@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Internet factors influencing generations Y and Z in Australia and Portugal: A practical study


@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Examine the influence factors of the Internet on Gens Y and Z.


                        
                        
                           
                           Empirical evidence was collected via an online survey in Australia and Portugal.


                        
                        
                           
                           This study composed new positive and negative factors of the Internet usage.


                        
                        
                           
                           Set of recommendations are raised to reduce the negativities of the Internet usage.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Internet influence factors

Generations Y and Z

Australia

Portugal

Positive and negative

Practical study

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This practical study aims to enrich the current literature by providing new practical evidence of the positive and negative influence factors of the Internet on generations (Gens) Y and Z in Australia and Portugal. The Internet has become a powerful force among these Gens in relation to communication, cooperation, collaboration and connection, but numerous problems from cognitive, social and physical developments' perspective are developed throughout the Internet usage. A quantitative approach was used to collect new, practical evidence from 180 Australian and 85 Portuguese respondents, with a total of 265 respondents completing an online survey. This study identifies new positive factors to the Internet usage, as problem-solving skills, proactive study, information gathering, and awareness globally and locally; communication and collaboration with their peers and family were improved and enhanced. Alternatively, this study identifies new negative factors as physical contact and physical activities were prevented, thinking, concentrating and memory skills were reduced, depressed and isolated, laziness having increased, nevertheless; the Internet encourages Gens Y and Z to play physical and virtual games (e.g. Wii). Finally, this study concluded that the Internet is becoming an essential part of the everyday routines and practices of Gens Y and Z.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The Internet is a network of thousands of computer systems utilizing a common set of technical protocols to create a worldwide communication medium. Currently, the Internet has a population of “over 7,259,902,243 million” (Miniwatts Marketing Group, 2011a). In Australia the Internet has a population of “over 12.8 million” (Miniwatts Marketing Group, 2011b), while in Portugal it is “6.7 million” (Miniwatts Marketing Group, 2011c). The Internet is used by different generations, by Baby Boomers (Age: 53–61), Generation Jones (Age: 43–52), Generation X (Age: 30–42), and Generation Y (Age: 18–29), while Generation Z (Age: 17–3) (Genworth, Financial, n.d.).

These massive groups of users access the Internet through their computers and terminals, via educational institutions, commercial Internet access providers and other businesses. The Internet provides numerous benefits to consumers in relation to access to information, entertainment, research, business and marketing. The Internet allows “consumers to educate themselves about the information or products at their own pace, and consumers can instantly access only that information which is pertinent to their needs” (Issa, 2008, p. 11,
1999). The Internet “provide(s) a low-cost ‘gateway’ to the global market for companies intending to engage or engaging in exporting, especially for small-to-medium enterprises located in peripheral economies and those operating in global niche markets” (Dou, Nielsen, & Tan, 2002, p. 105). The Internet was invented by Tim Berners Lee, a scientist at CERN,

                        1
                     
                     
                        1
                        CERN: is the European Organization for Nuclear Research.
                      in 1989, and the first implementation appeared in 1990 (CERN, 2002). He was examining various ways to make large amounts of data accessible without using complicated software. Finally, he found “the solution in plain text files, which we now know as HTML” (CERN, 2002; Gray, 1995; Hoekstra, 2000). Development of the Internet has provided the basis for implementation of the World Wide Web (WWW). “The World Wide Web contains a large and exponentially increasing number of websites, ranging from single personal homepages, to large corporate sites containing thousands of individual pages” (Cunliffe, 2000, p. 222).

The growth of the Internet continued with the development of other opened and closed browsers such as Microsoft Internet Explorer, Mozilla Firefox, Safari, Opera, Google Chrome and Netscape Navigator. Many businesses and individuals nationally and universally are using these browsers to access their needs. In general the Internet has become the major component in any business, as it links millions of computers and tens of millions of users around the world (Teo, Lim, & Lai, 1997; Wellman, Haase, Witte, & Hampton, 2001). In addition, Internet usage brings enormous challenges to businesses and individuals, as many observers allege that the Internet is changing society (DiMaggio, Hargittai, Neuman, & Robinson, 2001). From the business perspective, new opportunities will be created for businesses to become more creative and innovative, increase their profit and reduce the cost of their marketing activities, as the majority of these activities are performed via the Internet. Beside the above, if the Internet facility is adopted in any business, a unique reputation will be developed, and they will become more successful and exclusive in the market segment locally and globally (Van Dijk, 2006).

On the other hand, from the individual perspective, using the Internet will give them the opportunity to gain cutting edge knowledge, and more collaboration and communication with their family, colleagues, and friends. On the other hand, Internet usage will bring challenges, obstacles, and growing awareness of the potential impacts of the Internet, on cognitive development, social development and physical development (Sigelman & Rider, 2012; Verdick.org, 2011). In respect to cognitive development, individuals will face several problems, such as inability to concentrate in writing and reading, inability to remember (Bergquist et al., 2009; Huang & Lee, 2010; Levy, 2003; Nahl, 2005), and shallow minds, which lead to a lack of deep thinking, distraction and scattered attention, which makes it hard for them to complete their tasks in school or home on time (Carr, 2008). Internet usage also causes some problems with social development, such as health problems, stress, depression and isolation (Amstadter, Broman-Fulks, Zinzow, Ruggiero, & Cercone, 2009; Casale & Fioravanti, 2011; Selfhout, Branje, Delsing, Bogt, & Meeus, 2009). These influence factors will generate enormous challenges for the individuals, their families, and the community. Finally, from the individual perspective, using the Internet will harm their physical development, which means the absence and avoidance of face-to-face meetings between family, friends and colleagues, and a lack of physical exercise (Bargy & Mckenna, 2004; Kilvon, Togher, Power, & Turkstra, 2010; Vitak, Crouse, & LaRose, 2011).

This study is intended to assess the extent to which Internet usage is influencing generations Y and Z in their social and academic life, especially in Australia and Portugal, and targeted Gens Y and Z to observe their behavior and attitudes toward the Internet. This study will answer the following question: What are the positive and negative influence factors of Internet usage by Gens Y and Z in Australia and Portugal? To answer this question an online survey was distributed in Australia and Portugal; there were 180 responses in Australia and 85 in Portugal. This study will also make a valuable methodological, theoretical and practical contribution to the current literature review to the Internet usage by generations Y and Z globally and locally as new factors will be added to the current literature review to the negative and positive influence factors of the Internet. The study's new findings will assist several stakeholders including researchers, academics and personnel in the education sector, as well as families and government, especially the Australian and Portuguese. The new findings confirmed the literature review and identified several new factors. The negative factors that emerged should be addressed immediately by Gens Y and Z in Australia and Portugal.

This study is organized as follows: the influence factors of Internet usage, negative and positive influence factors of the Internet, research question, methodology, participants, results—independent T-test, results—factor analysis, comparison results: factor analysis and T-independent test, discussion, implications for theory, implications for practice, limitation and conclusion.

The Internet has become the main channel for businesses and individuals (old and young) to connect, interact and communicate without geographical restrictions, to increase their social involvement nationally and universally. This tool has made the world become smaller and smaller through enabling people to access information, research, education, entertainment and so on. In addition, using this tool will create new relationships, social identities and types of commitment between disconnected people. Business report presentation by Internet facility is more effective, proficient and efficient compared with the traditional ways, and will reduce costs and increase profit for the business as most of its operations are completed via the Internet, such as correspondence and emailing attachments and documents (Amichai-Hamburger & Hayat, 2011; Bryne & Lee, 2011; Harris, 2010; Mitchell, Lebow, Uribe, Grathouse, & Shoger, 2011). Alongside the above, use of the Internet by businesses and individuals will reduce the emission of CO2, since the logistics behind mailing, travel, and other influence factors will be reduced as the Internet takes on these roles. Furthermore, people are becoming more aware in respect to issues of sustainability in the current century, and the Internet assists businesses and individuals to recognize their responsibilities toward the environment and natural resources (Gomis, Parra, Hoffmann, & Mcnulty, 2011; Orlitzky, Siegel, & Waldman, 2011; Smith & Sharicz, 2011).

However, Internet usage by businesses and individuals is generating vast challenges and threats to their behavior, health and social development (Mueller et al., 2010; Shen & Chiou, 2010; Taragola & Lierde, 2010). Internet usage is unlimited to professional and older individuals; however, the younger generations are becoming more addicted to this tool, as they cannot live without it, in contrast to the traditional tools such as books, TV or radio. In this study, the researchers will examine how the Internet affects generations Y and Z, from two perspectives: negative and positive influence factors (see Fig. 1
                     ). Based on the previous studies, a general model for the influence factors of the Internet on Generations Y and Z (see Fig. 1) is developed in order to determine the positive and negative factors which Gens Y and Zs’ attitudes to Internet usage, and associated behaviors. This model of influence factors provides a rich map for researchers, academics and families, and illustrates the positive and negative influences of Internet use by Gens Y and Z.

Generations Y and Z (also known as the Millennials) are the dominant users of the Internet, and their use is mainly to meet their work and study needs (e.g. answering e-mails) or to socialize (e.g. Facebook). Generations Y and Z, more than any other generations, are considered the leaders in the usage of the technology, as they spend an enormous time surfing and browsing the Internet to catch up with their friends, colleagues and family and complete their academic work. A study by Perez (2008) indicated that the majority of generations Y and Z prefer to absorb information in small chunks rather than long text from various devices (i.e. mobile phones, iPads, and laptops) when obtaining their latest desires from the Internet. Furthermore, generations Y and Z are working as well as studying; therefore, businesses should take into consideration the needs of these generations by introducing new tools such as Enterprise 2.0 to match their requests in the workplace. Another study by McCrindle (n.d) indicated that generations Y and Z are aware of global and local events, as they have lived through the age of the Internet, cable television, globalization, September 11, and environmentalism. Finally, these generations are obsessed with technology and new devices, in wanting to obtain the cutting-edge knowledge and skills around them (Freestone & Mitchell, 2004; Genworth, Financial, n.d.; McCrindle, n.d; Perez, 2008).

Working with the Internet can offer challenges, opportunities and threats to generations Y and Z users, their social co-workers and their age group. These challenges, opportunities and threats can increase their knowledge and skills in their study and work, and make them more independent learners. On the other hand, it threatens to damage their health and to cause stress and depression. In Section 3, the researchers will explain these challenges, opportunities and threats of Internet usage with special reference to the literature review, and then examine whether generations Y and Z's perspectives match the reality.

These challenges, opportunities and threats factors are divided into two categories, positive and negative. The former category includes is mainly focus on cutting edge knowledge, collaboration, involvement and communication. The latter category deals with cognitive, social and physical developments. This category will discuss distraction, lack of deep thinking, lack of concentration, shallow minds, scattered attention and other factors (Bergquist et al., 2009; Carr, 2008; Huang & Lee, 2010; Levy, 2003; Snyder 2010).

Internet usage by generations Y and Z will assist them to perform searching, researching, and completing their tasks rapidly in a professional way (see Fig. 2
                           ). Via the Internet, generations Y and Z can communicate, collaborate, become involved, and gain new knowledge to become more aware of global and local issues. From the literature review it was noted that using the Internet rapidly will replace face-to-face interaction not only nationally but universally. Internet users interact and cooperate to meet people, develop relationships and maintain friendships (Sun, 2011). Tyler (2002, p. 196) indicated that using the Internet in our lives these days will enable users to work easily from home, and “form and sustain friendships and even romantic attachments from their home, to bank from their home, to vote and engage in political and social-issue-based discussion with others in their communities from home, and to pursue other social connections from their home”.

Additionally, it was noted from the literature review (Baams, Jonas, Utz, Bos, & Vuurst, 2011; Mitchell et al., 2011; Savolainen, 1999; Subrahmanyam & Smahel, 2011) that the Internet facility will allow generations Y and Z to communicate and collaborate with their peers frequently, and, most importantly, will allow them to foster independent learning and become more self-regulating learners with the ability to solve their problems easily. In addition, the Internet will assist them to perform well in their studies and develop their personal, communication, reading and writing skills (Clark & Everhart, 2007; Pujazon-Zazik & Park, 2010). Finally, the popularity of the Internet has increased rapidly as a result of the positive factors that influence the way in which people collaborate, communicate, and exchange cutting edge information. Based on the earlier study, a positive influence factors model is developed to study and examine the current factors influencing Gens Y and Z. This model is intended to clearly illustrate the ways in which the Internet can benefit individual users as well as businesses. This study aims to discover any further positive factors associated with Internet use by Gens Y and Z in Australia and Portugal.

Negative influence factors can be easily identified in respect to the symptoms which are considered to be due to computer addiction. These symptoms will lead to depression, stress, isolation, and the neglect and weakening of social ties, since people have less reason to leave their homes and actually interact face to face (Tyler, 2002). A survey carried out by Kraut, Patterson, and Lundmark (1998) found that use of the Internet appeared to increase depression, loneliness, and stress among a sample of 169 adults. The study is called “Internet Paradox” means using the Internet facility would increase communication, on the other hand, would increase negative social and psychological effects. Even though the results actually reversed in a follow-up study published by Kraut et al. (2002) the initial study encouraged a significant amount of research designed to assess potential negative influence factors of the Internet use. Young and Rogers’ (1998) study was generating interest in the relationship between Internet addiction and depression.

Therefore, this study aims to identify the new potential negative influence factors of Internet use from three perspectives: cognitive, social and physical developments (see Fig. 3
                           ). These symptoms are massive challenges to generations Y and Z as they are serious and can lead to severe situation i.e. divorce or suicide (Domokos, Cretu, Nagy, & Mihai, 2011). Furthermore, recent studies (Sigelman & Rider, 2012; Subrahmanyam & Smahel, 2011) suggested that Internet usage will influence users’ attitudes and behaviors, since generations Y and Z are spending more time in online activities on the Internet and less in sleep and physical activities. Rarer in sleep with reduced memory, increased heart heath, increased appetite and leading to weight gain.

It was noted that, in the cognitive development category, Internet usage by generations Y and Z will reduce the individual's concentration in writing and reading and his/her communication skills, and this will affect not only their study but also their work. Several studies (Kearns & Frey, 2010; Lee, 2009; Mokhtari, Reichard, & Gardner, 2009; Shaw & Gant, 2002; Sun, 2011) indicate and echo that Internet usage will affect generations Y and Z's communication skills such as grammar, spelling, writing style and proofreading. This problem affects not only the education sector, however, but also the workplace, the community, the country and the world. The Internet should be used carefully since some materials on the Internet are incorrect or mistakenly presented (Carr, 2008; Harris, 2010; Mitchell et al., 2011).

Furthermore, in this category, using the Internet will cause shallow minds in generations Y and Z; this means a reduction in their deep thinking, a tendency to be easily distracted, and scattered attention. Carr (2008) indicated that the Internet is having a detrimental influence on generations Y and Z's capacity to concentrate on reading or writing, as they can be easily distracted on the Internet, and this will result in the loss of their capacity for deep thinking, especially when reading books or articles or viewing items on the Internet. Schumacher (2010) indicated that the “bells, whistles and links that make up the web are ‘remapping the neural circuitry’ in our brains, making it difficult to do the ‘deep reading’ that once fuelled the exercise of serious thought”. By the same token, Naughton (2008) indicated that reading a book or article in the traditional way will allow users to focus and concentrate more; however, on the Internet, the reader will scroll through long stretches of prose, and their concentration often starts to drift after two or three pages. Another study by Hannula and Lonnqvist (2010) indicated that this problem is not limited to the education sector but also applies in the workplace, since employees spend a lot of time browsing sites which are unrelated to their job, and this will reduce their job productivity.

The second influence factor of the negative Internet use is social development. Under this heading, Internet usage by generations Y and Z will initiate particular problems such as health problems, stress, boredom, and depression, but the most important factor is isolation. It was noted from the literature review that Internet usage assists generations Y and Z in communication, interaction, searching and researching; on the other hand, it can cause various problems and dilemmas including disease, isolation, and depression (Austin & Totaro, 2011; Ekizoglu & Ozcinar, 2011; Griffiths, Crisp, Christensen, Mackinnon, & Bennett, 2010; Hampton, Sessions, & Her, 2011; Hinton, Kurinczuk, & Ziebland, 2010; Jeong & Kim, 2011; Yao & Zhong, 2014). Several studies (Amstadter et al., 2009; Bargy & Mckenna, 2004; Casale & Fioravanti, 2011; Hausner, Hajak, & Spiebi, 2008; Selfhout et al., 2009) indicate that Internet usage by generations Y and Z will develop a huge gap in their relationships with their family, friends and community, since they are spending a great deal of time using online facilities, and this will lead to psychosocial problems such as loneliness and depression. These problems will leave generations Y and Z with a preference for online interaction, since they perceive that online communication might be the ‘Prozac of social communication’: less risky and easier than face-to-face communication because of its greater anonymity (Amstadter et al., 2009; Kim, LaRose, & Peng, 2009). Furthermore, these problems can influence the behavior and attitudes of Internet users which are similar to alcohol abuse and smoking cessation deceases (Lenahan, 2011). Finally in this category, health problems, the health issues caused by Internet interaction are very well known, and so is Internet addiction; as the majority of generations Y and Z spend more and more time searching, researching, playing games and interacting with their friends, continuing to act in this way will cause them to develop different manners and behavior toward others, and this can lead to suicide or sometimes to divorce.

The third influence factor of the negative Internet use is physical development. Under this heading, generations Y and Z prefer to work online instead of working face-to-face. A study by Amichai-Hamburger and Hayat (2011) echoes and confirms that online Internet usage is associated with a decline in users’ face-to-face interaction with family and friends, and this will raise the alarm of depression and loneliness levels.

The negative influence factors of Internet have a huge impact on both individuals and organizations. Internet is a source of information for most people locally and globally, however, people should use this tool in an efficient to improve the positive and reduce the negative as it creates the threat from cognitive, social and physical developments. A negative influence model is developed to examine the negative factors associated Internet use by Gens Y and Z. The current factors are serious and critical to Gens Y and Zs’ attitudes and behaviors, and this can lead to significant concerns now as well in the future. This study aims to discover any additional negative factors associated with Internet usage by Gens Y and Z in Australia and Portugal.

In summary, the positive and negative influence factor models provide a current inventory of published research into Internet usage by individual and businesses. Clearly, most of the current research is limited to studying several western countries only, and discusses the negative or positive influences of the Internet in terms of ethics, gender, physical and psychological effects, and health. With this gap in the literature in mind, this study aims to discuss the Internet factors which have negative and positive influences on Gens Y and Z from two different populations and continents in order to enrich the related literature and to raise the awareness among the Australian and Portuguese governments, higher education and families of the Internet factors negatively influencing Gens Y and Z. To address this gap, researchers will use an online survey in Australia and Portugal to determine Gens Y and Zs’ attitudes and behaviors regarding Internet use.

This study will examine the relationship between Internet usage and Gens Y and Z in Australia and Portugal, and identify the relationship and correlation between the negative and positive influence factors on generations Y and Z in both countries. For this study the main research question is: What are the positive and negative influence factors of Internet usage by generations Y and Z in Australia and Portugal? This study will examine whether Internet usage will assist generations Y and Z to acquire more communication and interaction and enhance their behavior and attitudes; at the same time, it will examine the negative and detrimental influence factors of the Internet usage from three perspectives: those of cognitive, social and physical development.

@&#METHODOLOGY@&#

An online survey was adopted to assess the Internet's influence factors on generations Y and Z. Online surveys are “powerful tools for maintaining respondent interest in the survey and for encouraging completion of the instrument” (Couper, Traugott, & Lamias, 2001, p. 251). This technique is self-administered and involves computer-to-computer communication over the Internet, by asking the users to respond to the survey by clicking on radio buttons and adding further comments in a specific area within the survey regarding the survey questions.


                     Couper et al. (2001, p. 246) stated that “radio buttons are preferred because this allows mouse-only entry”. In addition, “the radio button version would take less time to complete than the entry box version, given the added burden of typing numbers versus clicking a button”. Web surveys save money; they are speedy, with a “high response rate” (McBurney & White, 2007, p. 245) compared with traditional techniques, since they are “designed so as to provide a more dynamic interaction between respondent and questionnaire than can be achieved in e-mail or paper surveys” (Dillman, 2007, p. 354). The data downloads from the online survey are ready for immediate data analysis in SPSS or other statistical programs, and the web-based survey presents the outcomes in various formats including tables and charts, with the mean and standard deviation calculated according to the researcher's requirements (Dillman, 2007; Dillman, Reipus, & Matzat, 2010; Fan & Yan 2010; Flanagin, Metzger, & Hartsell, 2010; O'Brien & Toms, 2010; Smyth, Dillman, Christian, & O'Neill, 2010). However, online survey can bring various disadvantages from technical failures, computer viruses, Internet crimes, and hacking into the web-based survey; these factors can lead to a decrease in the response rate (Fan & Yan, 2010; Fleming & Bowden, 2009).

The online survey for this study was generated after an extensive review of the past and current literature related to the positive and negative factors of Internet use globally and locally. The web-based survey was divided into three parts, as each part discussed specific information, which was required to assist the researchers to identify the Internet's influence factors on generations Y and Z. All the pages of the survey contained instructions at the top of the page and a progress bar along the bottom to provide feedback to users about their proximity to completion. The formal letter and information sheet were emailed to the respondents with the survey link. Pages 1–4 presented the survey items with three questions per page to minimize scrolling, and the concluding page thanked respondents for their participation. A description of each part was provided to the participants to explain its purpose. The three parts were as follows:


                     Part 1: background information: In this section, the participants provided some details about their: 1) gender; 2) age; 3) job title; 4) fields of study; 5) education level, and identified how many hours they spent using the Internet, and, finally, what types of activities they performed by using the Internet.


                     Part 2: the positive influence factors of the Internet: In this section, the researchers will examine how generations Y and Z use the Internet in a positive way to organize and maintain their work and social life. The majority of the survey questions aim to discover whether Internet usage will raise the users’ awareness of global and local issues, enhance their communication and collaboration with their peers, and allow them to study independently and improve their reading and writing skills.


                     Part 3: the negative influence factors of the Internet: In this section, the researchers will examine how generations Y and Z use the Internet in a negative way. The researchers will study this section from three perspectives: 1) cognitive development, 2) social development, and 3) physical development. Under cognitive development, the researchers will examine whether Internet usage by generations Y and Z results in reduced concentration in writing and reading, inability to remember, and shallow minds. Under the heading of shallow minds the researchers will assess their distractions, scattered attention and lack of deep thinking. Under social development, the researchers will examine how Internet usage affects their health, stress, depression, laziness and isolation. Finally, under physical development, this section will allow the researchers to examine whether use of the Internet by generations Y and Z will result in a lack of face-to-face meetings and physical activities.

A five-point Likert scale was used in each part of the survey to “examine how strongly subjects agree or disagree with statements” (Sekaran, 2003, p. 197). Likert scales are widely used in survey research, to measure a respondent's level of agreement with a statement (Likert, 1932). Cavana, Delahaye, and Sekaran (2001, p. 205) stated that the midpoint in the Likert scale (e.g. the third point in a five-point scale) “is either neutral (‘neither agree nor disagree’) or a passing level (e.g. ‘satisfactory’)”. The five points on the scale in this survey are: ‘Strongly disagree’, ‘Disagree’, ‘Neutral’, ‘Agree’ and ‘Strongly Agree’. Respondents were asked to select the one that best reflected their level of agreement or the importance they attached to each statement (Karkukly, 2011). Besides using the Likert five-point scale for this survey, the researchers provided a section for participants to write down other comments regarding each part.

The participants for this study are members of Gens Y and Z from Australia and Portugal. This cultural mix will assist the researchers to justify Gens Y and Z attitudes and behavior to the use of the Internet. By the same token, Hargittai (2008) confirms that culture and ethnicity influence the use of technology by various cultures, and to understand whether respondents from Australia and Portugal are sharing common belief in relation the use of the Internet. From Table 1
                      it was indicated that 27% from Australia and 65% from Portugal are male, while 73% from Australia compared to 35% from Portugal are female. This means that females in Australia were more committed to completing the survey than females in Portugal, whereas for males it was the other way round. In this study, the response validity from Australia and Portugal was 88% and 92% respectively.

As for age, it was interesting to see that the highest response rate in Australia came from those aged between 25 and 29 years, while in Portugal it came from those aged 14–19 years. Table 2
                      displays the number of responses and the percentage of each age group (see Table 2). Additionally, in the information sheet, the respondents are asked to answer the survey based on their age; however, any response outside the age target was excluded. The survey was collected within 6 months.

As for the field of study, it was noted that Australian responses came mainly from the Health Sciences and Science and Engineering; those in ‘others’ are came mainly from Drama, Architecture, Literature, Music, Finance, and Communications. The responses from Portugal came mainly from Information Technology, Management, and Art and Design; those in ‘others’ came mainly from Health and Safety and Operator of informatics departments (see Fig. 4
                     ).

As for the education level, it was noted that the majority of Australian respondents held or were still studying for the bachelor degree, while 19% held or were still studying for the Master's degree, and 22% were still in the high school. As for Portugal, 15% of participants held or were still studying for the bachelor degree, while 17% held or were still studying for the professional certificate, and 36% were still in the high school (see Fig. 5
                     ).

As for how many hours Gens Y and Z spend on the Internet daily, it was noted that generations Y and Z in Portugal spend 5.6 h on average, while in Australia the average figure was 4.8 h (see Fig. 6
                     ).

Furthermore, the researchers measured the amount of time spent by Gens Y and Z's on the Internet in Australia and Portugal. Fig. 7
                      noted that Australian are spending more time on chatting, working, shopping online and playing games, while Portuguese on working, chatting, and later studying. Figs. 6 and 7 provided a clear impression that Portuguese are spending more time using the Internet compared to Australian, and Internet usage is unlimited to study, research and search; however, strong indication confirmed that it used also in the work as well. Furthermore, it was noted that Internet usage assisted Australian to chat, exchange ideas and opinions among their colleagues and peers locally and globally.

A survey was carried out to examine and scrutinize Gens Y and Z's behavior and attitudes toward Internet usage in its negative and positive influence factors in Australia and Portugal. The researchers used SPSS software v.19 to interpret the results and to confirm the study's objectives and questions. The results included independent samples t-test, degree of freedom and p-value, compare means and standard deviation. T-test is used with two samples from populations with unequal variance, as variance is a measure of how spread out a distribution is. (Leng et al., 2012; Smith, Gratz, & Bousquet, 2009). The rationale behind using these statistics in this study to identify and assess the similarities and dissimilarities between Australian and Portuguese users in relation to the use of the Internet among Gens Y and Z.


                        Table 3
                         releases the independent t-test results in relation to the positive influence factors of the Internet usage in Australia and Portugal by Generations Y and Z. The survey results noted that ‘learning new information and knowledge’ is a very positive influence factor of the Internet, as the high average results for both countries suggest. Nevertheless there was a significant difference in the scores between Australia (M = 4.58, SD = 0.67) and Portugal (M = 4.33, SD = 0.61) (conditions: t = 2.85, p = 0.005). These results suggest that using the Internet will allow generations Y and Z to gain more information and knowledge, as was indicated in Section 2.1.1, however, Y and Z generations from Portugal were not confused that using the Internet facility will assist them to obtain new information and knowledge. Despite the difference between the respondents from Australia and Portugal, some survey respondents were keen to share with us the following comments regarding this factor: ‘It allows me to find information I need instantly’; ‘I think that it helps us grow as people, because of the information we gain and the communication skills that we gain by talking to our friends on the Internet, using social networking sites like Facebook’; ‘I love enriching knowledge’; ‘It allow students to be aware of the technology’; ‘Very accessible for getting information; it shows that people usually have the same problems as you and have ways to fix them, and shows you are not the only one’; ‘We can search for anything in a moment’; ‘It enables you to quickly search for information relating to a certain subject’; ‘Up-to-date information is always available’.

Additionally, the researchers would like to examine if ‘gaining up-to-date information’ would be a positive influence factor of the Internet. The survey shows high average results for both countries relating to this question. Again there was a significant difference in the scores between Australia (M = 4.56, SD = 0.70) and Portugal (M = 4.32, SD = 0.62) (conditions: t = 2.69, p = 0.008). These results suggest that gaining up-to-date information will enhance students’ knowledge and awareness about local and global issues and this will assist them to enhance their studies and make their work more productive, however, the participants from Portugal confirm that using the Internet will assist but still obtaining up-to-date information. Although the significant results, the participants were very generous to share with us the following comments: ‘I like the Internet as it is up to date and current, and an easy way to communicate in a positive manner’; ‘It allowed me to be more informed’.

Moreover, the researchers continue to examine if generations Y and Z ‘aware of global issues’ is also among the positive influence factors considered by respondents. The survey shows high average results for both countries relating to this question. Again there was a significant difference in the scores between Australia (M = 4.24, SD = 0.84) and Portugal (M = 3.89, SD = 0.76) (conditions: t = 3.24, p = 0.001). These results confirm that these factors are essential in study and work, to raise their awareness not only locally but also globally. It was noted once again that the participants from Portugal confirm that using the Internet will give them the awareness regarding the global issues, but not to the Australian participants who were in favor by using the Internet in this factor. Several comments were selected from the survey to confirm that Internet usage will rise generations Y and Z's awareness locally and globally: ‘It allows access to media from around the world’; ‘Learning a lot of things about other people from the world’; ‘Connection to a global consciousness/concerns/communication’; and ‘It makes it possible to get closer to people and cultures’.

Generations Y and Z are assessed if ‘aware of local issues’ can be a positive influence factor of the Internet usage. The survey shows high average results for both countries relating to this question. Again there was a significant difference in the scores between Australia (M = 3.94, SD = 0.90) and Portugal (M = 3.63, SD = 0.80) (conditions: t = 2.71, p = 0.007). These results suggest that using the Internet will make generations Y and Z will raise their acquaintance toward study and work. However, the Portuguese participants are still in doubt regarding this factor compared to the Australians who are in sustaining behind this statement.

One factor in which the researchers were interested is whether the ‘frequency of communicating with their peers’ is seen as a positive influence factor of the Internet. The survey shows high average results for both countries relating to this question. However, a non-significant difference in the scores between Australia (M = 4.39, SD = 0.87) and Portugal (M = 4.22, SD = 0.68) conditions; t = 1.62, p = 0.107. From the survey, the researchers selected the following comments: ‘To make friends, and communicate with family even when they are far away’; ‘One can talk to anyone in the family that does not live in the same place, country or even continent’; ‘Distant communication via the Web’; ‘Keep in touch with my friends and family, learn about news’; ‘Allow you to communicate nationally and internationally a lot more easily’; ‘I am able to connect with people whom I can see on a regular basis’; ‘A large sense of connectivity with your local community, friends, overseas friends, the world’; ‘Can help people come out of their shell by practicing letting other people see what their opinions are; confidence; not judging people by their appearance; talking to people you usually would not talk to; being more aware of what other people's opinions are; most sources of learning materials’; ‘Communicate with family and friends’; ‘Stay connected with your friends around the globe’; ‘It is a place to meet and find new and old things’. These results from the research questions also confirmed the results of the literature review; as Ackermann and Hartman (2000) indicated, using the Internet will enable users to connect more with family and friends via emails and social media.

This study aims to examine if using the Internet will increase or decrease generations Y and Z ‘collaboration with peers’. The survey shows high average results for both countries relating to this question. Again there was a significant difference in the scores between Australia (M = 4.17, SD = 0.90) and Portugal (M = 3.88, SD = 0.72) (conditions: t = 2.58, p = 0.011). These results suggest that collaboration with one's peers is very useful and important on line, to develop, interact, and communicate with each other, as this relationship will assist in developing the users’ personal, collaboration and communication skills. However it was noted the Portuguese participants are hesitated that using the Internet will improve the collaboration with peers, while the Australians participants confirmed and endorsed that using the Internet allow them to improve their collaboration among peers. The survey participants support our arguments regarding collaboration and personal skills development: ‘We can arrange study groups via Skype’; ‘Sharing my work and experiments with others in order to assist them when they need it’. By the same token, Kung, Picard, and Towse (2008), p. 48) confirm that the Internet is a “mechanism for information dissemination and a medium for collaboration and interaction between individuals and their computers without regard for geographic location”.

The researchers examined whether ‘studying independently’ would also be a positive influence factor of the Internet. The survey shows high average results for both countries relating to this question. Again there was a significant difference in the scores between Australia (M = 4.07, SD = 0.95) and Portugal (M = 3.70, SD = 0.95) (conditions: t = 2.97, p = 0.003). These results support the finding of the literature review in Section 2.1 that using the Internet will allow generations Y and Z to study independently and also assist them in the workplace. Here are some interesting comments from the survey: ‘You learn a lot through self-study on the Internet; you learn a lot from other people's perspectives as well’; ‘It allows students to find information quickly’; ‘It enables people to be independent thinkers; there is a great diversity of opinion on a plethora of subjects on the Internet’. However, this result confirmed that the Portuguese participants were uncertain that using the Internet facility will allow them to study independently; compared with the Australian who endorsed this statement.

Being able to ‘complete lessons more quickly’ was another factor that was examined regarding the positive influence factor of the Internet. The survey shows high average results for both countries relating to this question. There was a non-significant difference in the scores between Australia (M = 3.70, SD = 1.07) and Portugal (M = 3.92, SD = 0.95) (conditions: t = −1.61, p = 0.109). It was confirmed in the literature review that Internet usage by generations Y and Z will speed their study (see Section 2.1.1).

A related factor, being able to ‘understand and solve problems easily’, was also examined regarding the positive influence factor of the Internet. The survey shows high average results for both countries relating to this question. Again, there was a non-significant difference in the scores between Australia (M = 3.88, SD = 0.94) and Portugal (M = 3.79, SD = 0.89) (conditions: t = 0.76, p = 0.449). As was indicated in Section 2.1.1, Internet usage will assist generations Y and Z to solve their problems easily in study as well as in work.

Additional factor is to ‘scrutinize their research work more easily’. The survey shows high average results for both countries relating to this question. Again, there was a non-significant difference in the scores between Australia (M = 3.88, SD = 0.98) and Portugal (M = 4.10, SD = 0.60) (conditions: t = 1.90, p = 0.058). These results indicate that searching on the Internet becomes easier and more interesting than the traditional method. Here are some interesting comments from our survey: ‘The Internet helps me advance in school (as it makes research quicker) and also provides a source of entertainment when I have nothing else to do’; ‘Good for research’; ‘Access online books and journals’.

A further factor in which the researchers were interested is whether ‘developing personal and communication skills’ was seen as a positive influence factor of the Internet. The survey shows the average results for both countries relating to this question. There was a significant difference in the scores between Australia (M = 3.25, SD = 1.20) and Portugal (M = 3.58, SD = 0.92) (conditions: t = 2.25, p = 0.025). This result confirmed that Portuguese and Australian participants have different opinions and perspectives behind the Internet usage, since there was a major difference in mean between them especially from the Australian side. In spite of the difference between the participants, the survey results confirmed that Internet usage will enhance and develop generation Y and Z's personal and communications skills. One comment that was received via the survey confirms that using the Internet will enhance their skills: ‘Learning new communication skills, i.e. new technology’. These results answered the research question as well as confirming the findings of the literature review; Shelly, Cashman, Gunter, and Gunter (2008
, p. 2) indicated that ‘people use computers and other technologies at home for education, entertainment, information, management and business purposes, to access information and communicate with others around the world, and develop their skills in technology, information and writing using the Internet’.

The researchers continue to assess if ‘concentrating more on reading and writing skills’ is seen as a positive influence factor of the Internet. The survey shows neutral results for both countries relating to this question. There is a non-significant difference in the scores between Australia (M = 3.02, SD = 1.16) and Portugal (M = 3.07, SD = 1.03) (conditions: t = −0.37, p = 0.710). Both countries shared the same views in relation to the influence factor on concentration in reading and writing from using the Internet.

Lastly, the researchers wanted to know if doing ‘whatever they wanted, saying whatever they wanted and being whoever they wanted’ was seen as a positive influence factor of the Internet. The survey shows neutral results for both countries relating to this question. There was a non-significant difference in the scores between Australia (M = 3.26, SD = 1.20) and Portugal (M = 3.01, SD = 1.33) (conditions: t = 1.49, p = 0.137). These interesting comments were selected from the survey: ‘[You can] navigate and travel online without spending money in the trips’; ‘It is such a great experience to enjoy the Internet and escape from other daily issues that you don't feel like doing at that moment, it is a big distraction, so people do not spend time researching into things that the higher power (Government) do not want us to know’.

Finally, Internet usage offered Gens Y and Z in Australia and Portugal plenty of opportunities for their study as well social life. However, there were some disagreements among Gens Y and Z, especially in respect to learning new knowledge, information locally and globally, and making them independent learners.

In general, the primarily t-test results distinguish the positive influence factors of the Internet usage by Gens Y and Z, as collaboration, communications skills will be enhanced; cutting-edge knowledge and skills locally and globally will be accessible, and studying independently will be reachable. However, to tackle these disagreements, the researchers will study further these disagreement's statements by using a different tools, i.e. factor analysis to confirm the validity and reliability of the study aims and objectives.

Researchers continue to examine and assess both generations Y and Z in Australia and Portugal in relation to the negative influence factors of the Internet usage. Table 4
                         released the survey results; and confirmed some statistically significant difference between Australia and Portugal. Researchers are keen on, to examine if Internet usage will ‘prevent them from concentrating more on writing and reading skills’. The survey results indicate that both Australian and Portuguese respondents share the same concerns since both produced similar average scores. There was a non-significant difference between Australia and Portugal with high average. The majority in Australia (M = 3.07, SD = 1.10), and in Portugal (M = 3.04, SD = 1.12) (conditions: t = 0.22, p = 0.827). It was confirmed by survey participants that: ‘For writing and reading I do not think it is a huge issue unless the person has been exposed to bad language skills from a young age and carries this onto the Net. If the person has had a good basic command of a language that is used online it would not deteriorate as much.’

Under this heading the researchers examined whether Internet usage would prevent users from ‘remembering the fundamental knowledge and skills’. From the survey results, it was noted that generations Y and Z from Australia and Portugal strongly disagreed, as both produced similar average results. In addition, the majority believed that using the Internet will allow them to gain more knowledge and skills in respect to their studies and areas of work. However, there was a non-significant difference between Australia and Portugal, since the majority in Australia (M = 2.53, SD = 1.03), and in Portugal (M = 2.62, SD = 1.06) (conditions: t = 0.58, p = 0.562).

The researchers continue to examine generations Y and Z behavior by using the Internet, as they examine if using the Internet would ‘scatter and disperse generations Y and Z's attention in work or study’. Analysis of the survey showed that both sets of respondents strongly agreed that using the Internet in study, work or play would distract their attention. It was confirmed from the analysis that there was a statistically significant difference between them since p-value is less than 0.05. The majority in Australia (M = 3.42, SD = 1.18), and in Portugal (M = 3.07, SD = 1.15); this difference was significant (t = 2.24, p = 0.026). P-value results confirmed that the Internet can scatter their attention easily. This was also confirmed by survey responses such as: ‘It takes too much time instead of us doing homework’ or ‘Sometimes listening to music and not being able to concentrate better’. The researchers were keen on to understand generations Y and Z's behavior and attitudes toward Internet usage. It was noted that using the Internet will ‘decrease their capacity for deep thinking’, as indicated in Section 2.1.2. From the survey results, it was determined that generations Y and Z respondents from Australia and Portugal strongly disagreed, as low level of mean was suggested. It was confirmed that there was a non-significant difference as the majority in Australia (M = 2.84, SD = 1.15), and in Portugal (M = 2.82, SD = 1.13) (conditions: t = 0.13, p = 0.893). Participants were generous in sharing with us the following comments in relation to their behavior and attitudes toward Internet usage: ‘Making us stay away from the real world; misinformation; information overload; Internet hacker innuendo; self-diagnosis of medical conditions (not me but some); over-sharing’.

From the literature review (see Section 2.1.2) it was discovered that using the Internet will ‘distract users easily’ as they are diverted from one location to another using different links without completing their task. For this reason the researchers examined whether this situation occurred with generations Y and Z as well. From the survey results, it was noted that both Australian and Portuguese respondents agreed that Internet usage continuously can distract them from their study and work. It was confirmed from the analysis stage that there was a statistically significant difference between Australian and Portuguese respondents as the p-value is less than 0.05. The majority in Australia (M = 3.70, SD = 1.22) and in Portugal (M = 3.30, SD = 1.04); this difference was significant (t = 2.60, p = 0.010). The outcomes answered the research questions as well as confirming the finding of the literature review (Amichai-Hamburger & Hayat, 2011; Chu, 2010) that distraction is a major problem for generations Y and Z as it is easy for them to click links and move from one place to another. Survey participants shared with us the following comments regarding distraction, the majority of which confirmed the literature review: ‘Dangerous, extremely distracting at times, encourages me to procrastinate’; ‘The Internet is a major distraction for me, but it also helps me when I need it’; ‘Very distracting due to the range of websites available’; ‘Work cannot be finished’; ‘Waste of time’; ‘Loses my time’; ‘It can be distracting, but it is a necessary distraction from a day full of hard work’; ‘Internet can be very distracting with the aid of Facebook’; ‘Does distract me more than I care to admit’; ‘Social networking sites may decrease self-confidence, they encourage you to portray a distorted (and more appealing) version of yourself’; ‘More confusing, more time-consuming’.

To obtain the whole understanding behind the Internet's influence factors on generations Y and Z from two perspectives, the researchers assigned some questions in the survey to an examination of social development: i.e. completion of their studies online, health issues, depression, loneliness, laziness. The literature review in Section 2.1.2 confirmed that using the Internet will raise the user's awareness globally and locally, but using it for a long period or a short period will ‘prevent them performing their social activities’. From the survey results average it was noted that Australian and Portuguese respondents disagreed that Internet usage would prevent them from engaging in social activities as it. It was confirmed that the results were non-significant, as the majority in Australia (M = 2.42, SD = 1.14) and in Portugal (M = 2.51, SD = 1.03), conditions; t = 0.60, p = 0.549).

However, the rest of the statements in the social development category have p-values which show a statistically significant difference between Australia and Portugal in the following specific issues: preventing one from studying, health issues, boredom, stress, and laziness. However, the p-values for depression and loneliness show a non-significant difference. Under Section 2.1.2 it was noted that there is a high correlation between Internet usage and these specific issues, as the majority of them can create major problems, not only for users, but also for family, friends, community and nation (Mueller et al., 2010; Selfhout et al., 2009). For example, in the case of being prevented from studying, the majority of Australia (M = 2.65, SD = 1.14), and in Portugal (M = 2.32, SD = 101); this difference was significant, as t = 2.26, p = 0.025. The p-value indicated that there was a statistically significant between the results, as both sets of respondents agreed that using the Internet would not prevent them continuing or completing their studies online.

The same analysis will be carried out in relation to ‘health’, as there was a statistically significant difference between the two countries, as in Australia (M = 2.11, SD = 1.06), and in Portugal (M = 1.83, SD = 0.88); this difference was significant (t = 2.07, p = 0.039). Although the literature review confirmed that using the Internet will raise the alarm regarding health issues, from the survey there was a significant difference in respect to the answers, as Australians disagreed while the Portuguese strongly disagreed that using the Internet would make them sick. Here are some interesting comments from the survey participants regarding the research questions and the literature review: ‘Eye strain, and redness, poor posture, feeling tired after using it for a few hours’; ‘It damages our eyes’; ‘Health effects/influences’; ‘It hurts my neck, back and shoulders’; ‘Long use of Internet will cause strain in the eye muscle’; ‘It makes my eyes water bitterly after half an hour of use’.

As for the rest of the social development issues, i.e. boredom, stress, depression, loneliness and laziness, the researchers were keen to understand whether Internet usage is ‘boring’; the survey results confirmed that both sets of respondents indicated that using the Internet was not boring and would not make them bored at all. However, the p-value is statistically significant and less than 0.05, since in Australia (M = 2.16, SD = 0.88), and in Portugal (M = 2.69, SD = 1.18), this difference was significant (t = 4.02, p = 0.000). It was concluded that the two sets of respondents have different perspectives on whether Internet usage is boring or not. However, this outcome is totally against that of the literature review, which confirmed that using the Internet for a short or a long period will be boring for some users (Austin & Totaro, 2011; Ekizoglu & Ozcinar, 2011; Jeong & Kim, 2011).

Another specific issue is ‘stress’; as indicated in Section 2.1.2, using the Internet rapidly makes users more stressful and depressed. However, the results indicate that p-value for is statistically significant as it is less than 0.05. This indicates that generations Y and Z in Australia (M = 1.98, SD = 0.83) strongly disagreed that Internet usage would cause them stress, while generations Y and Z in Portugal (M = 2.36, SD = 1.09) disagreed regarding this concept (conditions: t = 3.09, p = 0.0002).

Also, in relation to ‘depression’, the survey results show that both sets of respondents confirmed that using the Internet for a short or a long period would not depress them, but would make them happy, which from the researchers’ perspective is against the current literature review (Section 2.1.2). Nevertheless, there was a non-significant difference between Australia and Portugal, since the majority in Australia (M = 1.95, SD = 0.81), and in Portugal (M = 2.11, SD = 0.98) (conditions: t = 1.38, p = 0.169).

Moreover, in respect to ‘loneliness’, the survey results show that both sets of respondents indicated that using the Internet would not make them isolated, but would assist them to meet new friends and colleagues online. Nevertheless, there was a non-significant difference between Australia and Portugal, since the majority in Australia (M = 2.07, SD = 0.99), and in Portugal (M = 2.13, SD = 1.03) (conditions: t = 0.44, p = 0.658). Finally under this heading is ‘laziness’, the results shows a statistically significant difference between the results, as the p-value is less than 0.05, as in Australia (M = 3.19, SD = 1.22), and in Portugal (M = 2.82, SD = 1.25) (conditions: t = 2.29, p = 0.023). Furthermore, interesting results were collected from the survey, in which generations Y and Z in Australia confirmed that Internet usage would make them lazy, while in Portugal the opposite is true. Here are some comments from the participants regarding laziness: ‘An excessive amount of Internet use gets you unfit and lazy, and you lose face-to-face communication’; ‘nowadays we use email as the base of communication and face-to-face communication is slowly disappearing. This may affect future generations as they will not develop good communication skills.

The final section in the negative influence factor of the Internet is physical development: under this heading the researchers will examine if using the Internet will affect the ‘physical development’ of generations Y and Z. It was noted from the literature review in Section 2.1.2 that using the Internet will prevent users from engaging in face-to-face interaction and physical activities. However, from the survey, it was noted that both sets of respondents disagreed, as they confirmed that using the Internet would give them more time to take part in these activities and interactions. Nevertheless, there was a non-significant difference between Australia and Portugal in respect to face-to-face contact with family: the majority in Australia (M = 2.41, SD = 1.18), and in Portugal (M = 2.18, SD = 1.06) (conditions: t = 1.52, p = 0.129). As for face-to-face contact with friends, the majority in Australia (M = 2.37, SD = 1.20) and in Portugal (M = 2.24, SD = 1.27) (conditions: t = 0.81, p = 0.421). It was interesting to read the following comment from one of the participants: ‘Does not help my face-to-face communication skills because if I can't say something in front of them then I tell/ask them online instead of gaining the skills and becoming less shy’.

As for the ‘physical activities’, it was noted that there was a non-significant difference between Australia and Portugal, since the majority in Australia (M = 2.62, SD = 1.23), and in Portugal (M = 2.47, SD = 1.27) (conditions: t = 0.89, p = 0.376). As for playing ‘virtual games i.e. Wii Games’ via the Internet, the majority of respondents from both countries disagreed that using the Internet would encourage them to play with these games. In addition there was a non-significant difference between Australia and Portugal, since the majority in Australia (M = 2.39, SD = 0.90), and in Portugal (M = 2.40, SD = 1.08) (conditions: t = 0.10, p = 0.922). To encourage them to play virtual games via the Internet, there was a non-significant difference between Australia and Portugal, since the majority in Australia (M = 2.68, SD = 1.12), and in Portugal (M = 2.90, SD = 1.19) conditions; t = 1.46, p = 0.146.

In conclusion; using the Internet among Gens Y and Z in Australia and Portugal generate some disagreement statements in relation to distraction, health, stress, bore, as well as laziness. The predominantly t-test results ascertain the negative influence factors of Internet usage as the study findings examined the negative influence factors of Internet usage from three perspectives: cognitive, social and physical development. The cognitive developments were distractions, and distributed and scattered their attention. Social developments were laziness, stresses, broses, unhealthy and sickness, and preventing to complete their studies on time, while the physical developments the results indicated a non- significance results under this concept. Examining and assessing t-test results assisted the researchers to understand the dissimilarities and similarities of Gens Y and Z attitudes and behaviors toward the Internet usage, especially for their study as well social life. It was noted that t-test results released interesting and challenging results to justify the research questions and study aims. However, to acquire the helicopter view of the findings in the researchers will examine the survey results by using factor analysis to examine the study aims and objectives.

To validate and justify the survey findings, the researchers carried out another test, which is an exploratory factor analysis through a maximum likelihood extraction method. A Varimax rotation with Kaiser Normalization has been applied to both factorial analyses (of results from Australia and Portugal) in order to identify each variable with a single factor. Factor analysis is useful in psychology and the social sciences and assists in gaining an understanding of the big picture behind Internet usage by generations Y and Z. Initially the factorability of the 31 statements which are related to the positive and negative influence factors of the Internet was examined. Furthermore, the factor analysis test will assist the researchers to validate the research ambitions and objects. The study sample size from Australia and Portugal is 177 and 84 respectively, and based on several studies (de Winter, Dodou, & Wieringa, 2009; Fleming & Bowden, 2009; Gagne & Hancock, 2006; Jackson, 2001; Zeller, 2006) small sample size (i.e. between 10 and 50) is adequate to be examined and assessed using factor analysis, as long as communalities are high, the number of expected factors is relatively small, and model error is low), researchers and reviewers should not be overly concerned about small sample sizes" (Preacher & MacCallum, 2002, p. 160). In this study, the sample size for Portugal is lower compared to Australia, but despite being lower and smaller, it meets the above criteria of high communalities, relatively small number of factors (i.e. compared to the original number of variables of the study), and having a low error. The data for Australia also meets these conditions. In all, the researchers were assured that the data met the quality criteria to perform the factorial analysis.

A factorial analysis of 31 Likert scale questions from this attitude survey was conducted on data gathered from 177 participants from Australia. A reliability analysis is conducted for the two constructs used in this study. Reliability refers to the extent to which an instrument consistently measures the same construct (Windsor, Baranowski, Clark, & Cutter, 1994). The reliability of all the constructs is assessed by computing the Cronbach's alpha for each construct (as shown in Table 5
                        ). The Cronbach's alpha values for each construct range from 0.87 to 0.88. They are well above the recommended value of 0.70, which is considered satisfactory for basic research (Fornell & Larcker, 1981). As shown in Table 5, the research results show that the constructs used in this research exhibit sufficient internal reliability.

Eight factors have been extracted in the Factorial Analysis (i.e. only those factors with Eigenvalues > 1 have been considered), corresponding to 56.261% of the variance explained. The Australian data generated eight factors: the factors dealing with the negative factor of the Internet account for 32.447% of the variance (factor 1 ‘Avoiding physical contacts and physical activities’ with 11.050% (explaining more variance than any other factor), factor 3 ‘Thinking, concentration and memory skills reduction’ with 8.558%, factor 4 ‘Depression and isolation’ with 7.858% and factor 8 ‘Incentive to game playing and laziness’ with 2.786%), while the factors dealing with the positive influence factors of the Internet account for 23.814% (factor 2 ‘Personal problem solving and skills improvement’ with 9.689%, factor 5 ‘Proactive study and information gathering’ with 6.369%, factor 6 ‘Issues awareness’ with 5.147% and factor 7 ‘Communication and collaboration frequency’ with 4.803%) of the total explained variance of 56,261% (see Table 6
                        ).

A Varimax rotation method has been used to obtain a Rotated Factor Matrix—this is presented in Tables 7 and 8.

For each Factor the variables with higher correlation have been selected (see Tables 7 and 8
                        
                        ):

                           
                              ✓
                              
                                 Factor 1 is evidently an “Avoiding physical contacts and physical activities” factor dealing with negative influence factors of the Internet. This factor has the variables “Prevents me from having face-to-face contact with my friends” with 0.820 correlation, “Prevents me from participating in physical activities” with a correlation of 0.747, “Prevents me from having face-to-face contact with my family” with a correlation of 0.691 and “Prevents me from participating in social activities” with a correlation of 0.581, accounting for most correlations. This is the most important factor, with an explained variance of 11.050%.


                                 Factor 2 is a “Personal problem solving and skills improvement” factor dealing with positive influence factors of the Internet. This factor has the following variables accounting for most of the correlations, in descending order of importance: “Complete my lessons more quickly” with 0.691, “Scrutinize my research work more easily” with 0.673, “Understand and solve problems easily” with 0.670, “Develop my personal and communications skills” with 0.654, and “Concentrate more on my reading and writing skills” with 0.578. This is the second most important factor, with an explained variance of 9.689%.


                                 Factor 3 is a “Thinking, concentration and memory skills reduction” factor dealing with negative influence factors of the Internet. This factor has the variables “Prevents me from remembering fundamental knowledge and skills” with a correlation of 0.798, “Decreases my deep thinking” with a correlation of 0.657, “Scatters my attention” with a correlation of 0.614, “Prevents me from concentrating more on writing and reading skills” with a correlation of 0.594, and “Distracts me easily” with a correlation of 0.507. This is the third most important factor, with an explained variance of 8.558%.


                                 Factor 4 is a “Depression and isolation” factor dealing with negative influence factors of the Internet. This factor has the variables “Depresses me” with a correlation of 0.825, “Stresses me” with a correlation of 0.712, “Bores me” with a correlation of 0.619, and “Makes me feel lonely” with a correlation of 0.521. This is the fourth most important factor, with an explained variance of 7.858%.


                                 Factor 5 is a “Proactive study and information gathering” factor dealing with positive influence factors of the Internet. This factor has the variables “Learn new information and knowledge” with a correlation of 0.736, “Gain up-to-date information” with a correlation of 0.726, “Study independently” with a correlation of 0.580, and “Complete my lessons more quickly” with a correlation of 0.431. This is the fifth most important factor, with an explained variance of 6.369%.


                                 Factor 6 is an “Issues awareness” factor dealing with positive influence factors of the Internet. This factor has the variables “Be more aware of local issues” with a correlation of 0.773, and “Be more aware of global issues” with a correlation of 0.710. This is the sixth most important factor with an explained variance of 5.147%.


                                 Factor 7 is a “Communication and collaboration frequency” factor dealing with positive influence factors of the Internet. This factor has the variables “Communicate with my peers frequently” with a correlation of 0.785, and “Collaborate with my peers frequently” with a correlation of 0.740. This is the seventh most important factor, with an explained variance of 4.803%.


                                 Factor 8 is an “Incentive to game playing and laziness” factor dealing with negative influence factors of the Internet. This factor has the variables “Encourages me to play physical games and sport (e.g. Wii Games)” with a correlation of 0.466, “Makes me lazy” with a correlation of 0.339, “Encourages me to play virtual games” with a correlation of 0.319, and “Prevents me from remembering fundamental knowledge and skills” with a correlation of −0.3420. This is the eighth most important factor, with an explained variance of 2.786%.

Factor two, ‘Personal problem solving and skills improvement’, confirmed the finding from the independent t-test results (see Section 7.1) that using the Internet will allow generations Y and Z in Australia to complete their work and locate their research needs faster than by traditional methods. Furthermore, it was confirmed that using the Internet will enhance their communication skills and make them concentrate more on their reading and writing skills. These results confirmed the finding from the literature review (Van Deursen, Jan, Van Dijk, & Peters, 2011; Verdick.org, 2011) that using the Internet will enhance generation's Y and Z communication skills as these skills are essential in study as well in workplace in the future.

An interesting point was developed from the factor analysis statistics in relation to factor three, ‘Thinking, concentration and memory skills reduction’. In Section 6.2, the majority of generations Y and Z respondents in Australia indicated that Internet usage does not distract them easily, with a high average; however, from the factor analysis results it was confirmed that using the Internet will distract them, with a correlation of 0.507, as well as preventing them from remembering fundamental knowledge and skills, with a correlation of 0.798, while the statistics in factor three confirmed the t-independent test results that using the Internet would scatter their attention, with a correlation of 0.614, and decrease their deep thinking, with 0.657. These results confirm the finding of the literature review that Internet usage by generations Y and Z will ‘scatter our attention and diffuse our concentration’ (Carr, 2008, p. 92; Harris, 2010).

As for factor 4, ‘Depression and isolation’, it was interesting to note that, according to the t-independent test, the majority of generations Y and Z respondents in Australia indicated that Internet usage would not bore, stress or depress them, or make them lonely. However, from the factor analysis it was noted that this factor has a variance of 7.858%. The results indicate that ‘Depresses me’ had a correlation of 0.825, while ‘Stresses me’ had a correlation of 0.712, ‘Bores me’ had a correlation of 0.619, and finally ‘Makes me feel lonely’ had a correlation of 0.521. The outcome from factor four was very exciting since it answered the research question and matched the finding from the literature review that Internet usage is causing these problems among generations Y and Z (Casale & Fioravanti, 2011; Stepanikova, 2010; Subrahmanyam & Smahel, 2011; Taragola & Lierde, 2010). The remaining factors, including factor five, ‘Proactive study and information gathering’, factor six, ‘Issues awareness’, and factor seven, ‘Communication and collaboration frequency’, confirm the t-independent test results in Section 6.1. It was confirmed by the literature review that Internet usage will provide “students with new exciting, and challenging resources, it opens doors to multicultural education, establishes real world learning experiences, encourages higher order thinking skills, helps to improve writing skills, and increases motivation, achievement and positive behavior’ (Barron & Ivers, 1998, p. 2).

The Australian results observed that Gens Y and Z were gaining many benefits by using the Internet as personal problem-solving and skills were improved, and proactive study and information gathering were enhanced, as well more awareness behind the news and knowledge globally and locally, and more frequency communication and collaboration among peers. Furthermore, the results concluded and identified several negative influence factors by using the Internet by Gens Y and Z in Australia, which are: stress; depression; laziness; and lack of face to face communications with friends; using the Internet will prevent them to participate in physical activities; and finally, reduction in thinking, concentration and memory skills.

A factorial analysis of 31 Likert scale questions from this attitude survey questionnaire was conducted on data gathered from 84 participants from Portugal. A reliability analysis was conducted for the two constructs used in this study. Reliability refers to the extent to which an instrument consistently measures the same construct (Windsor et al., 1994). The reliability of all the constructs is assessed by computing the Cronbach's alpha for each construct (as shown in Table 9
                        ). The Cronbach's alpha values for each construct range from 0.82 to 0.88. They are well above the recommended value of 0.70, which is considered satisfactory for basic research (Fornell & Larcker, 1981), as shown in Table 8, the constructs used in this research exhibit sufficient internal reliability.

Nine factors have been extracted in the factorial analysis (i.e. only factors with Eigenvalues > 1 have been considered), corresponding to 62.927% of the variance explained.

The factors dealing with the negative factor of the Internet account for 38.12% of the variance (factor 1 ‘Depression and isolation’ with 11.647% (explaining more variance than any other factor), factor 3 ‘Thinking, concentration and memory skills reduction’ with 9.305%, factor 4 ‘Avoiding physical contacts and physical activities’ with 9.068%, factor 7 ‘Game encouragement’ with 4.306% and factor 8 ‘Physical game encouragement’ with 3.794%), while the factors dealing with the positive influence factors of the Internet account for 24.807% (factor 2 ‘Communication and collaboration frequency’ with 9.535%, factor 5 ‘Issues awareness’ with 7.150%, factor 6 ‘Skills improvement’ with 4.854% and factor 9 ‘Information gathering and proactive study’ with 3.268%) of the total explained variance of 62.927% (see Table 10
                        
                        ).

A Varimax rotation method has been used to obtain a Rotated Factor Matrix—this is presented in Tables 11 and 12
                        . For each factor the variables with higher correlations have been selected:

                           
                              ✓
                              
                                 Factor 1 is evidently a “Depression and isolation” factor dealing with negative influence factors of the Internet. This factor has the variables “Stresses me” with 0.869 correlation, “Bores me” with a correlation of 0.788, “Depresses me” with a correlation of 0.709, “Makes me feel lonely” with a correlation of 0.659, and “Makes me sick and unhealthy” with a correlation of 0.537, accounting for most of the correlations. This is the most important factor, with an explained variance of 11.647%.


                                 Factor 2 is a “Communication and collaboration frequency” factor dealing with the positive influence factors of the Internet. This factor has the following variables accounting for most of the correlations, in descending order of importance: “Collaborate with my peers frequently” with 0.762, “Study independently” with 0.633, “Communicate with my peers frequently” with 0.618, “Understand and solve problems easily” with 0.615, and “Complete my lessons more quickly” with 0.552. This is the second most important factor, with an explained variance of 9.535%.


                                 Factor 3 is a “Thinking, concentration and memory skills reduction” factor dealing with the negative influence factors of the Internet. This factor has the following variables accounting for most of the correlations, in descending order of importance: “Scatters my attention” with 0.735, “Decreases my deep thinking” with 0.709, “Prevents me from concentrating more on writing and reading skills” with 0.690, “Prevents me from remembering fundamental knowledge and skills” with 0.608, and “Distracts me easily” with 0.593. This is the third most important factor, with an explained variance of 9.305%.


                                 Factor 4 is an “Avoiding physical contacts and physical activities” factor dealing with the negative influence factors of the Internet. This factor has the following variables accounting for most of the correlations, in descending order of importance: “Prevents me from having face-to-face contact with my family” with 0.807, “Prevents me from having face-to-face contact with my friends” with 0.804, “Prevents me from participating in physical activities” with 0.758 and “Prevents me from participating in social activities” with 0,495. This is the fourth most important factor, with an explained variance of 9.068%.


                                 Factor 5 is an “Issues awareness” factor dealing with the positive influence factors of the Internet. This factor has the following variables accounting for most of the correlations, in descending order of importance: “Be more aware of local issues” with 0.883, “Be more aware of global issues” with 0.754, and “Learn new information and knowledge” with 0.623. This is the fifth most important factor, with an explained variance of 7.150%.


                                 Factor 6 is a “Skills improvement” factor dealing with the positive influence factors of the Internet. This factor has the following variables accounting for most of the correlations, in descending order of importance: “Develop my personal and communication skills” with 0.818, and “Concentrate more on my reading and writing skills” with 0.502. This is the sixth most important factor, with an explained variance of 4.854%.


                                 Factor 7 is a “Game encouragement” factor dealing with the negative influence factors of the Internet. This factor has the following variables accounting for most of the correlations, in descending order of importance: “Encourages me to play virtual games” with 0.765 and “Encourages me to play physical games and sport (e.g. Wii Games) with 0.409. This is the seventh most important factor, with an explained variance of 4.306%.


                                 Factor 8 is a “Physical game encouragement” factor dealing with the negative influence factors of the Internet. This factor has only the variable “Encourages me to play physical games and sport (e.g. Wii Games)” accounting for most of the correlations with 0.867. This is the eight most important factors, with an explained variance of 3.794%.


                                 Factor 9 is an “Information gathering and proactive study” factor dealing with the positive influence factors of the Internet. This factor has the following variables accounting for most of the correlations, in descending order of importance: “Gain up-to-date information” with 0.564, “Complete my lessons more quickly” with 0.371, and “Learn new information and knowledge” with 0.357. This is the least important factor, with an explained variance of 3.268%.

The Portuguese results perceived that Gens Y and Z have similar positive influence factors compared to Australian. These are: using the Internet will make them more aware behind global and local news and knowledge; frequent interaction and collaboration with their peers; development of their personal and communication skills; and, information gathering and proactive study. On the other hand, Internet usage by Portuguese can: scatter and decrease their attention and deep thinking; and makes them bored, stressed, and depressed, avoiding physical contacts and physical activities. However, it was noted that using the Internet will encourage this group to play physical/virtual games.

From the factor analysis statistical results (see Section 7), it was noted that Gens Y and Z respondents in Portugal were affected by Internet usage, as the first factor is ‘Depression and Isolation’, with a variance of 11.647%. From the t-independent test (see Section 6), it was noted that the majority of respondents in Portugal strongly disagreed with the statement that using the Internet would make them depressed, bored or stressed. However, the factor analysis suggested another conclusion, as the ‘Stresses me’ variable had a 0.869 correlation, while ‘Bores me’ had a correlation of 0.788, ‘Depresses me’ had a correlation of 0.709, ‘Makes me feel lonely’ had a correlation of 0.659, and finally ‘Makes me sick and unhealthy’ had a correlation of 0.537. These results answer the research question and identify the negative influence factors of Internet usage, and confirm the finding from the literature review that using the Internet for a long period of time will cause people to develop these symptoms (Cooper, 1996).

Furthermore, the second factor, ‘Communication and collaboration frequency’, confirmed and validated the t-independent test. It was noted that the majority of respondents in Portugal confirmed that by using the Internet they would develop more collaboration and interaction with their peers, complete their homework easily, and solve their problems (study or work) easily. These results answer the research question and confirm the findings from the literature on the positive influence factors of Internet usage with a variance of 9.535%.

As for the third factor, ‘Thinking and memory skills’, the statistics from the factor analysis confirmed that using the Internet would scatter their attention, with a variance of 0.735%, decrease their deep thinking, with a variance of 0.709%, prevent them from remembering fundamental knowledge and skills, with a variance of 0.608%, and finally make is easy for them to be distracted, with a variance of 0.593. However, the only variable which matches the t-independent test is ‘preventing them from concentrating’, with a variance of 0.690. The above statistics for this factor confirm the literature review and answer the research question (Carr, 2008; Harris, 2010; Snyder 2010).

In relation to the fourth factor, ‘Avoiding physical contacts and physical activities’, the factor analysis results were interesting, as the majority of Portuguese respondents confirmed in the t-independent test that using the Internet would not prevent them from interacting with their friends face to face or prevent them from participating in social and physical activities. However, it was confirmed that using the Internet would prevent them from interacting and communicating with their family face to face, with a variance of 0.804%. The total variance for factor four is 9.068%. It was noticed that using the Internet would prevent them from performing their physical and social activities. By the same token, Subrahmanyam and Smahel (2011, p. 123) confirmed that activities that were displaced because of Internet use “include sleep, participation in physical activities and social interactions with real people in face to face contexts as well as over the phone”. These results confirmed the findings of the literature review and answered the research question for this study.

In respect to factor five, ‘Issues awareness’, with a variance of 7.150%, and factor 6, ‘Skills improvement’, with a variance of 4.854%, the outcomes from these factors matched the t-independent test in Section 6.1, confirming that use of the Internet by generations Y and Z in Portugal enhanced their knowledge and skills and allowed them to obtain cutting-edge skills.

As for the rest of the factors – factor seven, ‘Games encouragement’, with a variance of 4.306%; factor eight, Physical game encouragement, with a variance of 3.794%; and finally factor nine, ‘Information gathering and proactive study’, with a variance of 3.268%—some of these results do not match the t-independent test, as the majority of respondents in Portugal strongly disagreed with the statement that using the Internet would encourage them to play physical games and sport or use the virtual games. However, factor nine confirmed the result in Section 7.1 that using the Internet would let them complete their studies more quickly than the traditional methods, and allow them to gain cutting-edge skills. In Section 9, the researchers summarize the new theoretical and practical contributions made by this study based on the survey results from the t-test and the factor analysis. Furthermore, the researchers will identify the new positive and negative influence factors of Internet usage in general and specifically in Australia and Portugal.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

This experience was interesting and an outstanding achievement from the researchers’ perspective, as it was noted that the research produced new interesting and stimulating theoretical and practical results in relation to positive and negative influence factors of Internet usage by generations Y and Z in Australia and Portugal. The results from sections seven and eight corroborated and confirmed the research question and identified new positive and negative influence factors of Internet usage by Gens Y and Z in Australia and Portugal.

The purpose of this study is to determine whether Internet usage by Generations Y and Z will provide extra positive and negative influence factors in addition to those mentioned in the current literature Figs. 8
                         and 9
                        . The current literature (Ater & Orlov, 2015; Domokos et al., 2011; Ekizoglu & Ozcinar, 2011; Jeong & Kim, 2011; Kaldo et al., 2015; Lenahan, 2011; Shin, 2015; Verdick.org, 2011) confirms that Internet usage will assist Gens Y and Z to improve their communication and collaboration skills (see Fig. 2), while it also confirmed that Internet usage can produce various disadvantages and difficulties ranging from stress, depression, isolation and lack of personal interaction, as well as decreased capacity for deep thinking (see Fig. 3). The development of technology has greatly enhanced the communication and collaboration between users locally and globally. However, the use of technology can result in obstacles and inconveniences for both the short and long term which can affect users’ overall performance in study and work. From the results of this study, the researchers identified and distinguished new positive and negative influence factors of theoretical significance. It was noted that Internet usage assisted Gens Y and Z in Australia and Portugal to improve their problem-solving skills, proactive study and information gathering, and raised their awareness of both local and global issues. As for communication and collaboration with their peers and family, these are improved and enhanced, according to the survey outcomes. Fig. 8 shows the new positive influence factors of the Internet use by Gens Y and Z (in Fig. 8, items in italics, and with dash lines, are the new positive influence factors).

Furthermore, the survey outcomes added new features behind Internet usage by Gens Y and Z; from the physical development perspective, the Internet usage will prevent Gens Y and Z to have physical contact and physical activities, while from the cognitive development, thinking, concentration and memory skills will be reduced, and finally, from the social development the Internet usage will increase depression, isolation, and laziness but it was noted that using the Internet will encourage Gens Y and Z to play physical and virtual games i.e. Wii. Fig. 9 shows the new negative influence factors of the Internet usage by Gens Y and Z. (in Fig. 9, items in italic (and with dashes lines) are the new negative influence factors).

This study made new contributions to the theory presented in the current literature and hopefully raised the awareness of researchers and academics who have an interest in Internet usage by Gens Y and Z. However, the survey outcomes raised a warning message to researchers, higher education and families: both locally and globally, Internet usage by Gens Y and Z generate new negative influence factors (i.e. lack of physical activities, depression, isolation and laziness). These new negative influence factors should be tackled and resolved immediately by a concerted effort from researchers, academics and families. Researchers and academics should be part of the solution, not the problem.

This study concluded with some practical study from the researchers’ perspective to resolve the negative factors—or some of them, since the current situation has serious and dangerous implications for Gens Y and Z, as well families and governments. If no action is taken immediately, the negative influences of the Internet on Gens Y and Z are likely to increase. Therefore, it is imperative that various stakeholders (i.e. researchers, academics, governments, higher education as well Gens Y and Z's families) take immediate and rapid action to tackle and prevent the escalation of these problems. Moreover, to circumvent the Internet usage factors that have a negative influence on its users, the education sector, governments and families should provide recommendations and advice to Gens Y and Z based on the study outcomes as well the current literature review (Austin & Totaro, 2011; Bryne & Lee, 2011; Casale & Fioravanti, 2011; Domokos et al., 2011; Kuss, Griffiths, & Binder, 2013; Lenahan, 2011; Mani & Basavaraja, 2012; Starcevic, 2013; Verdick.org, 2011; Vitak et al., 2011).

In addition to this, forums and social events should be organized to alert Gens Y and Z to the need for attentiveness at both personal and institutional levels when it comes to accessing the Internet. Free seminars and workshops should be made available to Gens Y and Z to foster self-improvement, responsibility, social and physical activities, and most importantly, the morals and ethics associated with technology usage, especially the Internet. Internet usage could be limited by disseminating the idea of restriction via posters and flyers; if the problem still persists, then other strategies and tactics should be employed (i.e. a warning message should be displayed on the screen if users exceed their allocated quota). To prevent laziness among Gens Y and Z, they should be encouraged to take regular breaks from the computer via posters and flyers. If the problem still persists, free “take a break” programs should be devised to encourage students to take breaks—this could reduce the incidence of repetitive stress injuries and laziness. Finally, families and the community must track their children's navigation of the Internet, by installing appropriate tracking software; also, a software filter should be employed to limit their Internet access to specific sites. The implementation of these recommendations requires specific skills, training and commitment from the stakeholders to prevent these problems. Since Gens Y and Z are the leaders of the future, the current stakeholders should take responsibility for providing appropriate advice and guidance so that these Gens can take care of each other in future on a global scale.

This study was conducted between 265 participants from Gens Y and Z in Australia and Portugal to ascertain new positive and negative influence factors throughout the Internet usage. The study outcomes added innovative theoretical significance to the existing literature toward the influence factors of the Internet on Gens Y and Z in Australia and Portugal. However, despite the Portuguese small sample size, their results added new empirical contributions to the current literature. Finally, to strength research aims and objectives' further research with larger and diverse groups (from various countries) of Gens Y and Z are required in the future.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

This practical study aims to identify new positive and negative influence factors of Internet on Gens Y and Z in Australia and Portugal. The study was driven and built on the basis of the current literature review and aimed to enrich this literature by providing new empirical evidence of the influence factors of Internet usage by Gens Y and Z in general and specifically in Australia and Portugal. This empirical evidence was collected through an online survey which was employed in both countries.

The results from the survey indicated that respondents from both Australia and Portugal were satisfied with their Internet usage as it raised their awareness globally and locally and more frequency communication and collaboration among peers. In addition, Internet usage allowed them to enhance their problem-solving and skills (i.e. communications) and proactive study and information gathering were enhanced.

On the other hand, Internet usage by Gens Y and Z produced several threats and obstacles to cognitive, social and physical developments. The study results noted that serious problems are now facing generations Y and Z in Australia as the Internet has prevented them from engaging in face-to-face meetings with family and friends and in social activities as well physical activities. Furthermore, the Internet has also started to affect their level of thinking, and inducing a reduction of concentration and memory skills. In addition, the Internet makes them depressed, bored, stressed and lazy. As for generations Y and Z in Portugal, the survey results noted that the Internet makes them stressed, bored, and depressed. On the other hand, Internet usage can affect their level of thinking, concentration and attention, and prevent them from having physical contacts and activities. However, using the Internet will encourage them to play physical/virtual games i.e. Wii.

Finally, this practical study with its new empirical evidence contributes practically to raise the alarm to generations Y and Z's families and the education sector as well the governments in relation to the problems of Internet usage. Responsibility lays, first, on generation Y and Z's families to track their children's actions on the Internet and to manage their time, and second on the education sector, which must introduce special workshops in universities to raise awareness of the positive and negative influence factors of the Internet usage in order to tackle the current problems as academics must be part of the solution not the problem. To compare the results from this study, the same survey will be carried out by other researchers from Asia and Europe, since this study was limited to two countries only. Further research will be carried out by the researchers to examine the influence factors of the Internet on Generation X and Baby Boomers in Australia and Portugal.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

