@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Influence of human behavior and the principle of least effort on library and information science research


@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Zipf's 1949 book focusing on principle of least effort is not cited in LIS articles until 1958.


                        
                        
                           
                           Zipf's 1949 book has a growing influence on LIS research.


                        
                        
                           
                           Zipf's concept of “Zipf's law” has had the largest influence.


                        
                        
                           
                           “Principle of least effort” is the second most cited concept.


                        
                        
                           
                           Information behavior researchers focus on concepts relating to principle of least effort.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Principle of least effort

Citation context

Library and information science

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This study identified the influence of the main concepts contained in Zipf's classic 1949 book entitled Human Behavior and the Principle of Least Effort (HBPLE) on library and information science (LIS) research. The study analyzed LIS articles published between 1949 and 2013 that cited HBPLE. The results showed that HBPLE has a growing influence on LIS research. Of the 17 cited concepts that were identified, the concept of “Zipf's law” was cited most (64.8%), followed by “the principle of least effort” (24.5%). Although the concept of “the principle of least effort,” the focus of HBPLE, was not most frequently observed, an increasing trend was evident regarding the influence of this concept. The concept of “the principle of least effort” has been cited mainly by researchers of information behavior and served to support the citing authors’ claims. By contrast, the concept of “Zipf's law” received the most attention from bibliometrics research and was used mainly for comparisons with other informetrics laws or research results.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The principle of least effort (PLE), a concept advanced by the American linguist George Kingsley Zipf, indicates that people complete tasks by choosing the way of least effort among various options (Zipf,1949). To prove that the PLE is an indication of human nature, Zipf analyzed numerous empirical data collected from various human activities including those related to language, geographic distribution of the population, economic activities, social status, and collaboration, and used mathematical formulae to explain his findings. Zipf explained the PLE in detail in his classic 1949 entitled Human Behavior and the Principle of Least Effort: An Introduction to Human Ecology (HBPLE).

Opinions on the PLE are controversial. A few researchers have criticized the PLE for its oversimplification of human behavior (Cummings, 1977; Rapoport, 1957), whereas other researchers have supported and further explained the concept. Gratch (1990) stated that the PLE is the result of human experience and that exerting the least amount of effort is not equivalent to laziness. Case (2005) reported that people are willing to acquire lower-quality or less information to reduce their expenses.

The PLE represents a common human behavior; it may thus be expected that the HBPLE has become visible in various fields and applied to various human activities. HBPLE was also compared with similar theories and was reconceptualized in the field of library and information science (LIS). For example, one study indicated that Mooers’ law was derived from the PLE (Bierbaum, 1990). Mooers’ law states that users would rather not have information if having that information is painful, which is true even for users who can efficiently access information by using information retrieval systems (Austin, 2001; Mooers, 1996). Saving readers’ time, one of the five laws of library science, is also similar in meaning to the PLE (Gratch, 1990). The LIS publications on PLE have indicated that the concept of the PLE is connected to various topics, such as cataloguing (Chrzastowski, 1999; Wei, 2005), citation (White, 2001), information services (Chrzastowski, 1999; Duan, 2004), information seeking behavior (Bigdeli, 2007; Bronstein, 2008; Kebede, 2004; Xu, Tan, & Yang, 2006), information retrieval (Chen & Liang, 2000; Kim, 1982; Wang, 2000), and the location of resources (Chrzastowski, 1995; Wang, 2001). This shows that HBPLE has established its influence on various subfields within LIS research. To understand the relationship between HBPLE and LIS research, this study examined the influence of HBPLE on LIS articles.

Because the PLE is the core of HBPLE, I assumed that the PLE is the most frequently cited concept in HBPLE. Particularly, I assumed that the PLE is cited most by authors of information behavior articles because it has been regarded as an essential theory of information behavior according to the PLE being listed in the 2005 book, Theories of Information Behavior. Information behavior research is multidisciplinary and has been an essential subfield in LIS. Some theories of information behavior originating outside LIS have guided LIS researchers in advancing information behavior research, and the PLE is one example of these theories of information behavior. However, these assumptions required examination. I found that a few articles on the PLE did not cite the concept of the PLE in HBPLE and that certain publications not on the PLE cited the concept of the PLE in HBPLE. Furthermore, publications include numerous concepts. Apart from the PLE, HBPLE may consist of other influential concepts that have attracted LIS authors’ attention.

To clarify whether the concept of the PLE has received the highest attention among all concepts in HBPLE, I examined which concept in HBPLE was most frequently cited by authors of LIS articles that were published between 1949 and 2013. This study also analyzed the citation functions that reveal the possible reasons why authors cite the concepts in HBPLE. Combining the analyses of cited concepts and citation functions can reveal the influence of HBPLE on LIS research in detail. In addition, I analyzed citation frequency trends and the research topics of citing articles to identify emerging trends in the influence of HBPLE on LIS research and to determine which topics in LIS research have involved applying the concepts in HBPLE. The assumption of whether information behavior articles cite the concept of the PLE most can be verified. The results contribute to the understanding how a classic book on linguistics has influenced LIS research from three aspects: the number of citations, cited concepts, and citation functions.

This study answers the following research questions:

                        
                           (1)
                           Does the concept of the PLE have the most influence on citing authors among all concepts in HBPLE?

For the citing articles, what functions does HBPLE serve? What functions does the concept of the PLE serve?

What research topics do the citing articles focus on? Is the concept of the PLE cited most by information behavior articles?

@&#LITERATURE REVIEW@&#

Content analysis is useful for demonstrating the substantial influences on works. Citation context analysis, which is derived from the method of content analysis, can be used to identify the relationship between the contents of citing and cited works by examining partial texts surrounding a specific citation (Small, 1982). Citation context analysis relies on the researcher's judgment. Cited concepts can be confirmed by examining the content of cited work. However, analyzing citation functions is difficult because citation functions may not be apparent in texts. Some researchers have argued that authors’ motivations for citing literature are complex and indicate that only authors know why they cite a specific work (Case, & Higgins, 2000; Shadish, Tolliver, Gray, & Gupta, 1995). In such a situation, interviewing or surveying citing authors is another common method for exploring authors’ citing behavior (Bonzi & Synder, 1991; Harwood, 2009; White & Wang, 1997). However, some limitations still exist in interviews and surveys. Researchers have encountered difficulty in contacting all citing authors, especially when citing authors are deceased. This leads to a limited number of interviewees who can be interviewed. In addition, citing authors may forget why they cited a work a decade previously or may withhold the true reasons because they had negative intentions (Harwood, 2009). Because I conducted a longitudinal study to trace the changes in cited concepts and citation functions, I performed citation context analysis to explore the meaning of citations.

The method of bibliometric analysis is also used to measure the influence of a publication by counting its citation frequency and investigating the characteristics of citing papers (Carvalho, Diniz-Filho, & Bini, 2005; Chu, 2001; Furner, 2003). A high number of citations indicate greater influence. Although changes in the influence of a publication over time can be easily tracked, connections between the contents of cited and citing documents cannot be identified. This implies that the influence of a publication can be deeply understood by combining citation context analysis and bibliometric analysis. I used bibliometric analysis to observe the annual changes in the number of citations that HBPLE and specific concepts in HBPLE received.

Citation context analysis contains two types of content analysis: cited concepts and citation functions. The analysis of cited concepts is undertaken to identify content that has been cited by other researchers. A classic work has substantial influence on researchers in a specific field or across fields and usually becomes a primary subject of study. In the 1980s, Garfield (1980) identified 26 cited concepts from publications by Merton, a distinguished sociologist. Colemand and Salamon (1988) identified the main cited concepts embedded in Kuhn's The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Since 2006, more related studies have appeared. Researchers have explored the influential concepts embedded in classic works on social psychology (Anderson, 2006), software programs management (McCain & Salvucci, 2006), ecology (Richardson & Pysek, 2008; Thomaz, Michelan, Carvalho, & Bini, 2010), hypertext (Tsay, 2009), organizational memory (Anderson & Sun, 2010), information behavior (Chang, 2013b), and scientometrics (Chang, 2013a).

Citation function is a method used to reveal the reasons why the specific content of a publication was cited. Citation function studies have been paid attention since 1960s (Bornmann & Daniel, 2008; Case & Higgin, 2000; Chang, 2013a; Frost, 1979; Lipetz, 1965; McCain & Turner, 1989; Moravcsik & Murugesan, 1975; Oppenheim & Renn, 1978; Spiegel-Rosing, 1977; Tohidinasab & Jamali, 2013; White & Wang, 1997). Most researchers have developed classification schemes for citation functions in their studies and few researchers have modified previous classification schemes for citation functions. Some classification schemes consisted of more than 10 categories (Spiegel-Rosing, 1977; Tohidinasab & Jamali, 2013), whereas other classification schemes were simple and consisted of only four categories (Frost, 1979; Moravcsik & Murugesan, 1975). The structures of classification schemes depend on research purposes. Although Small (1982) claimed that most citation functions named with different terms among various studies were the same, I did not compare the results of citation functions because of differences in definition.

@&#METHODOLOGY@&#

To collect bibliographic records of articles citing HBPLE published between 1949 and 2013, we searched the multidisciplinary citation index database Web of Science (WoS), which provides users access to a wide range of bibliographic and citation information from articles published in international journals over a long timespan. I obtained the full text of articles that WoS indicated had cited HBPLE. The citing articles analyzed in this study had to meet four requirements. First, they have to have been published in LIS journals. The LIS journal candidates had to be included in the subject category of “Information Science and Library Science” in the social science edition of the 2012 Journal Citation Reports (JCR) and the subject category of “Library and Information Science” in the database provided by Ulrichsweb.com. Each journal indexed by JCR and Ulrichsweb.com was categorized under one or more subject categories. Because a few journals belonging to the subject category of “Information Science and Library Science” in the JCR do not focus on LIS, their subject attributes were further examined using the database provided by Ulrichsweb.com. The common LIS journals indexed by the JCR and Ulrichweb.com databases were selected for this study. Second, the publication language of articles had to be English or Chinese due to our language limitations. Third, because texts vary in nature, only research articles—which are the main texts published in journals—were examined. Fourth, articles were required to have been published between 1949 and 2013.

Regarding the search strategy used for collecting the citing articles, search terms were first combined in two designated fields: the cited author field and publication year of the cited work. The title and author name of a cited work are not recorded in full in WoS. Because of the problem of inconsistent data regarding the recording of the same title and author name, the only possible search strategy was used: The surname of the cited author and the year of publication of the cited work were combined. Therefore, “Zipf” was designated in the field of the cited author. In addition, I learned that HBPLE was reprinted in 1956, 1972, and 2012, based on two databases: OCLC's WorldCat and Bowker's Global Books in Print. Four pairs of search terms combining the surname of the cited author and the specific publication year of the cited work were searched for separately.

Next, I chose the index list of the cited work including the author names and titles related to ZIpf's HBPLE generated from the search strategy. The variations in Zipf's name included “Zip,” “Zipf, G,” “Zipf, GK.,” “Zipf George Kingsley,” and “Zipf George K.”; bibliographic title data included, for example, “HUMAN BEHAV,” “HUMAN BEHAVIOR PRINC,” and “BEHAV PRINCIPAL LEAS.” Because the bibliographic records of a few citing articles included the wrong author's name and the correct title or the correct author's name and the wrong title, I further identified the correct citing articles by examining their full text. Thus, the initial search results were limited to a specific type of document (research articles), a specific publication year range (1949–2013), and a specific field (LIS). The combined search results returned 263 bibliographic records of LIS articles citing HBPLE.

Before citation context analysis, I examined the in-text citations and reference lists of 263 English articles to ensure that the authors cited HBPLE. Each in-text citation was defined as an independent citation context. Of the 263 citing articles, three were excluded from the dataset because of citation errors existed between the in-text references and reference lists (two articles), or because full-text articles could not be obtained (one article). A citing article could have two or more citation contexts referring to HBPLE. Finally, I analyzed 260 citing articles including 310 citation contexts. Most citation contexts (91.9%) were collected from articles that cited the 1949 edition of HBPLE. Only 5.8% of citation contexts cited the 1965 edition of HBPLE and 2.3% cited the 1972 edition of HBPLE. In addition, each citing article had one to five citation contexts referring to HBPLE. Most of the citing articles (225 articles, 86.5%) had only one citation context referring to HBPLE. Twenty-six citing articles (10.0%) had two citation contexts referring to HBPLE. Four citing articles had three citation contexts referring to HBPLE, four citing articles had four citation contexts referring to HBPLE, and one citing article had five citation contexts referring to HBPLE.

The cited concept and citation function of each citation context were recorded after reading the text surrounding each citation context. During the analysis process, I reviewed HBPLE to ensure that the cited concepts were included in HBPLE; I then derived the keywords or statements used by citing authors to refer to the concepts in HBPLE. After analyzing all citation contexts, I examined and compared the notes for each citation context. Some different terms and statements that were identified to have the same meaning referring to the same concept in HBPLE were incorporated into a single category. One category represented one independently cited concept. Finally, several categories were formed.

The classification scheme of citation functions was developed based on a temporary classification scheme devised after reviewing previous studies and was modified during the analysis process. Regarding the main topic of each citing article, it was coded based on its title, keywords, abstracts, and full text. Similar topics were incorporated into topic that were the same but had broader coverage.

All analyses were conducted by one researcher. To improve the consistency of the classification schemes of cited concepts, citation functions, and topics of citing articles, all citing articles were analyzed twice or thrice at various times. When the first two results of classification were inconsistent, a third analysis for classification was conducted. In addition, citing articles in the same topic category were reexamined to guarantee that consistent criteria were applied during the analysis process.

@&#RESULTS@&#

As shown in Fig. 1
                        , comparing the logarithms of the annual totals of HBPLE-citing articles in LIS from 1958 to 2013 showed a clear increasing trend. Comparing the logarithms of the annual totals of LIS articles during the same period also presented a clear increasing trend (Fig. 1). The continually increasing number of articles published in LIS journals may support the fact that an increasing number of LIS articles cite HBPLE. However, the point is that, although HBPLE was published 65 years ago, the influence of HBPLE has not decreased over time. HBPLE has been proven as a classic work in the field of LIS. HBPLE, however, was not cited in LIS articles until the tenth year after its publication. During this study period, 260 LIS articles cited HBPLE. The annual number of citations that HBPLE received was less than 10 before 2005. During the period of 2005–2013, HBPLE received 7 to 15 citations per year. The largest growth in the annual number of citing articles was observed from 2004 to 2005. The number of citing articles in 2005 was 10 articles more than that in 2004.


                        Table 1
                         shows the 39 LIS journals that cited HBPLE. Among the 39 LIS journals, 17 (43.6%) focus on library science and 22 (56.4%) on information science. Seventeen journals (35.4% of 39 journals) cited HBPLE only once. Regarding the number of the citing articles, only 19.6% of the citing articles were published in library science journals. Over half of the LIS citing articles (56.2%) were published in three journals: Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology (25.0%), Information Processing & Management (16.5%), and Scientometrics (14.6%).


                        Table 2
                         shows that the 260 citing articles represent 9 topics. Bibliometrics articles accounted for the largest share (46.5%), followed by information retrieval (29.2%). Each of the 7 remaining topics accounted for between 1.2% and 10% of the citing articles. Bibliometric articles include numerous studies that have used bibliometric analysis. Information retrieval articles focus on indexing and information retrieval systems. Information behavior articles address information acquisition, information seeking, information use, and information overload. Information service articles mainly refer to reference services and evaluations of reference services. Most knowledge organization articles focus on classification, especially folksonomy. Information science articles cover discussions on information theory, the nature of information science, and information science curricula. Management articles refer to library management. Scholarly communication articles involve knowledge communication. This result showed that HBPLE is more associated with bibliometrics and information retrieval research than are other research topics.


                        Fig. 2
                         shows annual changes in the proportions of citing article topics. Except for 5 years (1959, 1960, 1961, 1965, and 1966), all citing articles represent only a specific topic per year before 1968. However, the citing articles representing three to six topics are observed for the period 2005–2013. The tendency for citing articles to cover diverse topics indicates that HBPLE tends to have a higher visibility in certain areas in LIS research. This tendency may also explain why the percentage of the top two topics clearly decreased after 2007. Although obvious fluctuations were observed in the annual proportions of bibliometrics articles and information retrieval articles, bibliometrics research and information retrieval articles dominated in most years. Authors of information behavior articles did not cite HBPLE until 1997. Information behavior dominated citing articles after 2011, with the exception of 2012. An increasing trend was evident in the proportion of information behavior articles after 2000.


                        Table 3
                         shows the 17 concepts extracted from 310 citation contexts. The citing articles mainly cited two concepts. “Zipf's law” is the most cited concept (64.8%), which involves various terms or statements describing the concept. Among 201 citation contexts referring to the concept of “Zipf's law,” 52.2% used the term “Zipf's law,” 28.4% used other terms, such as “Zipfian distribution,” “power law,” “hypobolic distribution,” and ”rank-size law,” and 19.4% contained a statement to describe or imply the concept of “Zipf's law.” Although Zipf's law is a well-known informetrics law, not all authors have used the formal term “Zipf's law” to refer to the law emphasizing the relationship between word rank and word frequency.

The second most cited concept was the PLE (24.5%), which is derived from Zipf's law. Although the concept of the PLE is the focus of HBPLE, the number of citation contexts referring to the PLE was lower than that referring to “Zipf's law.” This result ran counter to our assumption that the number of citation contexts referring to the concept of the PLE would be highest. Regarding to the terms used for the concept of the PLE, 84.2% of citation contexts referring to the concept of the PLE used the term “principle of least effort.” The remaining citation contexts used a definition or a brief statement to refer to this concept.

The remaining 15 concepts accounted for less than 10.7% of the concepts cited. “HBPLE” referred to Zipf's 1949 publication. “Word distribution” referred to the analysis or discussion of word distribution in human language. “Human behavior” included all types of information-seeking behavior. “Information cycle” referred to the cycle of scholarly communication. “Publication productivity” was equivalent to author productivity. “Rank” referred to the general concept of rank. “Sample size” referred to the quantity of data analyzed in Zipf's studies. “Information nonuse” indicated that the nonuse of information may result from certain situations. “Language analysis” referred to the statistical process of word distribution related to the types of language analyzed. “Lotka's law” was an informetrics law related to author productivity. “Richer effect” referred to the fact that the rich have a tendency to become richer. “R. Y. Chao” was one of Zipf's friends. “Signal information theory” referred to signal processing and communication. “Social physics” was coined by A. Comte and referred to sociology. “Optimization problem” was used to describe the presentation of possible solutions.

The 17 cited concepts were examined by year. Fig. 3
                         shows large fluctuations for the two concepts of “Zipf's law” and the PLE; opposing trends appear. A “falling after rising” trend (dashed line) was observed in the concept of “Zipf's law” whereas a “rising after falling” trend (solid line) was evident for the concept of the PLE. No trends were observed for the remaining 15 cited concepts because each cited concept appeared only in specific periods.


                        Table 4
                         shows the distribution of the 17 cited concepts in the 12 citing article topics. Researchers of bibliometrics and information retrieval have mainly cited the concept of Zipf's law, followed by the PLE. Authors of bibliometrics research and authors of information retrieval research have comprised approximately 60.7% and 26.4% of citation contexts referring to the concept of Zipf's law, respectively. The second most cited concept of the PLE has been cited by authors of articles representing 12 topics on information behavior research, followed by bibliometrics research and information retrieval research. Although authors of only nine articles have cited the concept of HBPLE; most of the citations were from bibliometrics researchers.


                        Table 5
                         shows the distribution of 11 citation functions based on 310 citation contexts. The top five citation functions were close in percentage and ranged from 11.0% to 17.1%. “Evidence” supporting citing authors’ claims was dominant (17.1%), followed by “comparison” (16.8%), which referred to comparing the findings or claims of HBPLE and results of other studies. “Related studies” referred to the basic part of a scientific paper presenting the findings of previous studies. “History” referred to the tracing of pioneers or earlier works with the aim of offering background information. “Relationship” referred to the foundation of Zipf's claims; Zipf's claims then became the foundation of other claims. “Definitions” referred to those of concepts that originated from HBPLE. “Examples” referred to HBPLE or to Zipf's claims being given as examples to clarify the author's ideas. “Further reading” referred to suggestions that readers read HBPLE to obtain a deep understanding of certain concepts. Finally, “Method” referred to the provision of detailed information regarding the methodology used in Zipf's studies.


                        Table 6
                         shows the distribution of 17 cited concepts in 11 citation functions. The most frequently cited concept was Zipf's law and was mainly used for comparison with other bibliometric laws, whereas the second-most cited concept, the PLE, was mainly used as evidence. The same concepts could have numerous citation functions. In addition, this reflected the complications of citing publications (Bonzi & Snyder, 1991; Liu, 1993).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

According to the growing trend in the annual number of citations that HBPLE received from the authors of LIS articles during the study period of 1949–2013, HBPLE was identified as a classic work in the field of LIS. The initial results of a search in WoS showed that articles in numerous disciplines, in addition to LIS, have cited HBPLE. Computer science articles, followed by physics and LIS articles, cited it most frequently. HBPLE was proved to exert an interdisciplinary influence.

The authors of LIS articles did not cite HBPLE until the tenth year after it was published, however; this may indicate that classic works may not emerge as essential in the field of LIS immediately after publication. This was consistent with the findings of previous studies that reported that certain highly cited articles did not receive a high number of citations within a few years after publication (Aversa, 1985). Although the rapid increase in the number of publications may have contributed to the increase in the number of citations that HBPLE has received, it also leads to a specific concept appearing in various publications. This means that authors can cite a specific concept from various publications, indicating that not all authors cite the same concept from the original work. Therefore, literature growth does not guarantee an increase in the number of citations that a publication receives. An increase in the annual number of citations that a publication receives during a long period is still a simple and useful indicator for identifying a classic work.

According to the results, the concept of Zipf's law was the most frequently cited concept, not the PLE, which is the focus of HBPLE. The difference in the number of citations that these two concepts received further demonstrates that the influence of Zipf's law is much stronger than that of the PLE. Although the concept of the PLE is derived from Zipf's law and is also referred to as Zipf's law (Case, 2005; Power, 1998), the two terms differ in meaning when cited. The concept of Zipf's law emphasizes the word “distribution,” which is one of the three bibliometric laws. By contrast, the concept of the PLE highlights that people tend to exert the least effort in conducting particular activities. The concept of Zipf's law originated from Zipf's book entitled The Psychobiology of Language (PL). PL was published in 1935 and reprinted in 1965, 1968, and 1999. Although a concept that is similar to the PLE appeared in Zipf's 1935 book, it was not fully developed (Chao, 1950). Zipf explained the concept of the PLE in his 1949 book.

Based on the relationship between Zipf's law and the PLE, it may be understood why the concept of Zipf's law is contained in HBPLE and why authors have referred to the concept in HBPLE. Nevertheless, one compelling finding is that the number of citations PL received is much lower compared with HBPLE based on the WoS data. I found that only some authors have cited original publications when referring to a specific concept. For instance, Naranan (1971) cited the concept of Zipf's law in HBPLE and the concept of the PLE in PL. In addition, researchers might cite a specific concept from various sources including the original work, or mention a specific concept without citing any related publications. For example, Sun, Shaw, and David (1999) cited the concept of Zipf's law in Zipf's 1935 and 1949 books. Kebede (2004) and White (2001) have mentioned the concept of the PLE without citing any publications containing the concept. This reveals that the influence of a specific concept may be underestimated because authors have not cited the original work.

Citing concepts from original publications shows respect to the authors who have advanced those concepts, however, several reasons may have affected authors’ citation of concepts from other studies, including availability or the accessibility of documents (Kim & Sin, 2011; Quigley, Peck, Rutter, & Williams, 2002), language barriers (Murphy, 2003), and other reasons (Bonzi & Snyder, 1991). Furthermore, a few cited concepts were not extracted from the specific content of HBPLE. “HBPLE” was used to confirm the existence of a publication. “Sample size” referred to the sample size used by Zipf in word analysis. A few cited concepts were not submitted by Zipf, such as “Lotka's law,” “signal information theory,” and “social physics.” This implies that literature citing is a complex behavior.

The findings also reveal that HBPLE has great influence on authors of bibliometric research, information retrieval, and information behavior. HBPLE has the strongest influence on authors of bibliometrics research. Most bibliometrics researchers have cited the concept of Zipf's law in HBPLE because they discussed informetrics laws, including Zipf's law. The second-largest group of authors who have cited HBPLE was information retrieval researchers. They also most frequently cited the concept of Zipf's law because they focused on index terms. Index terms are related to Zipf's study of word distribution. Information behavior researchers, the third-largest group of authors who have cited HBPLE, cited the concept of the PLE most. Only a few information behavior researchers have cited the concept of Zipf's law. Information behavior researchers were identified as the main group citing the core concept originating from HBPLE.

Regarding the concept of the PLE, it has been mainly cited by three groups of researchers: information behavior (32.9%), information retrieval (23.7%), and bibliometric research (17.1%). This is consistent with the assumption that information behavior researchers have most frequently cited the concept of the PLE. Information behavior researchers have mainly applied the concept of the PLE to explain the reasons for the selection and use of information. Even information behavior researchers did not pay attention to the concept of the PLE until 1997; the increasing trend in the number of citations may be understood as indicating the improved visibility of HBPLE in the area of information behavior. Information retrieval researchers have also mainly used the concept of the PLE to emphasize that users’ information seeking behaviors tend to follow the concept of the PLE. Bibliometric researchers have applied the concept of the PLE to various contexts, including word distribution, journal distribution, language use, comparing the PLE with other laws, and information seeking behavior.

Although the number of citation contexts containing the concept of Zipf's law was much higher than the number of citation contexts containing the concept of the PLE, opposing trends appeared in the annual proportions of the two cited concepts. A “falling after rising” trend was identified in the annual percentage of the concept of Zipf's law, whereas a “rising after falling” trend was observed in the annual percentage of the concept of the PLE. These opposing trends have resulted in a decreased difference in the annual percentage between the top two cited concepts since 2006. The changes in influence of the two concepts of Zipf's law and the PLE are worth monitoring. Regarding other cited concepts, their changes in influence were neglected because of a limited number of citations. No trends were formed.

Regarding the citation functions of HBPLE, the concept of Zip's law has the highest number of citation functions (11), followed by the concept of the PLE (10). The numbers of citation functions of the two concepts were similar. This demonstrated that the same concepts may play various roles in citation functions. The reasons for authors’ citing publications can affect the type of citation function. The concept of Zipf's law has been used mainly for comparison with other informetrics laws or statistical distributions that have resulted from other studies; however, the difference in the number of citation functions among “comparison,” “related studies,” “evidence,” and “history” was small. The main citation function of the concept of the PLE has been used as evidence to support authors’ claims. Most authors have emphasized that users tend to expend minimal effort to obtain necessary information. The marginal difference in the numbers of citation functions was identified among “evidence,” “comparison,” and “relationship.” In short, “evidence” and “comparison” were the two main citation functions for the two concepts of Zipf's law and the PLE.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#


                     HBPLE is a classic work on linguistics that has been cited by authors representing various disciplines, including LIS. This study tracked the influence of HBPLE on LIS research. An increasing trend in the annual number of citations indicated that the influence of HBPLE on LIS research has not yet diminished. Based on the findings, the influential concepts embedded in HBPLE and which topics in LIS research have been affected by HBPLE were identified. In particular, I focused on the visibility of the concept of the PLE, which comprises the core of HBPLE. Citation context analysis helped to clarify the relationship in terms of content between HBPLE and LIS research and to explore the citation functions of HBPLE. The most substantial discovery was the fact that the concept of Zipf's law has greater visibility than does the concept of the PLE. A concept highlighted in a publication may not receive substantial attention. This implies that citing behavior is complicated and that various motivations for citing publications also affect the visibility of cited publications. In addition, I observed that the influence of HBPLE is visible in numerous areas in LIS research. Information behavior researchers exhibited the most interest in the concept of the PLE whereas bibliometrics researchers paid the most attention to the concept of Zipf's law. Although a close relationship exists between the PLE and Zipf's law, they exert an evidently different influence. Because HBPLE has had an interdisciplinary influence and because citing behavior varies among disciplines, I suggest that future studies aim to identify the influence of HBPLE on various disciplines. Based on the WoS data, I determined that although HBPLE is a classic work on linguistics, it substantially influences numerous fields outside linguistics.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This research was supported by a grant from the Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan (MOST 103-2410-H-002-172).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

