@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Query strategies during information searching: Effects of prior domain knowledge and complexity of the information problems to be solved

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Three complexity levels of information problems are defined related to psychology domain.


                        
                        
                           
                           40 students in psychology and in other domains performed information problems with an online encyclopedia.


                        
                        
                           
                           Students in psychology performed better than the others, especially for complex problems.


                        
                        
                           
                           Students in psychologies used more relevant strategies than the others.


                        
                        
                           
                           These expertise-related differences are stronger for the complex problems.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Information searching

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This study addresses the impact of domain expertise (i.e. of prior knowledge of the domain) on the performance and query strategies used by users while searching for information. Twenty-four experts (psychology students) and 24 non-experts (students from other disciplines) had to search for psychology information from the Universalis website in order to perform six information problems of varying complexity: two simple problems (the keywords required to complete the task were provided in the problem statement), two more difficult problems (the keywords required had to be inferred) and two impossible problems (no answer was provided by the website). The results showed that participants with prior knowledge in the domain (experts in psychology) performed better (i.e. reached more correct answers after shorter search times) than non-experts. This difference was stronger as the complexity of the problems increased. This study also showed that experts and non-experts displayed different query strategies. Experts reformulated the impossible problems more often than non-experts, because they produced new queries with psychology-related keywords. The participants rarely used thematic category tool and when they did so this did not enhance their performance.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Searching for information in e-documents is now commonly used for professional, educational, and personal purposes. Among these e-documents, the Internet both provides a large environment within which users can search for information and also offers many different tools for accessing information (such as search engines). Search engines can be general (e.g. Google, Yahoo), in which case they can be used to search a huge number of documents throughout the Internet, or they can be part of a website (such as the search engine of Amazon.com). In both cases, the use of search engines and the way of carrying out a search for information depend on various characteristics, such as those of the individual (e.g., experience in using the Internet, level of domain knowledge), those of the interface (e.g., layout organization) and/or those of the task (e.g., complexity of the information problem to be performed, nature of the problem).

Among the factors underlying the information searching task, many studies have reported that prior domain knowledge is a major predictor of performance in information searching (e.g. Hsieh-Yee, 1993; Hölscher & Strube, 2000; Ihadjadene & Martins, 2004; Marchionini, 1995; Wildemuth, 2004; Willoughby, Anderson, Wood, Mueller, & Ross, 2009). These studies showed that experts formulated appropriate queries, their searches were successful and they were faster than non-experts (e.g. Dillon & Song, 1997; Downing, Moore, & Brown, 2005; Hölscher & Strube, 2000). On the other hand, some studies found that users tended to bypass complex information channels and advanced techniques in favor of ‘simpler’ web search and search engines (George et al., 2006; Makani & WooShue, 2006; Vezzosi, 2009). The level of expertise is particularly important in the educational field, since students are increasingly searching for information on the Internet to do their homework and/or to deepen their knowledge of an academic topic. Students with greater knowledge will use various and more efficient strategies than students with little or no existing knowledge. In addition, various studies have provided evidence that information searching performance depends on the level of complexity of the problem to be performed (Barsky & Bar-Ilan, 2012; Chevalier, Dommes, & Marquié, 2011; Dommes, Chevalier, & Lia, 2011; Dommes, Chevalier, & Rossetti, 2010).

Consequently, what will happen if we manipulate the level of prior domain knowledge and the complexity of the information problems to be solved? Would a high level of domain knowledge allow the user to overcome difficulties in searching for information by reformulating unsuccessful queries? Would it increase accuracy? In order to provide some answers, this experimental study set out to investigate the impact of prior domain knowledge (i.e., the level of expertise of the participants) and the complexity of the information problems to be performed on the efficiency and the strategies used by the participants. We describe these two points in greater detail in Section 1.1. The objectives and hypotheses underlying the study are presented in Section 1.2. The method and results are described in Sections 2 and 3. The article ends with the discussion of the results we obtained (Section 4) and we present limitations as well as further insights (Section 5).

Information searching activity can be defined as a complex cognitive activity involving problem solving, decision-making, and text comprehension processes. Several models have been developed (e.g., CoLiDeS developed by Kitajima, Blackmon, & Polson, 2000; Marchionini’s model, 1995; for an overview see Dinet, Chevalier, & Tricot, 2012). More precisely, with regard to information searching using search engines, Sharit, Hernandez, Czaja, and Pirolli (2008) developed a cognitive model, which involves three main stages:
                           
                              •
                              Stage 1, planning and formulating the query. An individual has to produce keywords relevant to the objective of the search.

Stage 2, evaluating and selecting the information provided by the search engine. An individual has to check and evaluate the relevance of the information provided by the search engine with regard to the keywords used. If the results do not match the objectives, the individual has to reformulate her/his query (and goes back to stage 1).

Stage 3, processing information. If the results provided by the search engine seem to be relevant to the proposed objectives, the individual selects and then processes them at a deeper level.

As an individual progresses in her/his search, s/he has to keep the search goal in his/her working memory, and compare it to the information provided by the search in order to obtain the information that is expected to solve the current information problem.

In this study we focused on Stages 1 and 2, i.e. on the formulation and reformulation of queries. Stage 2 may be iterative if the individual does not find the expected information, and so it may be repeated throughout search activity.

Various factors are involved in information searching, especially prior domain knowledge. Indeed, many authors have found that prior domain knowledge supported better search performance (e.g. more correct answers), higher search efficiency (e.g. fast search and more oriented by opening fewer pages) and more search flexibility (e.g. formulated more queries) (e.g., Ihadjadene, Chaudiron, & Martins, 2003; Ihadjadene & Martins, 2004; Sihvonen & Vakkari, 2004; Wildemuth, 2004). Ihadjadene and Martins (2004) and Ihadjadene et al. (2003) observed that only experts used thematic categories (provided by a search engine, such as sport, news) but they did so in an inefficient way that did not enhance their performance. Participants found that the category labels were not meaningful, they were also confused by the heading “categories”, and did not understand the difference between “keywords” and “categories”. Although prior domain knowledge is a relevant factor predicting search performance with search engines, Hölscher and Strube (2000) observed that only people with dual expertise (domain and web experts) modified their search strategies to develop a better one (by changing search engine) when faced with an impasse.

In addition to prior domain knowledge, the complexity of the information problems to be solved also impacts searching performance and the strategies used. The definitions and viewpoints of task complexity are numerous (for a review see Liu & Li, 2012). In psychology, Campbell (1988) defined two dimensions of task complexity: (a) objective task complexity is characteristic of a task and independent of the individual and (b) subjective task complexity is a psychological experience or perception of a task by the individual who performs the task. Campbell (1988) also identified four complexity attributes: (1) multiple paths to achieve targeted outcomes; (2) multiple acceptable solutions may be provided to solve the task; (3) conflicting interdependence among paths and targeted outcomes; and (4) uncertain links among paths and targeted outcomes to solve the task.

Hence, in the research field of information searching, problem complexity can be measured in different ways. For instance, Barsky and Bar-Ilan (2012) as well as Chevalier, Maury, and Fouquereau (2014) provided information problems for which keywords mentioned in the statement matched with the words displayed on the website vs. information problems for which words displayed did not match with keywords of the statement. Participants had to infer the correct link related to the information problem. For Chin, Fu, and Kannampallil (2009), complexity is defined with regard to the well-defined problem vs. open-ended problem. In well-defined problem, participants have to find a precise fact whereas in open-ended problem they have to collect various information (several websites may be visited and useful to solve the information problem). For Sihvonen and Vakkari (2004), a simple task presents specific and familiar concepts in the domain, whereas a difficult task includes terminology that requires greater domain knowledge. Bell and Ruthven (2004) developed a three-level model of complexity. A first level of complexity refers to tasks for which the information required the ways to find that information and assess its relevance are clear. At a second level, the goal may be clear but the decisions are required depending on each specific situation problem. At a third level, both goal and procedure to obtain relevant information are unclear (close to Chin et al.’s viewpoint). Search task complexity can also be defined by the level of cognitive complexity (i.e. level of elaboration, amount of cognitive processing, cognitive effort) required by the information search task (Arguello, 2014). In line with these different definitions, and particularly to the second level explained by Bell and Ruthven (2004), the present study examined objective task complexity rather than subjective task complexity, and took into account the amount of cognitive requirements imposed on participants while solving information problems. Problem complexity was operationalized by the presence, or absence, of instruction terms that were directly useful to reach the target information. The lack of the useful terms imposed inferences to produce new related terms that were necessary to find information. Among all the dimensions of complexity listed by Liu and Li (2012), the type of task complexity dealt with in this study tackled the “unreliability dimension”. It refers to inaccurate and misleading information to perform the task. More precisely, for our present study, the manipulation of complexity was similar to previous work by Dommes et al. (2011) and Chevalier et al. (2011). These authors instructed participants to carry out search problems after varying the keywords to be used to find the right answer. For the simple problems, the keywords required to obtain the right answer were included in the statement of the problem. In contrast, for the more difficult problems, the relevant keywords to obtain the correct answer were not included in the statement of the problem. The participants had to infer new related keywords to complete the task correctly (e.g., the word “vegetable” provided in the information problem statement did not lead to the correct answer, the participant had to infer “plant”). An additional category of problem was designed: impossible ones. These impossible problems contained elements that led the participants to believe that an answer could be found, when in fact there was none. Their results showed that participants performed better for the simple problems than for the difficult and impossible ones, i.e. they reached more correct answers and completed them within a shorter time. Participants also experienced more difficulty in reformulating unsuccessful queries while performing the difficult and impossible problems. Indeed, Dommes et al. (2011) found that for simple problems, participants mostly formulated a unique query that generally contained three keywords to obtain the targeted answer. Whereas in Jansen, Spink and Koshman’ study (2007), participants formulated 2 or 3 queries and no more than 3 words per query. But when the problem complexity increased, Dommes et al. (2011) observed that participants formulated more queries (means of 4 or 5 queries) and used more keywords (means of 6 or 7 keywords per query). These results were in line with those obtained by Aula, Khan, and Guan (2010) as well as Barsky and Bar-Ilan (2012).

In Dommes et al.’s (2011) and Chevalier et al.’s (2011) studies, the authors focused on problems within a general domain knowledge (such as the name of an author and the name of a plant). They did not manipulate prior domain knowledge of a specific area. On the basis of these prior studies, we hypothesized that the participants’ prior domain knowledge (i.e. their level of expertise) would affect their information searching performance and the strategies used with regard to the complexity of the information problem to be solved. To do this, a new experimental study was carried out.

This study investigates the interactions between level of prior domain knowledge (level of expertise) and level of complexity of the information problems to be solved both on performance and query strategies developed. We hypothesized that prior domain knowledge would play a substantial role, especially when participants had to perform difficult or impossible problems. In these problems, participants had to infer new keywords to find the relevant web pages, whereas in the simple problems the relevant keywords required to find the correct answers were provided in the problem statement. These difficult problems were expected to increase the difficulties experienced by the participants. Consequently, in order to get out of the impasse, the participants should produce new keywords or use the thematic category tool if they cannot infer new keywords (i.e. open up links provided by the website to find the targeted information). In solving complex problems (difficult and impossible problems), the participants with greater prior domain knowledge (experts in psychology) should be faster and more accurate than those with none (or very little) domain knowledge (non-experts in psychology). Furthermore, in line with the Hölscher and Strube (2000), experts were expected to produce more new keywords to solve complex problems; these keywords should be related to the domain of the problems to be performed. Finally, we expected that experts should have to reread the problems less often than the non-experts, meaning that the cognitive load in the working memory associated with the information search activity would be lower for the experts than for the non-experts. For the non-experts, this activity draws on too many cognitive resources, resulting in the loss of the search goal from the working memory, and the need to reread the problems more often, especially for the difficult and impossible ones.

In our study, the participants could use two tools for information searching: a search engine and thematic category tool (based on semantic categories). Thus, on the basis of the studies of Ihadjadene and Martins (2004) and Ihadjadene et al. (2003), we hypothesized that all participants would experience difficulties in using categories in order to access information. We therefore expected that the participants would mainly use the search engine and reformulate queries in spite of using thematic category tool provided by the website.

@&#METHOD@&#

Forty-eight students at the University of Toulouse volunteered to take part in the study (age: M
                        =19.9 ranging from 18 to 35years, SD
                        =3.19; 14 males and 34 females). The participants were recruited from two locations: in university lecture halls and the university library. Half of the participants were undergraduate psychology students, referred to as experts (age: M
                        =21, SD
                        =4.20) and the other 24 participants were undergraduate students in other fields (Languages, Art, History and Geography), hereafter called non-experts (age: M
                        =18.8, SD
                        =0.87). In line with Sihvonen and Vakkari (2004), the participants named “experts” in our experiment were not exactly and strictly experts in psychology (they had not a PhD in psychology for instance), but they had greater psychology-related knowledge than students in other fields.

Knowledge of psychology and familiarity with the Internet were checked by two questionnaires presented in the Design Section 2.2. A t test confirmed that the experts had significantly higher level of knowledge about the domain (M
                        =7.54, SD
                        =1.56) than the non-experts (M
                        =3.08, SD
                        =1.89); t(1,47)=79.63, p
                        <.001. The level of familiarity with Internet was assessed (number of hours spent using it per day), and no significant difference, t(46)=−.55, p
                        =.587, was found between the two groups with regard to familiarity with the Internet (experts: M
                        =2.68, SD
                        =2.10; non-experts: M
                        =2.96, SD
                        =1.33). The experimental study was carried out in March 2013.

The Encyclopædia Universalis is a French-language general encyclopedia (http://www.universalis.fr/). We chose this website because websites of this kind can be used by students or web users in general to search for academic information, especially students of the University of Toulouse (our sample) since they have access to this encyclopedia via the university digital work environment.

The Universalis website offers two different tools to access information: a thematic category tool using semantic categories such as Yahoo! or many e-commerce sites (but Universalis website is related to academic topics), and a search engine with an autocomplete feature (see Figs. 1–3
                           
                           
                           ), as we can find on internet search engines. Autocomplete is a feature which automatically predicts the remaining characteristics of a word or phrase based on what has been typed or entered.

The six information problems were clearly defined, such as finding the name of an author or the price of a product. According to Ingwersen (2000), this kind of problem can be solved quickly with a few keywords and few navigation activities. Unlike Ingwersen (2000), for whom these well-defined problems involved checking information objects not related to any specific topic, we asked the participants to perform well-defined problems within a specific domain knowledge (psychology), for which participants had differing levels of prior domain knowledge. In addition to the level of knowledge, we also manipulated the level of complexity of the information problem by using problems of three varying complexity levels. Two problems were produced for each complexity level (simple, difficult, and impossible problems). In line with Dommes et al. (2011), for the simple problems, the keywords required to reach the target web page were included in the statement of the problem. For the difficult problems, the relevant keywords required to reach the target page were not included in the information problem statement. The participants had to infer appropriate keywords related to the domain themselves. The last category of problems consisted of two impossible problems. These problems concerned real psychological concepts, but no answer was provided on the website (they did exist elsewhere on the web, but participants had been instructed to use the Universalis website). These impossible problems were used to investigate changes in strategies. Participants were not required to provide any answer and could also give up. Each answer for the impossible problems was obviously wrong.

Consequently, problem complexity included two dimensions:
                              
                                 (1)
                                 The inference of new, relevant and related-problem keywords for the difficult and impossible problems.

The awareness or understanding that no answer existed on the website for the impossible problems.

The six problems and the ways to solve them are shown in Table 1
                           .

To carry out the search activity, a web application had been developed (in HTML/JavaScript). Buttons were used to read and reread the problems, to write the answer or to give up. The application also recorded participants’ activities (time, mouse movements and keyword events) using the VLC media player.

In order to build the psychology knowledge questionnaire, we selected main concepts instructed during the Bachelor degree of Psychology at the University of Toulouse since all the participants were students in this university. So, these concepts were relevant to evaluate the level of prior domain knowledge of the participants.

More precisely, this questionnaire included 12 multiple-choice questions, including e.g.:
                              
                                 
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          What is behaviorism?
                                       
                                       
                                          □ A reaction against the use of introspection as practiced by philosophers
                                       
                                       
                                          □ A set of theories that account for the functioning of the unconscious
                                       
                                       
                                          □ An experimental approach
                                       
                                       
                                          □ The only approach consistent with that of scientific research
                                       
                                       
                                          □ I do not know
                                       
                                       
                                          What are the unconscious, preconscious and conscious?
                                       
                                       
                                          □ They describe the personality
                                       
                                       
                                          □ They predict behavior
                                       
                                       
                                          □ They are Freud’s second Levels of Mind
                                       
                                       
                                          □ They are Freud’s first Levels of Mind
                                       
                                       
                                          □ I do not know
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           Prior knowledge in Psychology, as assessed by these questions, were related to the information problems to be solved on the Universalis website, that is to say, they came from the same disciplinary fields (i.e. cognitive psychology, social psychology, development psychology and psychoanalysis). Cronbach’s alpha is equal to .707.

To determine the participants’ familiarity with the Internet, we measured their Internet use (number of hours per day).

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

The experiment was divided into two stages. First, the participants performed the prior psychology knowledge test and filled in the questionnaire measuring their familiarity with the Internet. Next, they were instructed to search for information on the Universalis website. Each participant had to perform the six problems (two simple, two difficult, and two impossible problems); the order of presentation of the six problems was balanced. To go on to the following problem, participants had to stop the previous problem either by writing an answer using the computer, or by giving up the search (they were free to stop any search whenever they wanted), or by reaching the assigned time limit (the time allowed for each problem was limited to 10min, which was long enough to find the correct answer and to avoid any irrelevant perseverance of participants). The time required to solve the six information problems lasted about 20min (min=7min 13s; max=37min 27s).

Two independent variables were manipulated:
                           
                              –
                              The level of prior psychology knowledge or expertise: high (expert participants) vs. low (non-expert participants) as a between-subject factor.

The complexity of the information problems to be solved: 2 simple problems vs. 2 difficult problems vs. 2 impossible problems as a within-subject factor.

Performance/accuracy for each type of problems was measured by:
                           
                              –
                              The number of correct answers (4-point score). For simple and difficult problems, a correct answer was scored 1. An incorrect answer or abandoning the attempt to find the answer was scored 0. The impossible tasks were not taken into account because there were no correct answers.

The nature of errors made by participants. For all the problems to be solved, the participants could give up, reach the assigned time limit or provide an incorrect answer. We distinguished between the number of giving ups vs. the number of incorrect answers. The participants could give up searching for information at any time, in which case no answer was given.

The search time (in seconds). For each experimental information problem, the search time was calculated from the moment the participants clicked on the “OK” button (after reading the problem), until they either entered the answer, or gave up their search.

The number of times they reread the problems, which reflected the difficulty encountered by participants in keeping the search goal in their working memory.

The number of actions made by the participant vs. the optimum pathway for each problem. We measured the number of additional actions made by the participants. For example, “Finding the definition of conditioning” using the search engine, the optimum pathway to the right answer consisted of three actions: (1) typing the query “conditioning”, (2) selecting the article “Conditioning”, and (3) selecting the answer. Using the thematic category tool, eight actions were needed: (1) clicking on “thematic category tool”, (2) clicking on the link “Social and Human Sciences”, (3) then on “Psychology”, (4) “Cognitive psychology”, (5) “Learning”, (6) “Conditioning”, (7) selecting the article “Conditioning”, and (8) selecting the answer.

The query strategies developed by the participants were defined by:
                           
                              –
                              The number of reformulations that the participant made in the search engine text box after an initial unsuccessful query. For example, for a difficult problem, the first query was “measurement of intelligence”. This query was unsuccessful. Then, the participant formulated several queries: “measurement of intelligence Piaget”, “Piaget measurement of intelligence”, “Piaget”, “Piaget intelligence”.

The use of search engine vs. thematic category tool: the use of tools made it possible to observe participants’ search strategies. We determined whether participants used one or both tools. We scored 1 if the participant used the search engine, 2 if s/he used the thematic category tool, and 3 if s/he used both tools.

The nature of the keywords used: the keywords could be taken from the statement of the problems (e.g., for the simple problem “finding the definition of “conditioning”, the participant used “conditioning”) or could be inferred by the participant (these keywords could originate in the domain of psychology or not).

@&#RESULTS@&#

Mixed 2×3 ANOVAs with expertise as the between-subject factor, and problem complexity (simple, difficult, impossible problems) as the within-subject factor were computed for each dependent variable, except for the number of correct answers (see below). The main effect of the problem complexity was investigated using a Bonferroni post hoc test. Pairwise comparisons tests were computed to interpret the significant interaction effect. The partial ηp
                     
                     2 was used as an index of the relative effect size.

Means and standard deviations for each dependent variable depending on the level of expertise and the complexity of the problems are shown in Table 2
                     .

As the impossible problems had no correct answers, only the answers to the simple and difficult problems were considered. A mixed 2×2 ANOVA was conducted and for each complexity level of problems, a mean score was calculated.

We observed significant effects of both expertise, F(1,46)=15.003, p
                           <.001, ηp
                           
                           2
                           =.246 and problem complexity, F(1,46)=130.79, p
                           <.001, ηp
                           
                           2
                           =.740. The experts provided more correct answers (M
                           =1.35, SD
                           =0.91) than the non-experts (M
                           =0.90, SD
                           =0.97). The simple problems generated more correct answers than the difficult ones. The Expertise×Complexity interaction did not reach significance, F(1,46)=1.92, n.s.

With respect to the number of incorrect answers, no significant difference was observed between the experts and non-experts, F(1,46)=0.82, n.s. In contrast, a significant effect of complexity did emerge, F(2,92)=8.31, p
                           <.001, ηp
                           
                           2
                           =.153. More precisely, the simple problems generated fewer incorrect answers than the difficult (p
                           <.001) or impossible problems (p
                           <.05). There was no significant difference between the difficult problems and the impossible problems (n.s.). There was no significant interaction, F(2,92)=0.14, n.s.

Expertise had no significant effect on the number of giving ups, F(1,46)=1.48, n.s. The complexity had a significant effect, F(2,92)=78.14, p
                           <.001, ηp
                           
                           2
                           =.629. The simple problems generated fewer giving ups than the difficult (p
                           <.001) or impossible problems (p
                           <.001). In addition, the impossible problems generated more giving ups than the difficult ones (p
                           <.001). The Expertise×Complexity interaction did not reach significance, F(2,92)=2.38, n.s.

The level of expertise had no significant effect on search time, F(1,46)=2.27, n.s. Problem complexity did have a significant effect, F(2,92)=55.51, p
                           <.001, ηp
                           
                           2
                           =.547. Participants completed the simple problems faster than the difficult (p
                           <.001) or impossible ones (p
                           <.001). No significant difference was observed between difficult and impossible problems (n.s.). The Expertise×Complexity interaction was significant, F(2,92)=6.05, p
                           <.005, ηp
                           
                           2
                           =.116. Experts needed less time to complete the difficult problems than non-experts (p
                           <.005). No significant difference was observed between the simple and impossible problems (n.s.). The lack of difference for the impossible problems can be attributed to both experts and non-experts very frequently giving up. When the participants’ queries were unsuccessful, they quickly abandoned the problems.

It should be recalled that the number of times the problem was reread reflected difficulty in keeping the search goal in the working memory while navigating in the website. The experts reread the problems less often than the non-experts, F(1,46)=7.61, p
                           =.008, ηp
                           
                           2
                           =.142. Problem complexity also had a significant effect, F(2,92)=31.56, p
                           <.001, ηp
                           
                           2
                           =.407. The simple problems generated fewer rereadings than the difficult problems (p
                           <.001) or the impossible ones (p
                           <.001). No significant difference was observed between the difficult and impossible problems (n.s.). The Expertise×Complexity interaction was also significant, F(2,92)=3.17, p
                           <.05, ηp
                           
                           2
                           =.065. More precisely, the experts reread the difficult (p
                           <.05) and impossible problems (p
                           <.05) less often than the non-experts. For the simple problems, the number of rereading was similar for the experts and non-experts.

The experts followed a search path closer to the optimum path than the non-experts, F(1,46)=9.53, p
                           <.005, ηp
                           
                           2
                           =.172. Search complexity also had a significant effect, F(1,46)=52.72, p
                           <.001, ηp
                           
                           2
                           =.534. The simple problems generated search paths closer to the optimum paths than the difficult ones. The Expertise×Complexity interaction was significant, F(1,46)=8.91, p
                           =.005, ηp
                           
                           2
                           =.162. The experts followed better search paths than the non-experts, but only for the difficult problems (p
                           <.005).

The level of expertise did not have any significant effect on the number of reformulations, F(1,45)=1.97, n.s., whereas the complexity of the problem did have a significant effect, F(2,90)= 41.21, p
                           <.001, ηp
                           
                           2
                           =.478. The simple problems generated fewer reformulations than the difficult (p
                           <.001) or impossible ones (p
                           <.001). No significant difference was observed between the difficult and impossible problems (n.s.). The Expertise×Complexity interaction was significant, F(2,90)=7.72, p
                           =.001, ηp
                           
                           2
                           =.146. The experts reformulated more queries than the non-experts only when dealing with impossible problems (p
                           <.005).

It should be recalled that for the simple problems, the keywords required to find the correct answers were included in the statement of the problems. In contrast, for the difficult and impossible problems, the participants had to infer new keywords. For more details about the main keywords used by the participants, see Table 3 in Appendix A.

For keywords directly extracted from the problem statement, no significant effect appeared for the level of expertise, F(1,46)=0.11, n.s. In contrast, we observed a significant effect of problem complexity, F(2,92)=32.41, p
                           <0.0001, ηp
                           
                           2
                           =0.41. More precisely, the simple problems generated fewer keywords than the difficult and impossible ones (p
                           <.0001). The difficult and impossible problems did not differ significantly. The expertise×complexity interaction was also significant, F(2,92)=5.86, p
                           <0.005, ηp
                           
                           2
                           =0.11. The post hoc comparisons showed that the experts used more keywords from the problems when they performed impossible problems than in carrying out the difficult (p
                           <.05) or simple problems (p
                           <.0001). They also used more keywords while dealing with difficult problems than simple ones (p
                           <.05). Non-experts used more keywords when tackling impossible or difficult problems than simple ones (p
                           <.001). No significant difference was found between difficult and impossible problems.

For the new keywords added by the participants, we observed that only keywords related to psychology were inferred and only when the participants were performing difficult or impossible problems. Consequently, the ANOVAs were computed for the difficult and impossible problems.

We observed a significant effect of expertise, F(1,46)=22,73, p
                           <.0001, ηp
                           
                           2
                           =.33, since the experts inferred more new keywords than the non-experts. Problem complexity was not significant (F(1,46)=.83, n.s). The interaction between complexity and expertise was not significant (F(1,46)=2.79, nis).

The level of expertise had no significant effect on the use of both tools, F(1,46)=.889, n.s. However, the problem complexity did have a significant effect, F(2,92)=13.14, p
                           <.001, ηp
                           
                           2
                           =.222. Both tools were used less often to carry out the simple problems than the difficult (p
                           =.001) or impossible ones (p
                           <.001). No significant difference was observed between the difficult and impossible problems. For the simple problems, the participants mainly used the search engine; the keywords required to reach the target page were included in the problem statement. For the difficult and impossible problems, the participants modified their search strategy more often, because they had to produce new keywords (keywords inferred by the participants). The Expertise×Complexity interaction was also significant, F(2,92)=8.26, p
                           =.001, ηp
                           
                           2
                           =.152. Experts used both tools less often than non-experts for the difficult problems (p
                           <.01), because they formulated more relevant queries than non-experts and therefore found the correct answers with the search engine.

@&#DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION@&#

The objective of this study was to determine the influence of prior domain knowledge (expertise level) and problem complexity on performance and the query strategies used by the participants while searching for information. The domain chosen was psychology.

The main findings we obtained showed that experts (students with greater knowledge of psychology) gave more correct answers than non-experts, which corroborate previous findings (e.g., Ihadjadene & Martins, 2004; Ihadjadene et al., 2003; Marchionini, 1995; Sihvonen & Vakkari, 2004; Wildemuth, 2004). Nevertheless, and unlike prior studies which showed that experts were faster than non-experts (e.g., Downing et al., 2005; Hölscher & Strube, 2000) and achieved a better performance, in our experiment experts took about the same length of time as non-experts to carry out the simple and impossible problems, but spent a shorter time on the difficult problems. This implies that when the problems required greater domain knowledge, such as the difficult ones that needed new keywords, the experts benefited from their prior knowledge and background in psychology. Indeed, when they performed difficult problems, experts used more relevant keywords, used the search engine more often than non-experts, and finally got to the correct answers by a path closer to the optimum path whereas non-experts did not. The poorer performance of the non-expert participants was related to their production of unsuccessful queries: they reformulated their queries by adding and/or suppressing keywords rather than modifying all the words in their queries (which is what the experts did). These results corroborated those reported by Borlund and Dreier (2014). In their study, participants who had to perform information problems in a domain for which they had no prior knowledge used fewer keywords and experienced difficulties in generating new ones.

In contrast, for the simple problems, for which participants could use keywords taken from the problem statements to find the answer, or for the impossible problems (for which the website used provided no answer), the two groups took about the same time, but non-experts and experts used differing search strategies for the impossible problems. Indeed, for the simple problems, all the participants only had to enter keywords from the problem statements into the search engine to find the correct answers; no specific issues appeared. Consequently, all the participants formulated no more than one query with only two or three keywords (in line with findings obtained by Jansen et al., 2007 and Dommes et al., 2011). But, when they had to perform impossible problems many issues surfaced since no answer existed in the website. Faced with these difficulties, our results showed that experts reformulated unsuccessful queries more often and used more keywords than non-experts. These results were consistent with previous findings (Ihadjadene & Martins, 2004; Ihadjadene et al., 2003), and may be explained by the fact that the knowledge of experts may help them to add new keywords to search for a possible answer, which explained why the experts produced more queries than the non-experts, who may have focused on keywords included in the problems and experienced difficulties in adding new psychology-related keywords. These results can also be related to those obtained by Sihvonen and Vakkari (2004). In their study, experts and non-experts in pedagogics (novices in their terminology) could use a thesaurus to solve information problems. Their findings showed that the thesaurus supported experts in identifying and selecting relevant keywords to expand their queries, whereas non-experts did not use efficiently this tool. Therefore, a higher level of domain knowledge was required to use the thesaurus, as in our experiment, a higher level of domain knowledge allowed inferring relevant words to formulate more efficient queries.

The more efficient strategy developed by the experts when they dealt with the difficult problems was corroborated by the fact that the experts made fewer deviations than the non-experts, as well as the results found by Gwizdka and Spence (2007). In our experiment, experts experienced fewer difficulties than non-experts when they solved difficult problems. This finding can be explained by the fact that experts had psychology-related knowledge that allowed them to infer more new relevant keywords than non-experts, even if in the end, very few psychology-related keywords were required to carry out the difficult problems successfully. In contrast, when the experts tackled the impossible problems, they used more queries and more keywords than for the difficult problems. These results seemed to show that the impossible problems were actually challenging problems for the experts since they tried to find an answer by reformulating more often their queries and used a greater number of keywords than for the difficult problems. In contrast, both difficult and impossible problems seemed to be very, or even too, complex for the non-experts, who exhibited similar performance and strategies in tackling the difficult and impossible problems. Non-experts used about the same number of keywords and queries when facing difficult or impossible problems. These difficulties were corroborated by the number of times they reread the difficult and impossible problems. The need to reread may have reflected difficulties in keeping a search goal in the working memory, as well as specific terms that would be relevant to producing queries.

For the participants with greater domain knowledge, efficiency in using the search engine by reformulating the queries and producing more relevant queries limited the need to change and switch between the two tools (search engine and thematic category tool). The findings showed that the thematic category tool was not used by the experts and was not useful for the non-experts, who performed poorly when using it. Two explanations may be suggested. (1) The first one deals with the relevance and comprehensibility of the categories displayed on the website for which some inferences were required. For instance, to find the “Binet–Simon test” article, the participants had to click on “Differential psychology”, then “Psychological tests”. Consequently, without psychology-related knowledge it may have been difficult or impossible to make this inference, so the non-expert participants might have experienced difficulties in understanding them and so in navigating within them. (2) The second explanation is more general and deals with the categorization process. Navigating through categories may require the building and manipulation of a mental model and, consequently, may be facilitated by higher level of domain knowledge.

Overall, the results obtained corroborated some older studies showing that prior domain knowledge had a beneficial effect on searching for information using search engines when the problem is cognitively demanding. Our study has also provided some new relevant results, some limitations should also be pointed out, and further studies would be required to deepen these initial findings as well as to overcome some limitations.

The study included two different tools, search engine and navigation from thematic categories, to reach the target information. It would be interesting to carry out further studies to test the type of tools used, even though the most-often-used tool was the search engine, and to examine the strategies and cognitive processes specific to each tool (e.g. one group of participants would use categories while the other would use a search engine). In addition, more attention should be paid on the regulation of the problem by users in using search engine and navigation. When the information problem is complex (i.e. users experienced difficulties or even failed to find target the information) we still do not know how users regulated their use of the tools and their strategies. It would be interesting to find out why some users stuck to the search engine, while others changed their strategies and navigated through related pages. Moreover, the reasons explaining why participant abandoned their search in impossible problems were not collected. Therefore, it difficult to interpret what their abandons mean. Did participants give up because they got aware that there was no correct answer or because they were less engaged or they thought that finding the answer was too much difficult? Qualitative measures would have been useful to interpret those behaviors.

Participants in our study did not seem to consider categories (thematic category tool) as an aid to accessing information. They often reformulated their queries, but tended to stick close to the original formulation (with very few variations of the same query), so their search did not turn up any relevant documents. Both non-expert people, and those with an approximate or vague understanding of the goal to be achieved, needed system support in formulating and selecting keywords and formulating relevant queries (Vakkari, Pennanen, & Serola, 2003). Suggested queries may provide such support. For instance, when the user formulates a query, Google provides a drop-down list showing possible queries, a process known as autocomplete. Some query supports have been developed, but they are only intended for searching specific domains such as medicine and use specific search tools, which may improve search efficiency (for more details see Kim, Seo, Croft, & Smith, 2014).

The tools to support information searching and more specifically the search engines should be improved for the different websites, such as the Encyclopaedia Universalis. They could support the reformulation process, by providing semantic suggestions to refine the search on the basis of previous queries as well as ontologies. Niu and Kelly (2014) carried out an experiment in which they focused on how participants (experts vs. novices in information searching) used the reformulation terms provided by a search engine. The results showed that the participants soon adopted the suggestions in their searching, and the participants with less expertise used more often the suggestions. The use of this function increased with the difficulty by adding new keywords and formulating queries. These results show that query suggestion provides support in situations where individuals have less search expertise and are experiencing greater difficulty in searching. These initial relevant findings should be improved by new experiments in which we will focus on the role of reformulating queries with regard to expertise in the domain and also on how the queries are modified during a difficult information problem.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The authors are very grateful to Mylène Sanchiz and the anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments and interest in this paper.

See Table 3
                     .

@&#REFERENCES@&#

