@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Differences in representations of Japanese name authority data among CJK countries and the Library of Congress

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           China, Korea, and LC have mixed headings in Kanji and other Chinese characters.


                        
                        
                           
                           Few organizations display correspondences between Kanji and their yomi.


                        
                        
                           
                           Romanized descriptions are different between organizations.


                        
                        
                           
                           Some names in hiragana might escape a search.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Authority files

Information retrieval

Name authority records

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This study aims to compare representations of Japanese personal and corporate name authority data in Japan, South Korea, China (including Hong Kong and Taiwan), and the Library of Congress (LC) in order to identify differences and to bring to light issues affecting name authority data sharing projects, such as the Virtual International Authority File (VIAF). For this purpose, actual data, manuals, formats, and case reports of organizations as research objects were collected. Supplemental e-mail and face-to-face interviews were also conducted. Subsequently, five check points considered to be important in creating Japanese name authority data were set, and the data of each organization were compared from these five perspectives. Before the comparison, an overview of authority control in Chinese, Japanese, Korean-speaking (CJK) countries was also provided. The findings of the study are as follows: (1) the databases of China and South Korea have mixed headings in Kanji and other Chinese characters; (2) few organizations display the correspondence between Kanji and their yomi; (3) romanization is not mandatory in some organizations and is different among organizations; (4) some organizations adopt representations in their local language; and (5) some names in hiragana are not linked with their local forms and might elude a search.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Sharing name authority data not only cuts down on labor and other costs but also increases convenience for national and international users. Hence, cooperative programs, such as the Virtual International Authority File (VIAF), are gaining significance both inside and outside of libraries. As is obvious, such programs are also important for libraries in Chinese, Japanese, and Korean-speaking (CJK) countries. However, in the current state of affairs, in which the LC/NACO Authority File (LCNAF) has only a short history in dealing with Chinese characters, and where most participatory organizations of the VIAF are from outside CJK countries, it is unclear whether authority data from CJK countries can be treated the same as that from Western countries; and if not, what is different and how we should treat it? It is crucial for libraries to consider sharing authority data, taking into account specific situations, such as the diversity of scripts for names in the Chinese character cultural sphere. This requires identifying the differences among the authority data within CJK countries.

The purpose of this study is to compare the representations of Japanese personal and corporate names in Japan and mainland China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, South Korea, and the Library of Congress (LC), in order to demonstrate the differences between them, and to bring to light further issues in the sharing of name authority data among CJK countries and other countries. This is the first attempt to compare representations of Japanese authors’ name authority data that are created in a wide range of CJK countries, and to present problems to be solved when sharing Japanese authors’ name authority data. The word ‘representation’ in this paper means differences in writing systems as well as differences in spellings within a writing system.

For this purpose, the author collected actual data, manuals, formats, and case reports about Japanese personal and corporate name authority data in CJK countries. Supplemental inquiries via e-mail and face-to-face interviews were also conducted. Subsequently, five check points considered to be important in creating Japanese name authority data were set. Then, using the collected information, each organization was investigated from the five perspectives. Vietnam writing systems are excluded from this study because of lack of information.

After a summary of the backgrounds and relevant works provided in Section 2, a detailed methodology of this study is offered in Section 3. In Section 4, the existing conditions of authority control by geographic areas are provided. Following the main result of this study, set out in Section 5, a discussion section is presented in Section 6, and Section 7 is a summary conclusion of the analysis.

In this study, ‘authority file’ and ‘authority database’ are treated as equivalents. ‘Authority database’ is used in general unless ‘authority file’ is used in cited references. ‘Authority data’ refers to all data included in the ‘authority database’; and ‘authority record’ refers to a unit of data to identify an entity in an authority database, including one or more authorized heading(s) with references and other information associated with the names in this study.

In the Chinese character cultural sphere, an area including China, Japan, Korea, and Vietnam, people use or used Chinese characters for their official writing systems. However, the languages spoken in Japan, Korea, and Vietnam are different from that spoken in China; therefore, these countries did not simply adopt Chinese characters, rather modifying their usage and character forms or inventing new characters to write their own languages.

In Japan, hiragana and katakana syllabaries (known collectively as kana) were developed from Chinese characters during the early Heian period (794–1185) (Onishi & Miyamoto, 2009). Since then, Japanese has been written in a mixture of Kanji (Chinese characters), hiragana, and katakana. Japan also has invented original Chinese characters called kokuji, which literally means ‘Japanese characters’.

Korea has had its own script, called Hangeul, since 1443 (ILCAA, 2005), and has used both Hangeul and Hanja (Chinese characters). Nowadays, Hanja is not used often by Korean people in their daily lives. However, their names can be written in both Hanja and Hangeul on birth registration forms or in official family registries in South Korea.
                           1
                           Article 37 of the Kajok kwan’gye ui tungnok tung e kwanhan kyuch’ik [The Rule of Registration about Family Relations] regulates types of Chinese characters used for names. Characters not covered by the rule should be described in Hangeul.
                        
                        
                           1
                        
                     

Hong Kong, Taiwan, and Macau use traditional Hanzi. On the other hand, mainland China has officially used simplified Hanzi since 1955 (Onishi & Miyamoto, 2009). This simplified script is less complex than the traditional script in that it contains fewer strokes. For example, the characters for ‘battle’ are written as ‘战斗’ in the simplified script and as ‘戰鬥’ in the traditional script. Both scripts are slightly different from Kanji or Hanja scripts. For instance, ‘battle’ is written as ‘戦闘’ in Japanese Kanji and ‘戰鬪’ in Korean Hanja.

Romanization of a given Chinese character (an example would be the character meaning ‘forest’) can be different in Mandarin, Cantonese, Taiwanese, Japanese, Korean, and Vietnamese because of differences in pronunciation (Harrison, 1992). Even though some names in the Chinese character cultural sphere look the same because they have the same Chinese characters, their pronunciation varies from region to region; hence, their romanized forms also should be different.

Since 1875, all Japanese people have had both surnames and given names. Nowadays, the number of Japanese surnames has been determined to be about 290,000 (Niwa, 1996), which is many more than the 23,813 surnames in China (Yuan & Qiu, 2010) and the 286 surnames in Korea (Korea, Statistics Korea, 2000).


                        Kanji is used to write a large majority of Japanese surnames; a smaller number is written in hiragana or katakana (Niwa, 1996). Scripts for given names are officially recognized in Kosekihō sekō kisoku (the Ordinance for Enforcement of the Family Registration Law)
                           2
                           
                              Kosekihō sekō kisoku is available at http://www.law.e-gov.go.jp/htmldata/S22/S22F00501000094.html (retrieved 27 August 2013).
                        
                        
                           2
                         for hiragana, katakana, and 2997 characters of Kanji. In those Kanji, 2136 characters are specified in Jōyō Kanjihyō,
                           3
                           The latest version of Jōyō Kanjihyō is available at http://www.bunka.go.jp/kokugo_nihongo/pdf/jouyoukanjihyou_h22.pdf (retrieved 27 August, 2013).
                        
                        
                           3
                         and the others are specified in an appended table of Kosekihō sekō kisoku.


                        Jōyō Kanjihyō is a national list of Chinese characters in common use, which came into effect through Cabinet Notification No. 1 of 1981.
                           4
                           Cabinet Notification No. 1 of 1981 (the old version of Jōyō Kanjihyō) is available at http://www.mext.go.jp/b_menu/hakusho/nc/k19811001001/k19811001001.html (retrieved 9 October 2013).
                        
                        
                           4
                         This list is based on Tōyō Kanjihyō, consisting of 1850 characters, a system which was established in 1946 for the purpose of simplifying the task of reading and writing Chinese characters (Yunoki, 2002). About 500 characters in Tōyō Kanjihyō were simplified compared to traditional forms. Characters included in Tōyō Kanjihyō at this time are called Shinjitai, which literally means ‘new letter shapes’, and those used before the Tōyō Kanjihyō was established are called Kyūjitai, which literally means ‘old letter shapes’ (Takebe, 1979).

As Tōyō Kanjihyō was a list designed to restrict the number and forms of Chinese characters in general usage, it was inconvenient and inadequate for conveying Japanese people’s names. In order to lessen public discontent with this system, an appended table was established for Kanji, designated specifically for personal names, to which Chinese characters were added and continually updated (Takebe, 1979). In 1981, Tōyō Kanjihyō was abolished, and Jōyō Kanjihyō was established instead. Jōyō Kanjihyō was merely a guideline set by the Japanese government and, furthermore, did not restrict the use of characters (Yunoki, 2002). However, with regard to naming, only the characters listed in Jōyō Kanjihyō and the appended table of Kosekihō sekō kisoku remained officially permitted for use in given names (Maeda, 2002). In 2010, Jōyō Kanjihyō was revised and characters added. The appended table of the latest Kosekihō sekō kisoku shows characters specifically for personal names, along with variant characters (itaiji). Variant characters have different character forms from Jōyō Kanji, although their pronunciations and meanings were the same as in Jōyō Kanji. As regards Japanese surnames, character use is not restricted.

The Ordinance on Commercial Registration has a policy regarding corporate names. Until October 31, 2002, the Ordinance banned the use of roman alphabets or Arabic numerals for corporate names, but it has been allowed since November 1, 2002 (MOJ, n.d.). Put simply, Japanese scripts for personal and corporate names became further diversified.

Most Kanji has more than one pronunciation: so-called yomi, which are usually represented in either hiragana or katakana. People must provide yomi for Kanji when they submit birth registration forms or business applications to show how these names should be pronounced in Japan. In general, even when the same Kanji are used, they identify different individuals when their yomi are different. As just explained, for Japanese personal and corporate names represented in Kanji, yomi information is considered to be very important. In library catalogues, yomi is written principally in katakana.

There are also several types of Japanese romanization systems, and controversy between the advocates of the rival systems has continued (Palmer, 1931). Two main romanization systems are used today in Japan: one is the Hepburn system, which is also called the modified Hepburn system in Western countries, and the other is the kunrei-shiki system. Kunrei-shiki is an official system that was originally designated in Cabinet Notification No. 1 of 1954, the so-called Rōmaji no tsuzurikata (a method of writing Japanese in roman characters).
                           5
                           
                              Rōmaji no tsuzurikata is available at http://www.mext.go.jp/b_menu/hakusho/nc/k19541209001/k19541209001.html (retrieved 27 August 2013).
                        
                        
                           5
                         However, Rōmaji no tsuzurikata states that spelling may also be determined by the Hepburn system when ‘international relations and situations with prior precedent in which a sudden spelling reform would be difficult’.

On the other hand, Japanese people are obliged to romanize their names using the Hepburn system on their passports, in line with Ryokenhō sekō kisoku (the Ordinance for Enforcement of the Passport Act).
                           6
                           
                              Ryokenhō sekō kisoku is available at http://www.law.e-gov.go.jp/htmldata/H01/H01F03301000011.html (retrieved 9 October, 2013).
                        
                        
                           6
                         The Hepburn system set forth by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan for Japanese passport applications (hereafter referred to as ‘MOFA Hepburn’
                           7
                           MOFA Hepburn is available at http://www.seikatubunka.metro.tokyo.jp/hebon/ (retrieved 10 April 2013).
                        
                        
                           7
                        ) is slightly different from the usual Hepburn system; for example, it does not use macrons for long vowels. In fact, ‘the Hepburn system can be reasonably considered more as a set of principles, something that serves as the bedrock of a specific Romanization method, rather than as a fixed set of rules’ (Kudo, 2011), so it cannot be determined which is the usual or definitive Hepburn system. It can be said that there are no unified rules governing romanization systems for Japanese nomenclature.

The LC/NACO Authority File (LCNAF) has been maintained by the Library of Congress (LC) and by National Authority Cooperative Program (NACO) participants. Non-Latin vernacular forms, such as Chinese characters, appeared in the ‘reference fields’ of authority records in LCNAF from 2008; however, the addition of non-Latin data was and is optional for NACO participants (LC, 2008a). Although participants in the CJK NACO Project contribute their CJK authority records to LCNAF, the numbers of records is still less than one per cent of all NACO members (Onnagawa, 2009). The numbers of records that can be used with no local editing for libraries in CJK countries still seem small.

In 2005, an agreement was signed between OCLC and the Joint University Librarians Advisory Committee (JULAC), a consortium of academic libraries in Hong Kong, to make the JULAC Hong Kong Chinese Authority Name (HKCAN) authority file available to OCLC Connexion clients (JULAC, 2010). Unfortunately, the agreement was not renewed, and the HKCAN authority file has not been available in OCLC Connexion since April 7, 2013. One of the reasons that the agreement was not renewed was the inception and expansion of VIAF (Patton, 2013).

VIAF is a system that links together authorized forms of names and titles among authority files of national bibliographic agencies and other regional agencies, and lets users search and display names of a given entity in various languages and scripts (Tillett, 2002). Although the National Diet Library (NDL) of Japan started to participate in VIAF in October 2012 (NDL, 2012a), other organizations in the Chinese character cultural sphere have not yet become involved. Furthermore, wrong links to Japanese names sometimes surface in the VIAF, as Fig. 1
                         shows. In heading no.1, ‘Hayashi, Yoshitsugu’ is linked to two Japanese names ‘林, 宜嗣’ and ‘林, 良嗣’. However, although their birth years are the same, actually they are very different people. This shows that it can be difficult to maintain accuracy in linking names that use Chinese characters, and users in CJK countries cannot place full trust in the VIAF as of now.

Aiming to develop a basis for Chinese name authority data sharing, the Cooperative Committee for Chinese Name Authority (CCCNA) was established by the China Academic Library & Information System (CALIS) Administration Center, the National Library of China (NLC), and JULAC in 2003 (CCCNA, 2003). CCCNA has launched the Chinese Name Authority Joint Database Search System, which can search authority records created by NLC, HKCAN, the Chinese Name Authority Database (CNAD) in Taiwan, and CALIS together.
                           8
                           The Chinese Name Authority Joint Database Search System is available at http://www.cnass.cccna.org/jsp/index.jsp.
                        
                        
                           8
                        
                     

In December 2011, the National Central Library of Taiwan (NCL) changed the bibliographic and authority format to MARC21 (NCL, 2011) and is currently reviewing the possible implementation of Resource Description and Access (RDA), which is based on Functional Requirements for Bibliographic Records (FRBR) and Functional Requirements for Authority Data (FRAD) (NCL, 2012). NDL also changed their formats to MARC21 in January 2012 (NDL, 2010) and decided to adopt RDA for Western books beginning in April 2013 (NDL, 2013a). This development suggests that in time, RDA may promote unification of the cataloguing code in the Chinese character cultural sphere.

Since many bibliographic databases support Unicode these days, the problems pertaining to character codes have been ‘almost solved’ already (Miyazawa, 2002). The appearance of VIAF and FRAD gave libraries all around the world full recognition of the significance of authority data sharing. Moreover, these developments certainly were a move toward sharing and linking the authority data of the Chinese character cultural sphere beyond national or regional levels.

Although the need to understand the situation of authority control in CJK countries was recognized in the early 2000s, only very little research, limited to a specific area, has been carried out. Intending to provide OCLC with the necessary information to help it play a significant role in developing a Chinese Name Authority File, in a concerted effort with Beijing, Hong Kong and Taipei, and to meet the needs of the East Asian library community and OCLC CJK users, Yu (2002) made an evaluation and analytical study of three authority files under development in those three cities. Yu compared the scope, size, format, character code, headings, and rules of the three files, and then analyzed the compatibility and usefulness to OCLC CJK users of the three databases. Yu’s may well be the first detailed comparative study covering authority databases from Mainland China, Hong Kong, and Taiwan. However, it was mostly concerned with Chinese names. Hu, Tam, and Lo also presented features of authority files created by NLC in Beijing, CNAD of Taiwan, HKCAN, and organizations in Japan (Hu, Tam, & Lo, 2004).

In South Korea, to develop a Korean authority database system for academic information, O compared certain aspects of four authority databases in South Korea (O, 2000). In another study, Yi sent a questionnaire survey to four university libraries in Korea and did a more lengthy comparison than O did, including forms of Japanese headings (Yi, 2012). As these studies pointed out, forms and contents of authority data differ in organizations and are not standardized in Korea. Yi also suggested that a national authority database and a cooperative structure are needed.

As an initial attempt at sharing name authority data in CJK countries, a workshop titled ‘Authority Control among Chinese, Korean and Japanese Languages’ was held at the National Institute of Informatics (NII), Japan. The workshop was held three times between 2001 and 2002. In the workshop, specialists from the NDL and NII of Japan, the National Library of China, the National Library of Korea (NLK), the Korea Education & Research Information Service (KERIS), and LC reported their own methods for developing authority data (Naito, 2004). Unfortunately, further cooperation did not take place after the workshop. Naito showed how Japanese personal names are displayed in CJK countries in a short report on the workshop, and pointed out that these variations create and drastically increase a lack of integrity for retrieval precision (Naito, 2004).

Kimura conducted a study to clarify the differences between representations of Chinese personal and corporate names in CJK countries (Kimura, 2013). With regard to Japanese names, comparative research on authority data created in a wide range of CJK countries has not yet been conducted.

@&#METHODOLOGY@&#

In the present study, the author will demonstrate differences in the representations of selective Japanese personal and corporate names in Japan, China, South Korea, and LC. The purpose of this study is to compare the representations of Japanese personal and corporate names in CJK countries and LC, to demonstrate the differences between them, and to bring to light further issues in the sharing of name authority data among CJK countries and other countries.

Issues on sharing name authority data are ideally divided into three parts: representations, data elements, and data models. How organizations in CJK countries adopt data elements, such as birth date, gender, and address shown in FRAD in their authority data, also should be investigated because they help author identification. These will be studied separately. FRAD also includes representations as relationships, such as ‘alternative linguistic form relationship’ and ‘alternate script relationship’. However, writing systems of Japanese, Kanji and yomi for example, are not in such a simple relationship (Kimura, submitted for publication). Thus, the FRAD data model might be enhanced or re-constructed to include such important relationships for CJK names in the future study.

Individuals might be identified by identifiers, not by name strings. In fact, approaches to identifying individuals by unique numbers or URIs, such as VIAF and ISNI (International Standard Name Identifier), are increasing (McEwan, Angjeli, & Gatenby, 2013). However, to share authority data that already exists, it is necessary to identify and link individuals from each database, and string matching provides an easy, simple method for matching, even if any identifiers are introduced. Since it is a basic and unavoidable issue concerning data sharing, the author deals with only the problem of the representations of Japanese names in this study.

The methodology involves the following steps:
                        
                           •
                           Step 1 – Data collection. Actual data, manuals, formats, and case reports about Japanese personal and corporate name authority data for each of nine organizations were gathered.

Step 2 – Analysis of current authority control practices and policies. Based on the documentation collected from the nine organizations, the author gives an overview of current authority practices and policies in Japan, China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, and South Korea, as described in Section 4.

Step 3 – Setting checkpoints which are unique to Japanese authority data. The author set five checkpoints that are considered to be important in creating Japanese name authority data.

Step 4 – Identification of issues affecting data sharing. Using the gathered information, five checkpoints were investigated based on the comparison of the current practices of each organization. Then, issues affecting the sharing of Japanese personal and corporate name authority data are pointed out.

The author explored authority control practices in major organizations that create CJK authority data, namely, the National Diet Library (NDL) of Japan, NACSIS-CAT (a system operated by the National Institute for Informatics (NII) for libraries in Japan), Keio University Libraries (Keio) in Tokyo, the China Academic Library & Information System (CALIS), the Hong Kong Chinese Authority Name (HKCAN), the National Central Library (NCL) of Taiwan, the National Library of Korea (NLK), and Seoul National University Library (SNUL). Their data or manuals were comparatively easily to access for reference. Additionally, to verify how Japanese name authority data are dealt with in North America, the LC was also included as a research object. The authority data from these nine sources provided the basis for analysis in this study.

Actual data collected in this step include those provided by NACSIS-CAT and Keio, and searched results derived from authority databases and OPACs. As for NACSIS-CAT, 1,517,926 name authority records made from January 1, 1986, to December 31, 2009, and extracted in March 19, 2010, were provided for the research. Keio also provided four sample records that were representative of Keio’s records in February 2012. Headings included in bibliographic data searched on OPAC of Keio (Keio, n.d.) are also used. NDL (NDL, n.d.), CALIS (CALIS, n.d.-a), HKCAN (HKCAN, n.d.), and LC (LC, n.d.) provided their authority databases in open websites. As for NCL (NCL, n.d.), NLK (NLK, n.d.), and SNUL (SNUL, n.d.), the headings included in bibliographic data searched on OPACs were used as an alternative to authority records. Authority data linked to bibliographic headings in NCL OPAC were also used. The author used 11 personal names and five corporate names to reflect the known characteristics of Japanese names as found in different romanization schemes. These are listed in Table 1
                         as search terms for authority databases and OPACs. All authority databases and OPACs support Unicode.

As noted earlier, Japanese romanization has two main systems. Thus, the author selected names in which romanization may differ between these two systems. The differences include long vowel pronunciations, the moraic nasal (letter ‘n’), and the moraic obstruent (small ‘tsu’ in Japanese). Reasons why the respective names were chosen are also shown in Table 1. Some names did not appear in a specific database. A similar name was used in such cases.

Collected manuals and formats are shown in Table 2
                        . In addition to Table 2, information included in e-mail responses from CALIS, HKCAN, NCL, and SNUL, and answers from face-to-face interviews with NCL and NLK were used. The author sent inquiry e-mails to these organizations in 2012, and all responses were received in the same year. The interviews with NCL and NLK were conducted in August and September of 2013, respectively.

The results of step 2 are set out in Section 4. As the third step in setting checkpoints for the study, the following five aspects, which are assumed to be treated differently by organizations in representing Japanese personal and corporate names, are provided for investigation
                           9
                           Beside these five topics, separating surnames and given names with a comma was also considered. Yet, especially for Japanese users, it is desirable that surnames and given names be treated separately, as they prefer searched names to be collated according to surnames in Kanji on screen; this topic was omitted from this study because it may not be a problem given that users or systems can differentiate between surnames and given names if either entry (romanization or yomi) has a comma.
                        
                        
                           9
                        :
                           
                              (1)
                              Character forms of Kanji.

The relating of yomi to their corresponding Kanji.

Treatments and types of romanization.

Representations in local languages outside Japan.

Names in hiragana.

These five topics for investigation were determined as follows. The first topic, character forms of Kanji, pertains because most Japanese personal names are in Kanji. While some Kanji have the same forms as simplified or traditional Hanzi or Korean Hanja, others do not. Japanese personal and corporate names should be written in Japanese Kanji, and it should thus be investigated whether Japanese Kanji are accurately used for authority data in China, Korea, or LC.

In this study, Kanji includes shinjitai, kyūjitai, other itaiji, and kokuji. It is beyond the scope of this paper to treat problems occurring in Japanese Kanji, because the study aims to investigate representations of Japanese names in all CJK countries.

The second topic, the relating of yomi to their corresponding Kanji, is studied because yomi, which shows how the Kanji should be pronounced, is important. One Kanji may have several yomi; thus, a name in Kanji and its yomi are treated as a pair in Japanese names.

The third topic, treatments and types of romanization, has to do with examining the different romanization forms used by organizations because, as noted above, there are two prominent methods of Japanese romanization. The author also conducted a preliminary investigation to estimate how differences in romanization affect VIAF matching.

The fourth topic, representations in local languages outside Japan, aims to show what kinds of local representations for Japanese names—other than Japanese Kanji, hiragana, or katakana—are adopted in China and Korea.

The fifth topic, names in hiragana, is to investigate how Japanese names in hiragana are managed. In China and Korea, though character forms are different, Japanese Kanji can typically be converted into their own Chinese characters. However, names in hiragana and katakana cannot be replaced by Chinese characters, as they represent only sounds. It is necessary to investigate how these names are dealt with in China and Korea. In this study, only names in hiragana are investigated because katakana has the same nature as hiragana, in the sense that both represent syllables. Usually, katakana is used for foreign or foreign-derived words.

In the fourth step of the study, five topics for investigation were determined by comparing the authority control practices of each organization using collected information. This study places weight on actual authority data. However, since data from some organizations were unobtainable or indeterminable, such compensations as manuals are used against any deficiency. For such information, the source will be made clear as much as possible in the text. The result of the fourth step is shown in Section 5. In response to the results, issues affecting the sharing of Japanese personal and corporate name authority data are provided in Section 6.

Several organizations generate their own authority data in Japan: NDL, NACSIS-CAT, Keio, Toshokan Ryutsu Center Co., Ltd. (TRC), and Nippan Library Service, Co., Ltd. (NTS) (NDL, 2004). NDL does authority work for personal names, family names, corporate names, place names, titles, and subjects. As of December 2012, NDL had 790,176 authority records for personal names and 184,955 authority records for corporate names (NDL, 2013b).

NDL originally used their own format, called JAPAN/MARC format, for bibliographic and authority data. In January 2012, concurrent with the replacement of their business system, NDL started to use MARC 21 formats (NDL, 2010). Authority data from NDL are provided via the Web NDL Authorities.

Most university libraries in Japan maintain their own local catalogues using shared cataloguing (both bibliographic and authority) data from the NACSIS-CAT system. It should be noted, however, that linking headings in bibliographic records to authority records is optional (NII, 1987). This means that not every organization participating in NACSIS-CAT does authority control. The NACSIS-CAT authority file has records for personal names, corporate names, conference names, and titles. As of April 2013, NACSIS-CAT had about 1.61million personal, corporate, and conference name authority records, and 32,575 title authority records (NII, 2013). The system uses an original format called CATP format (NII, n.d.) for bibliographical and authority data.

Keio did not generate authority data between 1998 and 2011, when the old library system started, and April 2011, when the new library system was launched (Koga, 2010). Keio currently does authority work for personal names and corporate names (including conference names). As of July 2012, Keio had about 827,863 records. However, many records are currently under maintenance, since authority records had not been created for the previous 10years. Keio uses MARC 21 formats for bibliographic and authority data.

TRC and NTS are creating bibliographic and authority data for commercial use. Both companies have adopted their own original format (NDL, 2004).

CALIS is a nationwide academic library consortium funded primarily by the Chinese government. In March 2000, the Chinese union catalogue for CALIS members was launched (CALIS, n.d.-b), and in September 2003, CALIS started constructing an authority database project (Zhao & Ma, 2008). As of December 31, 2010, CALIS had 727 member organizations (CALIS, 2010). Of these, 578 organizations are academic libraries, and 66 are libraries of colleges with specialized courses, and vocational and technical colleges. This means that most CALIS members are academic libraries. An authority database of CALIS, called CALIS Union Catalog Authorities, has authority records for personal names, corporate names, conference names, and titles (including series titles); and as of November 2010, CALIS had about 850,000 authority records (Liu & Yu, 2010), including Japanese personal and corporate names. CALIS has adopted the CALIS Union Catalog Authority Format based on UNIMARC for its authority data. CALIS members can download bibliographic and authority records from NACSIS-CAT; thus, many Japanese authority records are copy records of NACSIS-CAT.

In the CALIS Online Catalog, bibliographic databases for Chinese, Western, Russian, and Japanese materials are separately constructed (CALIS., n.d.-c). Authorized headings are produced for materials in each language; thus, a Japanese, a Chinese, and a Western heading, all authorized, are produced for the same person if the person is an author of materials in all three languages.

The National Library of China (NLC) carries out authority control for personal names, corporate names, conference names, titles, and subjects (Wan, 2010). However, authority control for Japanese names has not yet officially started (Luo, 2011).

As a project of the Joint University Librarians Advisory Committee (JULAC), which is a consortium of eight academic libraries in Hong Kong, the HKCAN Workgroup was set up in 1999 to establish a union database ‘that would reflect the unique characteristics of the Chinese authors and organizational names’ (JULAC, n.d.). HKCAN unified about 140,000 authority records from member libraries; since then, Lingnan University and the Chinese University of Hong Kong have worked to remove duplications (Liu, Tam, & Lo, 2004). At the moment, the online authority database, HKCAN Database OPAC, is in operation. The database adopted the MARC 21 Format for Authority Data (MARC 21/A) (Yu, 2002).

HKCAN has authority records for personal names, corporate names, conference names, and series/titles. The total number of records is 234,719 as of September 2011. Of these, 161,638 records are of personal names and 26,473 records are of corporate names (Xu & Li, 2012). This includes Japanese personal and corporate names.

Hong Kong is a bilingual society, and many authors publish in both Chinese and English; therefore, both Chinese and English headings are particularly important in Hong Kong libraries (Hu et al., 2004). However, before HKCAN was established, libraries had chosen various authority record formats and, in particular, made a decision whether to adopt Chinese character headings, romanized headings, or both because the form of authorized headings had differed from library to library (Chan, Hu, & Lo, 2000).

As a result of discussions, to be fully compliant with MARC 21/A and to serve the wants and needs of overseas libraries adequately, HKCAN chose to use field 1XX for LCNAF headings and 7XX (Heading Linking Entry Fields) for Chinese scripts (JULAC, 2010).

In the actual authority workflow, HKCAN members usually copy records from LCNAF and enhance the records by adding names in Chinese scripts to field 7XX and field 4XX (See From Tracing Fields) as appropriate (Yu, 2002). As we have seen above, in following the idea of sharing authority data with Western libraries, HKCAN has been creating authority records in close co-operation with LCNAF.

In Taiwan, the NCL and National Taiwan University Library (NTUL) collectively maintain a shared authority database called the Chinese Name Authority Database (CNAD) (Lin & Lin, 2011). However, the database does not include Japanese names. Both the NCL and NTUL are producing authority data for Japanese names in MARC 21/A format.

According to an interview, NCL has about 1.33million personal and corporate name authority records, including Japanese personal and corporate name authority records, as of July 2013. However, given that all data were converted from CMARC format to MARC 21 for mat in 2011, problems caused by conversion were reported in linking bibliographic records and authority records (Li, 2012).

NLK, SNUL, Yonsei University Library, and Ewha Womans University Library are known for creating Japanese personal and corporate name authority data in different forms and at different levels. According to Shim, public libraries in Korea have not instituted any form of authority control (Shim, 2006).

NLK started fully fledged authority control in 2000, following the launch of an integrated information system in the Windows environment and the establishment of the KORMARC format as a national standard (NLK, 2006). Previously generated authority data were concentrated heavily on foreign authors who appeared in both general and children’s book searches in Korea, in Japanese materials, and in Chinese materials (NLK, 2009).

Kim reported that NLK established a new guideline for personal name authority data in April 2012 (Kim, 2012). Consequently, Korean name authority data, which had not hitherto been fully constructed, could now be made. According to the interview, NLK produces only personal name authority data, not corporate name data, and it had constructed about 234,641 authority records as of July 2013.

Since April 2009, SNUL has carried out personal, corporate, conference names, series/titles, and subject authority control; they have 323,899 personal name authority records, 22,348 corporate name authority records, 3366 conference name authority records, 24,031 series/title authority records, and 63 subject authority records (Kim, 2009).

Although SNUL, the Yonsei University Library, and the Ewha Womans University Library are participating in the KERIS integrated bibliographic database, KERIS does not have a national-level authority database; each of the libraries, therefore, has different forms of authority data, and there is difficulty in integration (Kim, 2009; Park & Lee, 2001). Park and Lee indicate some reasons why authority data have not been standardized among Korean libraries. First, when library catalogues were computerized at the end of the 1980s, there were neither standardized catalogue data to refer to nor a leading organization for computerization; hence, most of the libraries built a MARC database in their own way. Second, the third edition of Korea Cataloging Rules (KCR) only had descriptive rules for monographs, and did not have rules for heading selections and forms (Park & Lee, 2001).

The fourth edition of KCR, published in 2003, also had no rules for heading selections and forms. However, as noted above, in April 2012, NLK established a new guideline for personal name authority data based on FRAD, RDA, and MARC 21/A, which included rules for selections and representations of headings and references as well as attributes for identifying persons (Kim, 2012). This means that a high level of attention was given to the authority data of NLK.

The adoption and character forms of Chinese characters when names are in Kanji are shown in Table 3
                        . Three Japanese organizations use Chinese characters for authorized headings and references. The same is true in the cases of CALIS and NCL. HKCAN adopts romanization for authorized headings, and equivalent Chinese characters are recorded in Heading Linking Entry Fields.

In NLK, Chinese characters are added as designations associated with reference entries whenever differentiations between persons with the same names or clearer identifications are needed (NLK, 2006). SNUL and LC adopt romanization for the authorized headings, and Chinese characters are recorded as reference entries.

The three organizations in Japan adopt Japanese Kanji for entries. CALIS adopts Kanji for Japanese authorized headings, and Chinese simplified and traditional characters for Chinese authorized headings. According to the CALIS manual, authorized headings in different languages, but representing the same entity, should be shown together in Authorized Headings Fields (2XXs) under one authority record to ensure user accessibility.

However, in the actual authority database, these headings sometimes appear in different records. There are two records for Senō, Kappa in CALIS, for example: one for the Japanese authorized heading ‘妹尾河童 (セノオ, カッパ), 1930-’, and the other for the Chinese authorized heading ‘妹尾河童, 1930-’. By way of contrast, only one record for Kenzaburo Oe exists in CALIS, and the record has authorized headings: in simplified Chinese script, traditional Chinese script, Hanyu Pinyin, and Japanese.

According to the interview, NCL constructs both Japanese authorized headings for Japanese materials and Chinese authorized headings for translated materials by taking character forms from the resources being catalogued and cross-referencing them, using Heading Linking Entry Fields. However, in the case of San’yō Rai, search results differ between search terms ‘頼山陽’ (in Kanji) and ‘賴山陽’ (in traditional Chinese characters). In this case, cross-referencing seems not to have been done.

In the HKCAN database, Chinese characters corresponding to authority headings are recorded in Heading Linking Entry Fields. According to an e-mail response from HKCAN, the types of Chinese characters generally depend on the resources being catalogued. For example, the authorized heading of ‘Nitchū Keizai Kyōkai’, ‘日中経済協会’ (in Kanji), is recorded in the Heading Linking Entry Field instead of in its traditional Chinese characters, which should be ‘日中經濟協會’. On the other hand, the authorized heading of ‘Kōdansha Intānashonaru Kabushiki Kaisha’, ‘講談社インターナショナル株式會社’ (‘會’ is a traditional Chinese character, and in Kanji it should be ‘会’), is recorded for the heading linking entry. In both NLK and SNUL, Chinese characters are transcribed (i.e. without any change) from the resources being catalogued for See From references (NLK, 2006). This means that several types of Chinese characters might be recorded in reference fields.

LC does not prescribe forms of Chinese characters. Thus, some records do not have references in Kanji even if the authorized headings are for Japanese names. For instance, a record with the authorized heading ‘Setouchi, Jakuchō, 1922-’ (record number: nr 94028021) has six references in Chinese characters: ‘瀨戶內寂聴’, ‘瀨戶内寂聴’, ‘瀬〓内寂聴’, ‘瀬戶內寂聴’, ‘瀬戶内寂聴’ and ‘瀬戶内寂聽’. However, none of these forms is in the correct Kanji, ‘瀬戸内寂聴’.

As noted already, yomi is highly important for Japanese names in order to distinguish one name from a similar name that uses the same characters but that is pronounced differently. As Table 4
                         shows, three Japanese organizations construct authority data relating author names to yomi and their corresponding Kanji entries.

Conforming to ‘Appendix C: Multiscript Records Model A: Vernacular and transliteration’ (LC, 2008b) of MARC 21/A, NDL employs Kanji for regular fields, adds its yomi in katakana in 880 fields, and links both fields by using a linkage subfield entitled $6 (NDL, 2012b). The linkage subfield $6 contains a linking field and an occurrence number, so that users can identify which yomi entry is associated with which Kanji entry. When a name is in Kanji, 880 fields are mandatory (NDL, 2012b).

NACSIS-CAT separates names in Kanji from their yomi using ‘||’ in authorized headings and reference fields. According to its manual, yomi is mandatory when the information is applicable or readily available. In the system at Keio, Kanji with yomi are indexed together in order to distinguish between the same characters with different pronunciations. Additionally, Keio prepares extended fields for Japanese data in addition to regular fields. Extended fields repeat regular fields and add a subfield, $9K, for yomi entries. Subfield $6 contains occurrence numbers to indicate which katakana entry corresponds to which Kanji entry. CALIS adds yomi in parenthesis to designate authorized headings.

In other organizations, yomi is generally not employed. According to an interview, it is recorded by way of reference if the cataloguer judges it necessary in NLK, but the correspondences between the Kanji headings and their yomi are not usually indicated.

As Table 5
                            shows, NDL and Keio provide romanization in the same manner as yomi. NACSIS-CAT occasionally employs romanization as an optional reference entry; likewise, romanization is not mandatory in CALIS, NCL, or NLK. In many search terms, romanization in NACSIS-CAT also exists in reference entries in CALIS, in that CALIS copies Japanese authority data from NACSIS-CAT. HKCAN, SNUL, and LC employ romanization for authorized headings.

Except for those that do not adopt romanization, all organizations studied employ the Hepburn system for romanization of Japanese. NDL used to follow the kunrei-shiki system, but since November 2011, it has been using the Hepburn system also. According to an e-mail response in September 2012, SNUL complies with the ALA-LC Romanization Tables: Japanese (hereafter referred to as ALA-LC romanization tables). Since HKCAN complies with AACR2, MARC 21, and LCNAF, it is natural that HKCAN should also use the ALA-LC romanization tables.

The ALA-LC romanization tables were revised in 2012. The new ALA-LC romanization tables set out the rules in more detail but do not attempt to modify the existing rules. Both old and new versions are based on Kenkyusha’s New Japanese-English Dictionary and the American National Standard (ANSI Z39.11-1972) (Kudo, 2011).


                           Table 6
                            shows differences among five organizations that adopt romanization for authorized headings or mandatory elements.

SNUL has some headings without a macron in the bibliographic data. For example, the entry ‘Ōe, Kenzaburō’ returned 65 results in OPAC of SNUL, and ‘Oe, Kenzaburo’ returned 69 results (search performed January 18, 2013). The four extra results returned in the latter search included three headings with ‘Oe, Kenzaburo’ (without a birth year) and one with ‘Öe, Kenzaburo’.

Even the same ‘Ō’ can be used for two different yomi. One is ‘オオ’ in Kenzaburo ‘O’e. Another is ‘オウ’ in ‘O’gai Mori. For Ogai Mori, disregarding the use of a macron, five organizations use the same representation, ‘Mori, Ōgai’. For Kenzaburo Oe, however, NDL uses ‘Ooe, Kenzaburo’, despite the fact that in ‘JAPAN/MARC MARC21 fōmatto’ ni okeru Romaji yomi hyōki yoryō, which NDL has applied since December 2011, the representation should ‘omit the representation of prolonged sounds or long vowels’; thus Kenzaburo Oe should be presented as ‘Oe, Kenzaburo’. According to an e-mail response from NDL, when re-generating romanization from yomi at the time of data migration, in line with the introduction of the new system in 2012, all of the forms ‘オオ’, ‘コオ’, ‘ソオ’, ‘トオ’, etc. were converted to ‘oo’, ‘koo’, ‘soo’, ‘too’, etc., without exception. This rule is correct for names like ‘Senoo, Kappa’ or ‘Tamura, Naoomi’ (田村直臣), in which ‘o’ is not a long vowel. In this case, batch conversion caused some data to be described outside the Hepburn system. Meanwhile, new data constructed by NDL after 2012 use ‘o’ for long vowels, resulting in a variety of representations.

According to Rōmaji no tsuzurikata, the moraic obstruent (small ‘tsu’ in Japanese) before ‘ch’ should be represented by doubled consonants. On the other hand, MOFA Hepburn has a special provision which states that ‘before “ch,” the moraic obstruent should be described by inserting “t” in the same manner as ALA-LC Romanization tables’. Of the five organizations shown in Table 6, only NDL reflects the policy of Rōmaji no tsuzurikata.

Additionally, ALA-LC romanization tables and Rōmaji no tsuzurikata have a rule that, when preceding a vowel or ‘y’ within a single word, a syllabic-final ‘n’ should be followed by an apostrophe: for example, ‘Rai, San’yō’, rather than ‘Rai, Sanyō’; but ‘Senoo, Kappa’, where the ‘n’ is syllabic-initial. Neither Keio nor MOFA Hepburn applies the rule.

Moreover, HKCAN, SNUL, and LC romanize ‘株式会社’ (meaning ‘a joint-stock corporation’) as ‘kabushiki kaisha’, applying the rule of ALA-LC romanization tables even though the Japanese pronunciation should be ‘kabushiki gaisha’.

Except for the search terms shown in Table 6, all organizations describe each romanization in Table 1 in the same way, with the exclusion of long vowels. According to NCR 1965 ed. (CCJLA, 1965), the moraic nasal ‘n’ before the letters ‘m’, ‘b’, or ‘p’ is written ‘m’ rather than ‘n’. Although MOFA Hepburn applies this rule, the ALA-LC romanization tables and Rōmaji no tsuzurikata do not apply it, and all organizations describe ‘内閣官房’ (meaning ‘Cabinet Secretariat’) either as ‘Naikaku Kanbo’ or ‘Nai kaku Kanbō’, not ‘Naikaku Kambo’.


                           Table 7
                            summarizes the differences in the Hepburn system between Rōmaji no tsuzurikata, NCR 1965 ed., MOFA Hepburn, ALA-LC romanization tables, and those organizations that adopt romanization in their authority data. Although all of these organizations adopt the Hepburn system, some differences were found. For instance, according to Rōmaji no tsuzurikata, a circumflex accent mark should be used to describe long vowels, whereas no circumflex should be used in MOFA Hepburn. NDL used the circumflex accent mark until March 2002, but ceased in April 2002. Keio does not use any circumflexes. On the other hand, HKCAN, SNUL, and LC use macrons for long vowels, based on the ALA-LC romanization tables.

As Table 7 indicates, NDL romanization is different from that used by LC. It is probable that the difference influences data matching.

To estimate how differences in romanization affect VIAF matching, the following preliminary investigation was conducted. First, authorized headings that include the moraic obstruent (small ‘tsu’) before ‘chi’ – that is to say, ‘ッチ’ in their yomi – were searched December 15, 2012, in Web NDL Authorities using a SPARQL query. The search result set of 702 authority records was extracted. Second, both NDL romanization (many including the letters ‘cc’) and Hepburn romanization (converting the letters ‘cc’ to ‘tc’) of these target records were searched on VIAF. The results were examined manually to determine whether the target entities were searched correctly.

Although many entities could be searched using both NDL and Hepburn romanization – that is, the search results were the same – in 111 cases (about 15.8% of the records), the search results were different and had some defects. These 111 cases did not include the nine names used only as subject headings by NDL. Unmatched data that could not be confirmed as belonging to the same person because of lack of information in the records were omitted from this investigation. Table 8
                            shows details of the defects.

In Table 8, ‘Cannot retrieve when using “tc”’ means either that no result was returned, or that a wrong entity appeared when Hepburn romanization was used. ‘Duplicates’ means that different records representing the same entity appeared when searched using both NDL romanization and Hepburn romanization. Separate records should be merged. ‘Cannot retrieve See Also records when using “tc”’, means that related records (See Also records) appear only when NDL romanization is used. ‘Mismatched’ means that NDL headings are incorrectly matched and that there are other records that should be merged.

The ratio of author names that include ‘ッチ’ in their yomi to the total number of NDL authority records is small. However, 25,222 authorized headings that include ‘オオ’ in their yomi in the Web NDL Authorities are supposed to have the letters ‘oo’ in their romanization, which differs from the Hepburn romanization. Taking into account the authorized headings, including ‘コオ’, ‘トオ’, etc., in their yomi that have letters like ‘koo’, ‘too’, etc. in their romanization, there must be more romanizations in NDL that differ from the Hepburn system. It can be presumed that there are a certain number of defects in these records. The result from this investigation indicates that the differences that emerge from romanization may constitute barriers to data matching.

As Table 9
                         shows, NLK adopts Hangeul transcripted from Japanese pronunciations for personal authorized headings, and Hangeul transliterated from Chinese characters for references.

SNUL adopts both Hangeul transcripted from Japanese pronunciations and Hangeul transliterated from Chinese characters based on the resources being catalogued for references.

In the CALIS database, Hanyu Pinyin is one of the authorized headings in Chinese authority records. In Japanese authority records, Hanyu Pinyin or other variant forms in such scripts as Hangeul are recorded in reference fields of partial records. However, most of these references have been copied from NACSIS-CAT, which can be deduced from the fact that such references also exist in NACSIS-CAT records.

English names and Hanyu Pinyin are sometimes recorded in the reference fields of HKCAN records. When comparing them with LCNAF records, it is found that many references in HKCAN are the same as references in LCNAF. However, HKCAN has added some reference entries of its own accord. For instance, a record for ‘Rai, San’yō’ has a Reference Entry ‘賴襄, 1780–1832’ in the HKCAN database, but it does not exist in the LCNAF record. There are many variant forms in non-Latin scripts—such as Hangeul, Cyrillic, and so on—in the reference fields of LCNAF records.

To investigate how organizations deal with names in hiragana, five personal names (four new names added to ‘Miyabe, Miyuki’ of Table 1) that include hiragana script were searched in the six non-Japanese databases. Table 10
                         shows the search results. With regard to the two Korean organizations, OPACs were searched instead of the authority databases because the latter are not accessible.

In the Japanese authority records of CALIS, all names are described correctly in Japanese. However, some authors also have Chinese authority records, in which the hiragana parts are converted to Chinese characters. Their representations may be a result of the resources’ being catalogued, such as Japanese books translated into Chinese, in which Japanese author names in hiragana are usually substituted by Chinese characters. The problem is that some Japanese and Chinese authority records are not linked or merged, although the CALIS manual provides for the fact that several authorized headings should be placed together under one authority record. When users search in Japanese, only Japanese authority records appear.

In the HKCAN database, Japanese forms that correspond to their authorized headings are generally described correctly in Heading Linking Entry fields; thus, both Japanese forms and romanization can be used in a search. Only in the record for ‘Sakura, Momoko’ are Chinese characters described in the Heading Linking Entry Field. Despite the rule on cross-referencing Japanese and Chinese authorized headings, such cross-references could not be confirmed in the OPAC of NCL.

In the OPAC of NLK, the number of search engine hits differs according to search terms. However, results for romanization and Japanese forms were the same except for in Banana Yoshimoto’s case in the OPAC of SNUL. Since Japanese forms are described as references in LCNAF records, both romanization and Japanese forms could be searched in LCNAF.

First, no organization adopts Kanji for authorized headings of Japanese names except Japanese organizations and CALIS. However, HKCAN, NCL, SNUL, and LC adopt Chinese characters from the resources being catalogued; there are mixed headings in Kanji and other Chinese characters in databases, depending on the characters found in the resources. It is natural for Japanese authors to wish to be indicated in correct Kanji. However, systems or tables which convert variant characters cannot avoid some mistakes because they are not perfect, and using many characters involves many risks in retrieval. Sharing authority data may facilitate the addition or linking of names in correct Kanji, thus potentially solving this problem.

Furthermore, few organizations display correspondences between Kanji and their yomi. Yomi provides more precise pronunciations than the romanization of Japanese. For instance, for the same ‘ō’, its yomi can either be ‘オウ’ or ‘オオ’. Yomi is one of the most effective tools for identifying names with the same Kanji. Thus, for the purpose of sharing authority data for Japanese names, the existence of yomi in each authority data would be ideal. Otherwise, both romanization and other data elements, such as birth year, would be necessary for matching. Moreover, correspondences between yomi and Kanji should be shown. The relationships could be shown in authorized headings like those found in records from Keio or CALIS, showing yomi as qualifiers of names. It also could be accomplished using the linkage subfield like NDL. The relationship helps with identification of names because matching algorithms should check the combination of Kanji and yomi, and if either one does not match the candidate, a negative would result.

Although the romanization of Japanese is not a perfect surrogate for yomi, it is still a strong guide to identifying names with the same Kanji. Nevertheless, romanization is not mandatory in NACSIS-CAT, CALIS, NCL, and NLK. Additionally, romanization is different among organizations, even though each organization adopts the Hepburn romanization system. For the purpose of sharing authority data, unification or conversion of a romanization system is needed. It is problematic that romanization is not consistent, even in Japan. In addition, some organizations provide romanization without presenting its correspondence to Kanji. This is also a problem in the case of yomi.

As the above investigation using VIAF shows, the Hepburn system of NDL differs from that of other VIAF participants, which could be one of the impediments to data sharing. In the research on VIAF, many records were successfully matched even when romanized forms were different. The existence of other data elements which prompt an algorithm for identification might be the reason for this. Thus, enriching other data elements is needed when romanization cannot be the chief factor in identification. Because the details of the VIAF matching algorithm are not clarified, the data elements weighted by the algorithm need to be discussed between the VIAF participants and OCLC. However, as FRAD and RDA advocate, recording the various attributes of authority data is very important, and doing so would be helpful in terms of any matching algorithm because more information helps to achieve more accurate matching results.

It is natural that some organizations adopt representations in their local language or script. However, as the names in hiragana show, there are some cases in which local and Japanese forms are not linked. There is a fear that some entries might escape a search. Adding headings or linkage to the Japanese forms from other databases is needed in such cases.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

This study revealed that representations of Japanese names differ from organization to organization. In particular, there are differences in romanization even in Japan, so that it is not an assured factor for identification. The main issues and possible solutions for sharing authority data among CJK countries and LC are as follows:
                        
                           (1)
                           Databases from China and South Korea have mixed headings in Kanji and other Chinese characters. Adding correct Kanji headings might be beneficial.

Few organizations display correspondences between Kanji and their yomi. The addition of yomi is an ideal solution, and corresponding relationships between yomi and Kanji should be shown. Using qualifiers or the linkage subfield might be possible.

Romanization is not mandatory in some organizations, and the rules of romanization differ among organizations. Organizations that do not adopt yomi should at least consider adopting romanization. Differences among romanization rules that affect searching should be standardized.

Some organizations adopt representations in their local language, but they are not linked to Japanese forms. To avoid being missed in searches, linkage should be provided during daily authority work.

As noted earlier, the scope of this study is restricted to representations of Japanese name authority data. Representations of Korean and Vietnamese names will be studied in the near future. In addition, elements of authority data in the Chinese character cultural sphere should also be investigated. This study revealed four main issues concerning representations of Japanese authors’ name authority data for sharing. The results may also contribute to constructing authority data models for the Chinese character cultural sphere.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The research described in this paper was funded by a grant to Maiko Kimura from the Mita Society for Library and Information Science in 2012, from the Fuji Xerox Setsutaro Kobayashi Memorial Fund in 2013, and from the doctoral course research support program of Keio University in 2013. I would like to thank my supervisor, Prof. Shunsaku Tamura for the patient guidance. I would also like to thank Dr. Barbara B. Tillett for precious advice and encouragement.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

