@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Use of a discrete-event simulation in a Kaizen event: A case study in healthcare

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Reducing patient delays with discrete event simulation (DES) in an oncology clinic.


                        
                        
                           
                           Participative simulation (PS) use people creativity to improve patient pathways.


                        
                        
                           
                           PS combined with DES may support participants during the Kaizen to test ideas.


                        
                        
                           
                           Using DES during the Kaizen event fosters quick implementation.


                        
                        
                           
                           Quick implementation of changes after the Kaizen is crucial to guaranty its success.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Discrete-event simulation

Business game

Lean approach

Kaizen event

Outpatient clinic

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  To improve service delivery, healthcare facilities look toward operations research techniques, discrete event simulation and continuous improvement approaches such as Lean manufacturing. Lean management often includes a Kaizen event to facilitate the acceptance of the project by the employees. Business game is also used as a tool to increase understanding of Lean management concepts. In this paper, we study how a business game can be used jointly with discrete event simulation to test scenarios defined by team members during a Kaizen event. The aim is to allow a rapid and successful implementation of the solutions developed during the Kaizen. Our approach has been used to improve patients’ trajectory in an outpatient hematology–oncology clinic. Patient delays before receiving their treatment were reduced by 74 percent after 19 weeks.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Considering the increasing needs for services in healthcare, hospital services must review their practices to improve them and increase their performance. Healthcare facilities look toward continuous improvement approaches such as Lean manufacturing to improve service delivery (Houchens & Kim, 2014). Lean manufacturing is a management approach aiming to improve the performance of an organization by reducing waste, delays, etc. while involving staff in decision-making. During the last few years, the DMAIC (Define, Measure, Analyze, Improve and Control) problem-solving approach combined to six sigma was used jointly with Lean to become Lean six sigma.

Operations research techniques and discrete event simulation have also been used by healthcare managers (Fone et al., 2003). Since healthcare services are mostly dynamic and stochastic processes, discrete event simulation has been more often used to model and analyze flows in healthcare processes (Fone et al., 2003; Jun, Jacobson, & Swisher, 1999; Mielczarek & Uzialko-Mydlikowska, 2012). More recently researchers included a Lean approach to discrete event simulation in a facilitated mode (Robinson, Worthington, Burgess, & Radnor, 2014). Robinson, Radnor, Burgess, and Worthington (2012) describe the role of simulation in a Lean approach (before, during and after a Kaizen event). A Kaizen event is a group activity, commonly lasting 5 days, in which a team identifies and implements a significant improvement in a process (Lean Enterprise Institute, 2014). It is a participative activity and it facilitates the acceptance of the project by the employees. Tako and Kotiadis (2015) combine discrete-event simulation, a hard OR approach, with soft systems methodology (SSM) in order to incorporate stakeholder involvement in the simulation study lifecycle.

Business games are also used as a tool to increase understanding of Lean management concepts (Ashenbaum, 2010; Billington, 2004; Martin, 2007; Swanson, 2008). van der Zee and Slomp (2009) assert that they could help workers find solutions for specific problems, or to familiarize themselves with and ease their acceptance of new work methods or systems. Originally, business games have been used to help find solutions in different business environment. A business game has been defined by Greco, Baldissin, and Nonino (2013) as “a game with a business environment that can lead to one or both of the following results: the training of players in business skills (hard and/or soft) or the evaluation of players’ performance (quantitatively and/or qualitatively)”. The business game allows a better understanding of complex problems. The pedagogical principle underlying the business game is involving participants in a virtual environment. Business games were originally developed to educate business managers. They reproduce a process in a virtual environment while being inspired by reality. It can also be used to let employees perform a task or a given operation for real (Ellis, Goldsby, Bailey, & Oh, 2014). However business games can be helpful to educate managers, employees and change agents in healthcare or education. The play themes are not only related to enterprise strategy but address other topics such as quality, work organization, planning, safety at work or project management.

In this paper, we ask how it is possible to facilitate rapid implementation of solutions found in a kaizen event and reduce barriers when implementing Lean in healthcare. We believe that discrete-event simulation, business game and the involvement of the project team can play a crucial role in achieving those goals. In doing so, we present an approach to implement a Lean project according to the DMAIC problem-solving procedure (de Mast & Lokkerbol, 2012). The DMAIC approach has been used to analyze patients’ trajectory in an outpatient hematology–oncology clinic in order to propose and implement improvements aiming to reduce patients’ waiting time when receiving a chemotherapy treatment. Data were gathered only 3 months after the Kaizen event to evaluate the impact of the modifications implemented. A Kaizen event was organized at the Improve step during which a business game was used to help find solutions. During the Kaizen event, discrete event simulation was used to test how the solutions could modify patient waiting times. We describe the role of each stakeholder in this approach and how it is facilitative and participative. We also explain the advantages of using a business game and discrete event simulation during a Kaizen event.

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents relevant literature while Section 3 presents the methodology. The implementation of our approach and results are described in Section 4. Finally the results are discussed in Section 5 and Section 6 presents the conclusion of our research.

The heart of Lean consists in preserving value with less work by the identification and elimination of “waste” and in developing standardized, reliable processes. This is performed in a context of connectedness, respect, and growth of all employees who are trained to identify waste and errors, and suggest possibilities for improvements that will be tested using scientific methods. Lean seems to be an effective way of improving healthcare organizations and the growing number of implementations and reports found in the literature reinforce this view (Brando de Souza, 2009)

Lean implementation in healthcare requires adaptation and development to fit the specific context and allow healthcare staff to take ownership of the approach (Poksinska, 2010). Literature review shows that there have been some significant tangible outcomes in healthcare organizations that adopted Lean principles such as increased patient throughput (Dickson, Singh, Cheung, Wyatt, & Nugent, 2008; Van Lent, Goedbloed, & Van Harten, 2009), reduced waiting times (Al-Araidah, Momani, Khasawneh, & Momani, 2010; Lodge & Bamford, 2008) and improvements in work environment (Kaplan & Patterson, 2008; Nelson-Peterson & Leppa, 2007). However, many papers identified barriers when implementing Lean management in healthcare organizations such as lack of ownership of proposed processes, skepticism and resistance to change (Brandão de Souza & Pidd, 2011; Proudlove, Moxham, & Boaden, 2008; Radnor, Walley, Stephens, & Bucci, 2006).

In the last few years, discrete-event simulation has been considered as an interesting tool to help improving healthcare services (Brailsford, Harper, Patel, & Pitt, 2009; Fone et al., 2003; Mielczarek & Uzialko-Mydlikowska, 2012) as in outpatient clinics (Jun et al., 1999; Rohleder, Lewkonia, Bischak, Duffy, & Hendijani, 2011). Discrete-event simulation has been applied to solve a wide variety of healthcare problems such as patient appointment systems (Klassen and Yoogalingam, 2009; Ogulata, Cetik, & Koyuncu, 2009), patient waiting time (Paul, Reddy, & De Flitch, 2010; Santibanez, Chow, French, Putterman, & Tyldesley, 2009), patient flow, (Rohleder et al., 2011; Sepulveda, Thompson, Baesler, Alvarez, & Cahoon, 1999; White et al., 2011), operational performance (Berg et al., 2009; Griffiths, Jones, Read, & Williams, 2010) and others problems (Hagtvedt, Griffin, Keskinocak, & Roberts, 2009; Katsaliaki & Brailsford, 2007).

Too often, discrete event simulation models have been developed and used by experts to find solutions without involving stakeholders in the development process. Recently, more work has been done on facilitated modeling to involve stakeholders in the development of discrete event simulation models.

Facilitated modeling consists in developing models jointly with a client group: from defining the nature of the problem, to supporting the evaluation of priorities and development of plans for subsequent implementation (Franco & Montibeller, 2010). Franco and Montibeller (2010) discuss in detail facilitated modeling as an OR intervention tool in organizations. Jahangirian, Taylor, Eatock, Stergioulas, and Taylor (2015) examine the stakeholder engagement in the context of healthcare simulation. They find that “communication gap between simulation and stakeholder groups” is the top primary factor contributing the most to the poor stakeholder engagement in healthcare simulation projects, followed by “poor management support”, “clinician's high workload” and “failure in producing tangible and quick results”. Recently managers began to be included in problem definition and process modeling (Kotiadis et al., 2013; Tako, Kotiadis, & Vasilakis, 2010a; Tako, Kotiadis, & Vasilakis, 2010b). This participation is especially important for studies in healthcare characterized by the presence of many stakeholders with tacit knowledge of their part of the system and often multiple views and objectives. Tako and Kotiadis (2015) combined the steps required to develop a discrete event simulation model with the participative steps of Soft Systems Methodology. Their whole procedure, called PartiSim, allows stakeholders to be involved at every stage of the model development and experiments (except for programming which requires a specific expertise). Fig. 1 presents the PartiSim steps in which stakeholders are involved through workshops. Our approach differs from Tako and Kotiadis (2015) because it includes the Lean project steps together with the development of the discrete event simulation model.

There are few studies on the use of discrete event simulation through a Lean approach, or other continuous improvement process, in healthcare systems. Young et al. (2004) propose the use of simulation to evaluate the benefices of a continuous improvement project in healthcare before the implementation. Khurma, Bacioiu, and Pasek (2008) present a discrete event simulation model to study the impact of a Lean project in an emergency unit. Even if they do not specifically consider Lean management, Proudlove, Black, and Fletcher (2007) show how a simple simulation model can improve efficiently patient flows. Robinson et al. (2012) explore potential complementary roles of discrete event simulation and a Lean approach in healthcare systems. Their model, SimLean, defines three roles for discrete event simulation used with Lean: education, facilitation and evaluation (Fig. 2).

According
                      to Robinson et al. (2012), discrete event simulation can have an educational function in teaching Lean principles (Educate step, Fig. 2). It is a mean to understand the dynamics of a healthcare process. One or many predefined standard discrete event simulation models can be used to teach Lean principles before or during a Kaizen event. During Lean events, processes must be analyzed through the use of a process mapping. Simulation can be used to create a dynamic version of the process mapping (Facilitate step, Fig. 2). A simple discrete-event simulation model developed during the Kaizen event can be used to better understand the process dynamics and to encourage participants to propose improvement solutions. With a detailed discrete event simulation model, different scenarios can be tested. Developing a detailed discrete event simulation model may take a long time since it requires obtaining data, modeling and validating the process, validating the model and generating improving solutions. These steps are usually performed after the Kaizen event to test solutions found by the participants and to eventually propose new ones (Evaluate step, Fig. 2). The discrete event simulation model can also be used during the implementation phase and plays a role in continuous improvement. In fact, the model in Robinson et al. (2012) implies defining three discrete event simulation models: (1) predefined models (Educate step), (2) simple model (Facilitate step) and (3) detailed model (Evaluate step).

Unlike Robinson et al. (2012) who use a simple model during the Kaizen event to better understand the process dynamics and to encourage participants to propose improvement solutions, a detailed simulation model was considered to measure the impact on patients waiting time of solutions found by the participants during the Kaizen event. Since Robinson et al.’s model implies developing the detailed simulation model (Evaluate step) after the Kaizen event, it increases the delay before implementing solutions, while it is crucial to start the implementation on a short delay after the Kaizen event to guaranty its success (Martin & Orsterling, 2007).

The paper of Robinson et al. (2014) focuses on SimLean facilitate as an example of facilitated modeling using discrete-event simulation. The simulation model was developed and used within a 3 days period of an improvement workshop. However, they had to build the model in the “back office”, meaning that a fully facilitated model was not achieved. During the Kaizen event the simple but not validated model (since it was built with estimated times) helped in suggesting solutions. Consequently Kaizen participants were able to immediately get some feedback on how their ideas could improve the system performance even though it could not be measure precisely. Fig. 3 presents their facilitated approach.

Unlike Robinson et al. (2014) our Kaizen activity is entirely devoted in finding solutions that could improve the whole process and satisfy stakeholders (doctors, nurses, etc.). Data collection (process mapping, time study) and the simulation model are determined before the Kaizen event. As in Robinson et al. (2014), our simulation model was not defined during the Kaizen event but rather in “back office”.

This paper presents an approach to conduct a Lean project in an oncology clinic during which a detailed simulation model is defined in order to validate improving ideas proposed by the Kaizen event participants. The DMAIC solving problem method was used in a facilitate mode. Moreover a business game was performed during the Kaizen event to facilitate employees’ involvement and be able to implement improvement ideas more quickly. The approach is presented in Fig. 4.
                     
                  

The DEFINE step allows specifying the project and determining performance indicators. In order to achieve this, a project charter and interviews with the personal clinic were realized. The project charter defines the team vision: problem statement and objective, financial impact, project scope, schedule and team members. Once the project charter finished, the project itself can begin. A meeting with the clinic's employees is then planned to explain the project and present the team.

Next, each clinic employee (nurses, doctors, pharmacists, clerks, assistant technicians) is met individually in order to

                        
                           •
                           Know how they perceive the problem and how it affects their work

Identify other problems than the one identified in the project charter

Better understand working relations and teamwork

Determine what they expect from the project

The aim of these interviews is to assure that the employees share the same objective and work together to reach it rather than trying to reach individual goals.

The MEASURE step consists in measuring the current process performance.

Data collection is conducted during a representative working week and included appointment scheduling, work schedules, treatment capacity for a better understanding of the clinic. Data is next used to describe the process and develop the discrete-event simulation model and business game.

In the ANALYZE step are identified the causes of the problems on which the team will work during the IMPROVE step. A detailed discrete event simulation model is built to help find solutions. Because human judgment is not taken into account in discrete event simulation and has a great influence on process efficiency (Bok, 2007), we developed a business game.

To IMPROVE the process efficiency, a Kaizen event was planned so that each team member could participate in finding solutions. During this Kaizen event, the business game and the detailed discrete event simulation model were used to evaluate the different solutions proposed by the team members. The main output of the Kaizen event is an action plan to implement the selected scenario immediately after the event.

The objective of the CONTROL step consists in making sure that the new process will remain efficient. The performance indicators must be measured over time to verify the process stability and take actions if necessary.

Our approach was implemented in a hematology–oncology clinic when carrying out a Lean project. The clinic under study offers oncology treatments (chemotherapy) and hematology treatments (hemoglobin transfusions, blood transfusions, phlebotomy, coagulation factors). On average, 8500 treatments are administered every year. The clinic is opened from 8h00 AM to 8h00 PM. Seven doctors, six nurses, one clinical nurse, two to three pharmacists and two to three assistant pharmacists (ATP) depending on the day, and two clerks work in the clinic. Nurses work on 8-hour shifts (8h00 AM to 4h00 PM, 9h00 AM to 5h00 PM, 10h00 AM to 6h00 PM and 12h00 PM to 8h00 PM).

The project team consists of:

                              
                                 •
                                 
                                    University team: has the expertise to collect data and build the simulation model.


                                    Lean facilitator: a member of the clinic who acts as a Lean expert. This person leads the project, makes the interviews and leads meetings and the Kaizen event.


                                    Intervention team: all employees (nurses, doctors, pharmacists, clerks, assistant pharmacists).


                                    Kaizen team: two nurses, one clerk, two doctors, one pharmacist, one assistant pharmacist, one employee from the informatics department, the chief laboratory, the Lean facilitator and the university team.


                                    Clinic manager: to ease the implementation of the solutions and make the connection between the hospital managers and the intervention team.


                                    Hospital managers: control decisions.

The project charter was developed by hospital managers, the Lean facilitator, the clinic manager and the university team (Table 1
                           ). At this step it was decided to create a detailed simulation model to study the patient trajectory instead of a simple one for the following reasons:

                              
                                 •
                                 Encourage participation of many persons with varied expertise.

Make it easier for the intervention team to accept improvement ideas since they will have been tested on a more realistic model.

Measure precisely the impact of the solutions proposed to reach the objective knowing that with a detailed model the error margin is less than with a simple one regarding the reduction of patients’ waiting time (Bowers, Ghattas, & Mould, 2012).

The project launch meeting was led by the Lean facilitator during which the project charter was also presented. Employees showed enthusiasm toward the project and a willingness to collaborate. Afterwards individual interviews were held with all employees involved and they led to following findings:

                              
                                 •
                                 Personnel agree on the main problem being too long patients waiting time. Doctors must necessarily agree with the objective of reducing patients waiting time and not have individual objectives.

Doctors must be involved in each step of the project (DMAIC). Good relations among personnel members should contribute to the project's success.

These interviews indicated that the intervention team was ready to put the required effort to turn this project into a success.

The complete trajectory followed by a patient comprises five steps:

                              
                                 (1)
                                 The patient arriving at the clinic registers with the clerk.

The patient waits for a blood sample which is sent to the laboratory to be analyzed.

Once the blood tests results are available, the patient may need to meet the doctor.

After meeting with the doctor, the patient makes another appointment.

The patient receives his treatment after being taken care of by the nurse, if his health status allows for it, otherwise the treatments are given another day.

Not all patients need to follow the five steps. Some of them come only for a blood sample and to meet the doctor, others only for treatments or, only to meet the doctor if they previously had a blood sample. As the process mapping shows (Fig. 5), four different trajectories can be followed by patients:

                              
                                 1.
                                 
                                    Follow-up and taking charge (5 steps): registration, blood sample, meeting with the doctor, making an appointment and taking charge; this trajectory is followed by 20 percent of patients.


                                    Blood sample and taking charge (3 steps): registration, blood sample and taking charge; this trajectory is followed by 14 percent of patients.


                                    Treatment (2 steps): registration and taking charge; this pathway is followed by 19 percent of patients.


                                    Meeting with the doctor (3 steps): registration, meeting with the doctor and making an appointment; this trajectory is followed by 47 percent of patients.

Treatments can last from 15 minutes to up to 8 hours. Patients coming to the clinic to receive treatments represent 53 percent of all patients. The taking charge step is followed by three sub-steps: (1) meeting with the pharmacist, (2) hydration and premedication and (3) treatment.

The process mapping was first realized by the Lean facilitator. It was next posted in the clinic for the intervention team to get acquainted with it. Then during a meeting led by the Lean facilitator they validated the process mapping to make sure that no steps had been forgotten.

Appointment scheduling provides information on patients coming to the clinic. Three appointment lists are considered: (1) list of patients needing a blood sample (only in the afternoon), (2) list of patients needing to meet a doctor (fixed periods and last 20 minutes each from 8h00 AM to 1h30 PM) and (3) list of patients needing treatments.

The first treatments of the day are scheduled every 15 minutes (regardless of the treatment duration). Later in the day, the time between scheduled appointments for treatments may vary depending on the end of the previous one. Ad hoc rules are used by clerks to schedule the appointments. Clerks must consider doctors’ working schedules, patients ‘preferences and opening hours of the treatment rooms. Appointment scheduling showed that the number of planned treatments is on average equal to 37, the average daily number of administrated treatments is 32 and the average percentage of canceled treatments is equal to 14 percent. Results in Table 2
                            show that when treatments are scheduled, the capacity (number of hours available) is not always considered.

On Wednesday, for instance, treatments were scheduled for the equivalent of 135.25 hours while there were only 128 hours available (16 chairs × 8 hours/chair). However, on Thursday, more treatments could have been scheduled.

The treatment room capacity depends on nurses’ schedules. Each nurse is responsible for four patients (or 4 chairs). Sixteen chairs are available for treatments. Treatment chairs are available when nurses are working (from 8h00 AM to 4h00 PM, for instance). Between 6h00 and 8h00 PM there is only one nurse at work. However, at least two nurses should be at work at the same time in case a patient has health problems during his treatment. Table 3 shows an example of the link between nurses’ schedules and patients waiting.

We can see that the number of patients ready for treatment often exceeds the treatment room capacity in the morning. Patients ready for treatment follow trajectories 1, 2 or 3. On trajectory 1, seven doctors can receive patients. This implies that seven patients could be ready for treatment at the same time while the treatment room has the capacity to receive only one every 15 minutes from 8h00 to 11h00 AM. The number of patients waiting increases during the same time leading in a long waiting time. It is thus important to coordinate appointments with doctors with treatment appointments and to take into account the treatment room capacity.

Considering that treatments can be long (up to 8 hours), that there must be at least two nurses to take care of one patient and that meeting with doctors are from 8h00 AM to 1h30 PM, it is important to schedule treatments as early as possible. However actually, nurse schedules do not allow beginning treatments early enough in the morning.

Patient trajectories were also analyzed. Let us consider trajectory 1: registration, blood sample, meeting with the doctor, making an appointment and treatment. A patient following this trajectory must make two appointments: one to meet the doctor and one for the treatment. We were interested in verifying if the treatment appointment was coherent with the appointment with the doctor. The computerized appointment system does not allow scheduling more than one treatment at the same time (even if there are four nurses working at the same time). The clerk is forced by the system to enter a fake appointment time in order to provide a list of patients for nurses working in the treatment room. Nurse providing treatments cannot rely on the appointment schedules to determine the next patient to see. They rather see patients on a first come, first call basis. The actual computerized appointment system is not consistent when scheduling appointments with doctors and treatments.

Our time study consisted in determining patient lead times according to their trajectory (Fig. 5). Data collection was done at the clinic over 1 week. Each patient coming to the clinic received a numbered chip. At every step of his trajectory he had to identify himself with his number and the observer would take note of the time he went through the step. Table 4
                            provides a summary of the trajectory lead times.

The total lead time from registration until meeting with the doctor could be computed for only two trajectories. For trajectory 1, total waiting time is 69.31 minutes, 93 percent of total lead time. For trajectory 4, it is 48.50 minutes, 97 percent of total lead time. In both cases waiting time is considered too high. Reducing total lead time from registration to beginning preparing for treatment was identified as the main objective during the Kaizen event. Waiting times are noticed at every step of the process. The time study provided other performance indicators (Table 5
                           ).

The average time required to prepare the patient in the treatment room is 20 minutes while appointments are scheduled every 15 minutes. This shows inconsistency in scheduling appointments. The average treatment chair utilization rate is 68 percent, showing that the number of treatment chairs is adequate and that many more patients could receive treatments.

Finally, patients are asked to arrive 30 minutes before meeting the doctor, to leave enough time for blood sampling. Our time study shows that the average time required to analyze a blood sample is 31 minutes. If we add the waiting time before the blood sample (21 minutes) to these 31 minutes, it is obvious that patients should arrive earlier for the blood sample results to be ready before meeting the doctor. Patients having their blood sample taken the day before their appointment with the doctor or before their treatment don't have to wait for the blood sampling results. It also reduces the amount of work in the clinic. With only 22 percent of the blood samples performed the previous day, there is place for improvement.

Data analysis indicates that:

                           
                              •
                              Appointment schedules do not take into account the treatment room capacity and treatment durations.

Taking charge of patients for treatments is done between 8h00 AM and 12h00 PM depending on nurses’ schedules.

Patients needing a blood sample before meeting the doctor or before their treatment usually wait an additional 30 minutes for blood analysis to come back from the laboratory.

A patient is taken in charge for treatment every 20 minutes but appointments are planned every 15 minutes.

Each step generates delays.

The discrete event simulation model was developed using the Arena software (Kelton, Sadowski, & Sturrock, 2007) in order to (1) evaluate improving scenarios before the Kaizen event and (2) measure the impact of the ideas expressed during the Kaizen event on patient lead times. The statistical distributions used in the simulation model are based on data collected from the clinic process. These statistical distributions provided by Input analyzer of the Arena software are the ones fitting best the data considering the mean-square error. In our simulation model, entities (patients) follow one of the different trajectories, according to the percentages presented in Section 4.1. The model was developed to be as close as possible to the real process. Comparisons between simulated and real waiting and lead times were performed for all trajectories. A ±10 percent threshold was considered to take into account the margin of error related to the statistic curves and the error induced by a simplified process. Table 6 shows that the gap between our simulation model and the real process is at most ±10 percent confirming the validity of the model to be used to test scenarios.

The simulation model was built by the university team. However the clinic personnel were involved in many aspects to understand all the specifics of the process. The final model was validated by the Lean facilitator, the clinic manager, one doctor and a nurse. Unlike the SimLean approach (Fig. 1), the detailed discrete-event simulation model was developed before the Kaizen event. It was used to make preliminary tests to avoid unnecessary discussions during the event. The animator of the activity was able to evaluate objectively the impact of adding a nurse to blood sampling and increasing the size of blood samples shipments, on patients waiting times. These two propositions were tested with the simulation model. Results showed that there was no significant improvement. Therefore discussion among the Kaizen event participants could be moved toward other subjects. However different scheduling appointment rules, taking into account the treatment room capacity, had to be evaluated with the simulation model. They had to be determined with the help of the clinic personnel.

A business game was developed to allow participants to really schedule appointments according to the rules defined during the Kaizen event and to measure with the discrete event simulation model how it impacted on patient waiting times. A set of cards, each representing a patient with his characteristic, was prepared to schedule the appointments of a typical day. Each card contained the following information:

                              
                                 1.
                                 Fictitious patient's name

Need of a blood sample or not

Name of doctor to meet

Treatment type (chemotherapy or else) and duration

Need to make another appointment with the doctor or not

The game will work as follows: participant will choose randomly a card and schedule the appointment according to the patient's need: blood sample, meeting the doctor or treatment. Patients arrival rates will be modified in the simulation model depending on the schedules generated. A member of the university team will run the simulation model to measure the impact of the new appointment schedules on patients waiting time and present the results. For the game to be efficient during the Kaizen event, it should be able to integrate the different arrival rates rapidly.

To improve the process efficiency, a Kaizen event was planned so that each team member could participate in finding solutions. The Kaizen team includes 10 persons: two nurses, one administration officer, two doctors, one pharmacist, one assistant pharmacist, one employee from the department of informatics, one laboratory manager, and one clinic manager. The Kaizen event was led by the Lean facilitator together with a member of the university team.

The objective of the Kaizen event after data analysis was to reduce patient waiting times for treatments by 45 percent while lightening the whole process. Even though this objective may seem too ambitious, it must be given all resources and effort involved for the project. This objective is related to trajectories 1 (follow-up and treatment), 2 (blood sample and treatment) and 3 (treatment) from Fig. 3. The targets to be achieved were evaluated using results from Table 3 and they are 96 minutes for trajectory 1, 63 minutes for trajectory 2 and 34 minutes for trajectory 3. The Kaizen event was held on three consecutive days.


                           
                              Day 1
                           
                        

The activity begins with the presentation of the objective by a member of the management team: reduce patients waiting time by 45 percent. The Lean facilitator presents the Lean approach and the results obtained after the MEASURE step (process mapping, time study, etc.). These presentations assure that all Kaizen members receive the same information. Participants are invited to discuss and modify the process mapping if necessary. Process irritants and waste are next identified by teams of two to three persons. They are written on post-it. Each team share their findings and explain each irritant when a member places the paper on the process mapping poster. Then participants agree on 4–6 main topics to group the irritants. These topics are written on an Ishikawa diagram and each irritant is put next to the appropriate topic.

Participants identified the following six topics to discuss in workshops:

                              
                                 1.
                                 Nurses work organization

Patients trajectories

Equipments and work sites

Tools and information flow

Taking charge of patients by nurses

Scheduling appointments

Workshops whose results had more impact on patients waiting time are 1, 2 and 6.

At the end of the day, the Kaizen team finds a name to the project. It is a way for the team to take ownership of the project. Finally, the hospital manager is invited to attend the meeting. One of the participants summarizes the work done during the day. Since the direction members do not attend the Kaizen event it is a way to keep them informed and show the Kaizen team how the project is important to managers.


                           
                              Day 2
                           
                        

Day 2 begins with the sum up of the previous day. Then the Lean facilitator asks the Kaizen team to think of an ideal process and identify the constraints to reach it. For instance, the ideal process may need a real time follow-up of the patient trajectory which can be costly. However it might be possible to have a real time follow-up for one of the critical steps of the trajectory. Identifying the ideal process allows the Kaizen team to clearly determine actions and decisions needed to get solutions. Next three teams of three participants each work on three topics identified from the Ishikawa diagram to find solutions to the irritants. They present their solutions to the other teams and discussion is undergone to find new ideas. Here follows results of workshops 1, 2 and 6.


                           Workshop 1: Nurses work organization
                        

During this workshop, participants proposed new nurses schedules. The treatment chairs’ availability depend on nurses’ schedules which was modified to be from 8h00 AM to 4h00 PM for all nurses. This modification allows for the beginning of more treatments earlier in the day. Real data showed that it was taking 20 minutes on average to prepare a patient (Table 5). This was due to the fact that treatments were not ready when the patient was ready to receive it. During the workshop, pharmacists assured that treatments could be ready by 8h00 AM for the first incoming patients. Consequently it was decided to continue scheduling appointments every 15 minutes.


                           Workshop 2: Patients trajectories
                        

Participants proposed to divide trajectories 1 (follow-up and treatment) and 2 (blood sample and treatment) over 2 days. As shown in Fig. 6, blood sample and meeting with the doctor (day 0) are planned the day before treatments (day 1).

These new trajectories allow a reduction in treatment cancellation rate on the same day (day 1) due to bad blood results (day 0). A deal was made with healthcare providers in specific regions to allow patients to have their blood sample close to their home (day 0) instead of coming to the hospital, therefore eliminating the 30 minute waiting time before meeting the doctor.


                           Workshop 6: Scheduling appointments
                        

The business game was mainly used to test ideas to improve appointment scheduling. Participants to the game were a clerk, a doctor, an assistant pharmacist technician and the clinic manager. Let us recall that the current appointment planning worksheet (treatment) is divided into 15 minute time slots from 8h00 AM to 8h00 PM and that it is impossible to schedule two appointments at the same time. The treatment room capacity is not taken into account.

The game is quite simple. First, participants were asked to create their own appointment planning worksheets for blood sample, meeting doctors and treatment, according to different criteria. Patients used to arrive for blood sampling 30 minutes before their appointment with the doctor while it was taking around 50 minutes to perform and analyze the blood samples. Therefore appointments were also added for blood samples (on morning) to reduce waiting times for blood sampling. The idea was to coordinate appointments for blood samples and with doctors according to the different trajectories. The appointment planning worksheets for treatments were designed to consider the number of treatment chairs available and nurses’ schedules (workshop 1). These modifications allowed taking into account the treatment room capacity when building new schedules by planning as many patients at the same time as there are nurses and considering treatment times. The computer specialists confirmed that these new worksheets would be included into to the current appointment planning software. Moreover they could test other priority rules such as scheduling patients with longer treatment durations at the beginning of the day.

Second, the cards were randomly sorted to simulate demands for an appointment. Finally, clerks had to pick a card and assign an appointment time to the fictitious patient using the appointment planning worksheet. Results during business game with the cards show that 8 of 94 had to be scheduled on another day. It was impossible to schedule all patients on the same day since capacity was now taken into account.

The appointment schedules for blood samples, meeting with the doctor and treatments were used as inputs in the discrete event simulation model to measure their impact on patient waiting times. Since trajectories 1 and 2 were divided over 2 days (workshop 2), it was impossible to compare results before and after testing improving propositions. Only trajectory 3 (treatment) could be analyzed more closely. The discrete event simulation model was replicated 100 times. Patient waiting times before treatment were reduced by 90 percent on average (from 61 minutes to 6 minutes). Participants could see that the new schedules had a significant impact on patient waiting times before treatments.

One of the participants summarizes the work done at the end of the day to the direction members.


                           Day 3
                        

Day 3 begins with the sum up of the work done the previous day. Considering the solutions defined during workshops participants try to find a new process. They build the new process mapping and prepare two action plans: a short term action plan (20 days) and a long term action plan. Participants identify the actions required to put in place the new process (who, what, when and how) together with the role of each one. Eighty percent of all actions should be in the short term action plan to facilitate a quick implementation of the proposed improvement ideas and keep participants involved in the project.

During day 3, participants identify performance indicators that will be used to verify if the objective of reducing patients waiting time is reached and determine how the required data will be collected. At the end of the day, participants fill out an evaluative questionnaire of the Kaizen event. They also present the new process to the hospital manager who may evaluate the implementation cost since she has received information every day of the Kaizen event. The hospital manager can thus give her approbation to move forward with the implementation of the 20 day action plan the very next day.

@&#RESULTS@&#

At the end of the kaizen event, participants have built an action plan to quickly implement those changes, ideally in 20 working days. The 20 day action plan is the main output of the Kaizen event. Since the improving scenarios were tested during the Kaizen event, it will be easier to implement them rapidly. Nineteen weeks after implementing the modifications, new data was collected. Since trajectories 1 and 2 were divided over 2 days, it was impossible to compare results before and after testing improving propositions. Only trajectory 3 (treatment) could be analyzed more closely (Table 7).

Patient lead times for trajectory 3 were reduced from 61 to 16 minutes, a 74 percent reduction. Simulated results (during the kaizen) promised a 90 percent reduction. The gap between what was expected and the real value after implementation can be explained by limits of the discrete event simulation model which did not take into account patients’ lateness, treatments beginning late, treatments not ready on time, patients not feeling well and other human related events that cannot be modeled. Consequently the discrete event simulation model overestimated lightly the expected improvement but it is still an appropriate manner to evaluate new ideas to reach the objective. Results show that the 34 minutes target for trajectory 3 (55 percent × 61 minutes) has been reached. The challenge is now to ensure that those results are maintained.

Control is assured by weekly meetings called weekly huddle, led by the clinic manager with different members of the clinic. They verify patients waiting time and propose new actions if necessary to still be able to reach the target.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#


                        Robinson et al. (2012) showed that Lean and simulation are complementary methods even though they are often used independently. SimLean Educate involves the use of existing models before the Kaizen event in teaching key Lean principles, SimLean Facilitate involves rapid modeling during the Kaizen event to better understand the dynamic of the process and SimLean Evaluate involves the development of a detailed model after the Kaizen event to evaluate scenarios. Our approach proposes to develop a single detailed simulation model (Fig. 7
                        ).

The time required to develop a detailed simulation model is not shorter than Robinson et al. (2012). We used the model before the Kaizen event (Educate step), to generate different improving scenarios and eliminate the least interesting ones (those having less impact over the reduction of patients waiting time). This leaves more time during the Kaizen event to provide guidance to the team to find feasible solutions. The Kaizen event is used to find solutions to improve the process performance and reach an identified target. Kaizen events are costly considering the salary of 10 participants during 3 days. Consequently some steps (process mapping, time study and data analysis) are done before the Kaizen event leaving more time to participants to find solutions. During the Kaizen event, the discrete event simulation model contributes to engage participants to discuss different points of views and to provide evidence in order to achieve consensus. As Robinson et al.’s model, ours helps in managing conflicts of interest between team members. Simulation model is thus a fundamental tool to evaluate the proposed solutions. Since the model is valid participants are confident that the results will be closed to what is expected in real life. This help reducing barriers when implementing Lean in the clinic such as skepticism and lack of ownership of solutions (Brandao de Souza & Pidd, 2011).

Our approach allows a rapid implementation of the solutions generated during the Kaizen event compared to Robinson et al. (2014). Indeed the first steps of the DMAIC approach (DMA) have been realized in 6 months. The last two steps (IC) needed 3 months, 1 month for implementation (20 day action plan) and 2 months for follow-up. Our approach allows reducing the implementation delays of Robinson's model (2007) caused by the development of a detailed simulation model during the Evaluate step (Fig. 1). This is a major contribution since a Kaizen event holds out an expectation from participants. If solutions resulting from the Kaizen event are not implemented quickly, team members may believe that their efforts have been worthless and that the approach is not working. Indeed, failure in producing tangible and quick results is a factor contributing to the poor stakeholder engagement in healthcare simulation project (Jahangirian et al., 2015)

In a facilitate mode, an intervention team with members of the client's organization are actively involved in determining the scope of the project, analyzing and solving the problem. This team is supported by an operations research consultant who acts as a facilitator (Franco & Montibeller, 2010). To better understand how our approach is facilitating, the composition of the intervention team must be analyzed.

Our intervention team is similar to Kotiadis, Tako, & Vasilakis (2014). The university team has the expertise to collect data and build the simulation model (modeling team in Kotiadis et al., 2014). The Lean facilitator serves as a Lean expert leading the project, meetings and the Kaizen event. The intervention team consists of nurses, pharmacists, doctors and clerks (stakeholder team). The clinic manager is responsible for implementing solutions and maintaining relations between the management team and the intervention team (project champion). Finally the manager team can make all decision (key stakeholders). Fig. 8
                         shows the steps and activities realized during the project with the detailed schedule and involvement of the team members.

Our approach has other similarities with Kotiadis et al. (2014) since it includes interviews and workshops with stakeholders to involve them in the Lean steps and the development of the simulation model.

Because Lean healthcare project often involves many stakeholders with plurality of opinions and objectives, we wanted to make sure that all team members agree with the target and collaborate to reach it and not individual goals. All personnel members were met individually (DEFINE step): 5 nurses, 2 clerks, 8 doctors, 1 pharmacist and 2 assistant pharmacists. These meetings are considered beneficial for the success of the project while reducing resistance to change (Brandao de Souza & Pidd, 2011).

Four group meetings were organized. The first meeting (DEFINE step) is to present the team project, their role and the steps of the whole project including discrete event simulation to employees. Unlike Kotiadis et al. (2014) this meeting is informative instead of participative since the project objective has been previously defined by the management team, the facilitator and the clinic manager. The second meeting (MEASURE step) is used to validate the process mapping made by the Lean facilitator that was posted in the clinic so that everyone could see it. They all discuss about possible modifications. The presence of the university team to that meeting is crucial to help them understand the process and model it adequately according to the process mapping. This is a participative meeting comparable to workshop 2 (stage 3: specify conceptual model) of Kotiadis et al. (2014). In Robinson et al. (2014) the process mapping is also realized before the Kaizen event but it is only finished day 1 of the Kaizen. In our case the whole process mapping is completed before the Kaizen event. During the third meeting (ANALYZE step) results from the MEASURE steps are presented: patients waiting time, personnel tasks, treatment room capacity compared to the demand, work schedules, appointments schedules, etc. It is more an informative meeting led by the Lean facilitator. It allows the university team to capture the details needed to build the simulation model. The goal of the fourth meeting (ANALYZE step) consists in validating the simulation model and presenting simulation to the team members who can propose modifications that will be studied before the Kaizen event. It is led by the university team and the Lean facilitator. This meeting is participative and comparable to workshop 3 (stage 5: experimentation) of Kotiadis et al. (2014). Like Kotiadis et al. (2014) and Robinson et al. (2014), model coding was done apart from the meetings and the Kaizen event. In our approach, model coding was realized at the ANALYZE step right before the Kaizen event. In Kotiadis et al. (2014), model coding is done at step 4 (model coding) and in Robinson et al. (2014), it is done between 2 days of the Kaizen event.

The Kaizen members received training on Lean principles and simulation (ANALYZE step) from the Lean facilitator and the university team. Our approach is different from Robinson et al. (2014) since it is devoted to finding solutions, identifying the best scenario and writing the action plan. Kotiadis et al. (2014) did not have a Kaizen event.

The organization of our Kaizen event differs from what is found in literature in two ways. It uses a detailed simulation model during the Kaizen event to evaluate improving scenarios proposed by the Kaizen team in a unique way. Indeed Kotiadis et al. (2014) evaluate scenarios outside the workshops. Robinson et al. (2014) uses the simulation model to evaluate scenarios during the Kaizen event. However the results are not precise since the model was developed with estimated data. Therefore participants are not able to know if the goal has been reached. Let us recall that the target consists in a 45 percent reduction of patients waiting time. Solutions at the end of the 3 day Kaizen event must allow reaching this goal. The simulation model is thus an interesting tool. In Robinson et al. (2014) the target is not defined precisely. Second using a business game to generate appointment schedules during the Kaizen event is an innovative contribution.

Scheduling appointments in a hematology–oncology clinic requires human judgment even if there are guidelines. Business game helped clerks to test different guidelines, better understand them and take note of the results. By scheduling appointments themselves through business game, they realized that they were able to detect potential problems for the future. Business game allows participants to test in real-time their ideas and to detect rapidly potential problems. More realistic scenarios can then be proposed. Arrivals in discrete event simulation are modeled as appointment schedule. The evaluation being performed during the Kaizen event, the best ones are chosen immediately accelerating their implementation. The use of business game during the Kaizen event encourages participants to be more creative. Participants in the Kaizen event could evaluate the impact of the proposed changes on their work and anticipate future problems. They could then propose solutions immediately. It also allows taking into account human aspects when determining solutions and make the Kaizen event more dynamic. Like van der Zee and Slomp (2009), we conclude that the game could help workers find solutions for specific problems and facilitate their acceptance of new work methods or systems. Our results demonstrate that business game combined with a discrete event simulation can be used to support participants during the Kaizen event.

Finally since the 20 day action plan is defined during the third day of the Kaizen event this is comparable to workshop 4 (stage 6: implementation) of Kotiadis et al. (2014).

Our approach helps maintaining interactions between participants during a Lean project involving the development of a simulation model during a Kaizen event to evaluate different improving scenarios. It could be used not only in healthcare applications. It requires a team eager to be involved in the project and opened to the idea of using simulation models. Team members must accept to give individual interviews and participate in group meetings during working hours. This implies coordination to avoid disturbing the clinic activities and to obtain a high level of participation. The Lean facilitator must put a lot of effort to plan, coordinate meetings and follow the steps rigorously.


                        Robinson et al. (2014) propose the development of a simple simulation model in 2 days which is less time than what our model requires. Our approach is closer to Kotiadis et al. (2014) since it implies a detailed simulation model requiring more time to be developed. However the model reproduces more adequately reality and can be used during the Kaizen event to help participants. Considering all the effort required in developing the simulation model and from participants, our approach is more convenient to solve complex problems.

Finding solutions during the Kaizen event is crucial in our approach. The scope of the problem must be well identified so that participants can work toward the same target. It requires the participation of at least one representative of each profession over three consecutive days for the Kaizen event. Otherwise the Kaizen event cannot be organized. Even though it can be perceived as a constraint it is a success factor. Participants become ambassadors of the solution to their colleagues facilitating implementation. The use of Kaizen and the business game encourages participants to be more confident in results and to rapidly implement the 20 day action plan.

The university and project teams are co-partners with roles and responsibilities well defined (Fig. 8). The DMAIC is well structured and rigorous for the project to progress adequately and meet the schedules.

Four success factors have been identified. It needs the involvement of doctors, pharmacists, managers and employees. It confirms the importance to have doctors and pharmacists present during the Kaizen event. Second it requires a culture of continuous improvement in the organization and among the team members. Indeed before the Kaizen event the team had already begun to implement modifications to improve the process. Third the use of a structured approach (DMAIC) and the presence of a Lean facilitator were comforting to the team members. Finally being able to generate appointments schedules and to measure their impact during the Kaizen even with the simulation model was well received by participants. However the 20 day action plan to implement the selected scenario requires a sustained rhythm and a lot of work that was underestimated.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

As Robinson et al. (2014) and Tako and Kotiadis (2015) we showed that participants involvement is crucial for the success of an ambitious project. Even though our approach is similar to a facilitated mode, a fully facilitated mode was not achieved since the client was not involved in the model coding step. Our approach can be considered as participative because of the numerous meetings (individual and group). Our study showed that the use of simulation and a business game in a Kaizen even favors participation of all members. It also has for principal advantage to help finding an adequate solution and to measure its impact before the implementation. Given the nature of the model, the result could be taken as an accurate result (contrary to Robinson et al., 2014). The 20 day action plan can be implemented immediately after the Kaizen. There is no delay after the Kaizen to develop a detailed simulation model as for Robinson et al. (2014). Finally data have been collected 3 months after implementing the solution. It shows that our approach provides an important advantage by allowing a rapid implementation. Future work could be devoted to implement our approach in another healthcare department or in other activity sectors such as manufacturing.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

