@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Integrating soft and hard operational research to improve surgical centre management at a university hospital

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Soft and hard OR methodologies were used in a case study in a Brazilian hospital.


                        
                        
                           
                           Cognitive maps facilitated a dialogue between hospital staff and the analysts.


                        
                        
                           
                           The approach incorporated specialists' views in simulation experiments.


                        
                        
                           
                           Findings can signal actions for resolving/improving real-world problems.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Problem structuring

OR in health care

Simulation

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The aim of this work is to present the practical applications of an integrated use of soft and hard methodologies applied in a case study of the Surgical Centre of the University Hospital Clementino Fraga Filho, where the low volume of surgeries is of major concern. The proposed approach is particularly appropriate in situations where there is limited time, financial resources, and institutional cooperation. Cognitive maps were used to elicit the perspectives of health professionals, which supported simulation experiments and guided the model's execution. Human-resource, patient-related, room-schedule, material, and structural constraints were found to affect the number of surgeries performed. The major contribution of this paper is the proposal of a multi-methodological approach with a committed focus on problem solving that incorporates specialists' views in simulation experiments; these specialists’ collaborative work highlights actions that can lead to the resolution (or improvement) of real-world problems.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The use of operations research (OR) in healthcare differs from its use in other fields because of the special characteristics of healthcare, including the differing influence of the decision-making of different stakeholders and the existence of an indirect command line, as described by Brailsford and Vissers (2011). Moreover, there are challenges in the use of OR in healthcare; Kopach-Konrad et al. (2007) identified some of these to be the rigid division of work in health service operations and management and the scepticism and mistrust of health professionals regarding agents from other fields. It is therefore very important to maintain an interface between OR researchers and health professionals to ensure the success of the research and its applications. According to Hämälläinen, Luoma, and Saarinen (2013), this can be linked to Behavioral Operations Research (BOR), since it is a “behavioral aspect related to the use of OR methods in modelling, problem solving and decision support”.

Soft OR methods can contribute significantly to this purpose and provide a focus for system participants when building solutions; they represent a commitment to the problem which these participants want to solve. These features may be related to the observation made by Brailsford and Vissers (2011) that there is an increasing number of health-related studies using soft methodologies.

In addition to soft methodologies, hospital managers who face financial constraints need hard methodologies to provide quantitative information on the impact of proposed actions, enabling them to allocate available resources more effectively. However, direct experimentation in health services can harm patients. Thus, discrete event simulation (DES) methods are often used in health service studies to enable evaluation in both an operational and a strategic context (Davies & Davies, 1995; Lagergren, 1998).


                     Howick and Ackermann (2011) discussed the mixed use of different methodologies, emphasising the lack of ‘generic lessons’ in the literature arising from using different methodologies. These lessons may include obstacles encountered in conducting studies, perceived limitations of models, observations regarding the quality of models, and the results.

This study was an original and independent initiative that was supported by the health professionals of the hospital where the case study took place but absent of any long-term funding. It is a simplified model, with quantitative and qualitative elements, appropriate for situations where there is limited time, financial resources, and institutional cooperation. It aims to present a methodology combination—a variety of multi-methodology (Mingers & Brocklesby, 1997) wherein the methodologies complement each other, which affords several advantages for modelling and simulation experiments—and apply this combination in a case study. The major contribution of this paper is the proposal of a multi-methodological approach with a committed focus on problem solving that incorporates specialists' views in simulation experiments, working collaboratively to signal actions that can lead to the resolution or improvement of real-world problems. The lessons learned during the execution and the presentation of the discussion may be valuable for future work in healthcare and OR.

The following section presents the theoretical background and some contextual information, which guided our procedure in the case study. Section 3 presents the abstract model in some detail. Section 4 states the case study and its results. Finally, we discuss the results in Section 5, and report the conclusion in Section 6.

@&#BACKGROUND@&#

In contrast to classic, 'hard' OR, where structuring is only an implicit issue, soft OR makes the ill-structured nature of the problems encountered explicit (Mingers & Rosenhead, 2004). Ackoff (1979a, 1979b) wrote some seminal critical papers on the use of OR in the 1960s and 1970s, revealing that OR had become a set of theoretical disciplines that were disengaged from real world applications. Among the several important books on soft OR, we can cite Checkland (1981), Rosenhead and Mingers (2001), and Pidd (2003). Two of the most widely used methods for problem structuring are Soft Systems Methodology (SSM), proposed by Checkland (1992), and Strategic Options Development and Analysis (SODA), proposed by Eden (1989).

Cognitive mapping is an important resource used in SODA (Eden, 1989) that proposes a networked and graphic structure that helps overcome sequential communication in spoken and written language. Moreover, cognitive mapping allows for constructive communication, as each participant can focus on the issues about which he or she is most concerned. According to Eden (1989), one of the interesting features of cognitive mapping is that the decision-maker can learn about the situation because of the reflexive characteristic of the maps. It makes the stakeholder very clear about his/her own knowledge or point of view, which can be interpreted as a form of metacognition. This stimulates a metacognitive approach to the problem (Lins, 2014).

Cognitive mapping consists of a network in which nodes represent questions regarding the particular stakeholder perspective. Fiol and Huff (1992) classify them into identity maps, characterisation maps, and causal maps, the last of which is the most frequently used in organisational studies. The cognitive map developed in this study is a causal map, as it possesses the following characteristics: it identifies causal relations, produces sequences of actions and conditions that produce desirable results, and indicates logical decisions for alternatives that achieve relevant goals.

Although soft and hard OR are seemingly conflicting paradigms (Mingers & Brocklesby, 1997), Lagergren (1998) reported that the use of both soft and hard OR can achieve better model acceptance. Kotiadis and Mingers (2006) discussed two approaches to using both OR paradigms: in one approach, the methodologies, in whole or in part, are combined and used together without consideration of their different paradigms; in the other, the methodologies are combined while respecting ‘their underpinning paradigms’. Howick and Ackermann (2011) presented a review of case studies that mix different methodologies and used a set of interest aspects to classify these methodologies. We try to make these aspects very explicit in this case study. Howick, Eden, Ackermann, and Williams (2008) combined system dynamics and causal mapping, exploring the benefits of both techniques. Kotiadis et al. (2012) described how the Performance Measurement Model enhances SSM in a real life study and cites other examples of hard OR and SSM associations.

Before 2000, few studies directly combined DES and soft OR methodologies (Robinson, 2001). Sachdeva, Williams, and Quigley (2006) used cognitive maps to identify what DES has not provided and to explain the results of various DES experiments. Kotiadis and Mingers (2006) discussed in depth the benefits and drawbacks of both SSM and DES by conducting a case study wherein SSM and DES were combined. Pidd (2007) described a complementary relationship between Problem Structuring Methods (PSM) and simulation for better practice, while Kotiadis (2007) presents a framework for applying SSM to determine simulation objectives, particularly for conceptual modelling. Robinson, Worthington, Burgess, and Radnor (2013) compared a number of studies on their use of DES, while Kotiadis, Tako, and Vasilakis (2014) emphasized the interaction among researchers and stakeholders.

Other important issues are quality requirements as defined by Robinson (2002) regarding not only the validation but also the accreditation and acceptance of the model. As an example,Robinson et al. (2013) noted the need for greater involvement between clients and analysts. This kind of concern can be traced to Lehaney, Kogetsidis, and Clarke (1996), who proposed that communication is improved by the closer proximity between analyst and client. Cognitive maps can provide a way for hospital health professionals and OR analysts to collaborate so that a solution is developed collaboratively and is not imposed on the system.

It can be argued that the situational features of a problem may partially define the methodological choice for solving it (Munro & Mingers, 2002). The integration between cognitive mapping and DES was based on the following assumptions:
                        
                           
                              •
                              Limited institutional cooperation: the decision makers would not be involved from the beginning of the study. Thus, there would be no expectation of negotiated decision-making and a complete intervention would be impossible.

Mission: The mission was an objective aligned with the strategic objectives of the system, but it was restricted to an operational context.

Limited resources (temporal and financial): limited resources did not allow decision makers to provide a cyclical treatment of the problem, as they could have if given more time and funds.

Operational stakeholders’ participation: using the stakeholders’ views of the problem, we aimed to achieve better acceptance and identification through transparency. The idea was to build a trusting relationship, lower the barriers between staff and researchers, and develop solutions together.

Structuring methods such as SSM could provide a more comprehensive and in-depth approach to the problem. However, its use would require negotiation between different actors and a cyclical process structure (Checkland, 2000). Robinson (2010) recognised that developing a desired (ideal) model may become infeasible because of resource constraints (e.g., data, time). Nevertheless, it is important to strive to identify culturally feasible solutions, as proposed in SSM (Checkland, 1992).

The proposed methodology is based on the combination of a structuring approach, using cognitive mapping to represent the problem according to the stakeholder's view, and DES.

The structuring approach consists of a mission definition, key personnel selection, interviews, and cognitive mapping. SODA was the main inspiration for the cognitive mapping phase; however, the approach cannot be considered a strict SODA application, because it uses a simplified form of causal cognitive mapping and does not explore a negotiated decision (Eden, 1989).

The mission refers to an improvement objective that can arise from previous intent or from board directions. It serves as the main purpose of the study and will represent the most important concept on the map. This mission must be aligned with the strategic objectives of the system. It must be simple, concise, clear, and built in a positive/affirmative way for better identification by the interviewees because, psychologically, existence is better perceived than is non-existence (Hearst, 1991). The mission must be limited to an operational context in order to produce feasible suggestions that can be accepted and implemented.

As the mission is defined, we will look for leaders inside the sector/operational unit with greater involvement in the mission. Leadership can arise from either experience or position. The purpose of this key personnel selection is to identify those who will have a greater responsibility and power to implement the proposed changes.

During the interviews, we collected data to build cognitive maps and to provide more detail for the simulation modelling, identifying important factors for problem resolution from the interviewee's viewpoints. Open interviews carried out independently avoid the inhibitions that can arise from group interviews, where formal hierarchical relations may be salient to interviewees. In addition, because the interviewees are key people in their sectors, their availability is limited, which means the interviews need to be scheduled accordingly; individual interviews accommodate this limitation more easily.

The cognitive map is constructed through the compilation and structuring of the factors relevant to the problem solution, referred to as Primary Evaluation Concepts (PECs). These should be brief and may be complemented by contrasting items to better characterise the core idea. From the interviewees’ viewpoints, these contrasts represent psychological opposites in light of circumstances and do not necessarily correspond to logical opposites.

The cognitive maps are developed from the perspectives of the employees, using their own terminology for the elements and constructs used in the maps, thereby providing more transparency and easier identification by the interviewees. The ensuing question ‘How?’ (meaning ‘what actions can lead to this concept?’) is proposed to obtain the means to achieve a concept. Thus, the links between concepts are initially derived from the mission to form other concepts. We asked the interviewees to give their answers in a format centred on their actions. To organize the concepts, the facilitator asked ‘Why is this concept important?’ This also allowed for interconnections among different concepts.

Furthermore, we asked about only positive actions in order to achieve a more favourable return from the interviewees (Matlin, 2003), which differs from the standard SODA approach. We felt it better to point out areas for improvements rather than errors, which could appear as a judgment on the interviewees, and thus reduce their willingness to cooperate. It is noteworthy that the maps are owned by the interviewees, so the researcher should allow corrections and modifications until the interviewees validate the maps.

The simulation modelling involves in loco observations, historical data collection, and information provided by the staff (including cognitive maps). Although the maps were not the only required information, they provided a means of establishing a trusting relationship with the employees, and they are a way of transferring knowledge of what must be modelled, both of which are necessary to properly represent the system. After the cognitive mapping, some of the concepts might be very complex or could not be modelled at all. Kotiadis (2007), who used SSM, faced a similar situation. However, clustering related actions could suggest possible simulation experiments as well as offer what culturally feasible changes should be included in those experiments. In order to guide these experiments, we clustered the cognitive mapping concepts according to related features, which can be the type of resources (material, human, etc.) or similar related information.

Another important aspect in this link between maps and simulation is how the interviewees perceive how their thoughts and their proposed solutions are guiding the simulation experiments. We regarded identification (transparency of interviewees’ guidance) as a major factor influencing whether interviewees would be more willing to help, as it ensured that the proposed solutions would not be seen as imposed.

Once managers have seriously evaluated the quantitative data, the simulation results can be interpreted as reinforcements to the proposed solutions. This study can then serve as a communication tool (Lagergren, 1998) for the interviewees and produce improvements to the system itself. On the other hand, the concepts that are not clustered are also valuable for the decision makers, adding other possible improvements that have not previously been monitored.

Brazilian public health care, codified in article 6 of the Federal Constitution of Brazil, is a universal service that is similar to the European model of universal access to health care (Brailsford & Vissers, 2011). The University Hospital Clementino Fraga Filho (HUCFF) covers 22 specialties with more than 450 physicians (HUCFF, 2009). In addition, the hospital is attached to a university and therefore conducts medical training and research. However, the low number of surgeries at the hospital, in relation to its capacity, is a major impediment to performance improvement, as noted in a 2006 management report (HUCFF, 2006).

The case study started with an academic initiative from an OR group, who, after reading the HUCFF report, approached the hospital surgical centre with the goal of increasing the number of surgeries; this purpose was aligned with the strategic objectives of the hospital management.

Performing more surgical procedures would enhance patient treatment and contribute to improving both the education of future surgeons and research conducted at the University Hospital. The hospital granted permission for a local (operational) study, but the managers opted not to be involved from the start. The researchers were two OR professors, one physician, and one post-graduate student. The case focused on the following surgical specialties: Cardiac; General; Gynaecological; Neurosurgery; Ophthalmology; Oral, Ear, Nose and Throat; Orthopaedics; Paediatrics; Plastic; Proctologic; Thoracic; Urology; and Vascular.

Data on the number of surgeries were collected from hospital records of the period between January 2008 and March 2009. The objective of this case study was to present potential courses of action that could contribute to increasing the number of elective surgeries performed at the University Hospital.

The conceptual map in Fig. 1
                         synthesises the structure of the case study, allowing an overall understanding of the relationships between the methods and relevant aspects of the real world problem studied. This figure shows that increasing surgeries is aligned to a management strategic objective. Soft OR methods are used to reduce staff mistrust through cognitive maps. They allow for the identification of potential causes and solutions for problems at the Surgical Centre from the viewpoints of members of the system. Furthermore, they help to build feasible scenarios (which represents the connection between the cognitive maps and DES), thereby guiding the conduct of simulation experiments. Finally, DES produces quantitative results for decision evaluation.

The first step is the creation of a mission that will clearly indicate the objective purpose of the analysis. In the case study presented here, the mission is ‘Increase the number of surgeries performed at the Hospital Surgical Centre’. Two employees closely involved with the operation of the Surgical Centre were interviewed; these employees have broad knowledge of and experience with the system, and are leaders in the medical and nursing sectors.

The cognitive maps of the HUCFF Surgical Centre were developed from the perspectives of the hospital employees, using their own terminology for the elements and constructs used in the maps. The construction followed two steps: first, we drew a preliminary map with the interviewees, and after its preliminary acceptance, we moved on to using a computational tool. Then, after the computation, we presented a revised map to interviewees so as to receive their final approval. Table 1
                         shows the PECs and related concepts and contrasts for this case study.

It is worth noting that PECs may be complemented by a generalisation or specification of the original idea. For example, Interviewee 1 expanded on the concept related to the PEC ‘Surgical Centre Clothing’ and included other supplies (materials and equipment) from the Surgical Centre. Thus, the PECs are used as origins for newer concepts when using the procedure described in the previous section. Table 2
                         shows the PEC relationships for interviewee 1.

The PEC concepts resulted from both interviews and are directly connected to the mission. The remaining concepts that arose from the ‘how’ and ‘what for’ investigation were then arranged to reveal the structure of the cognitive map. Concepts are placed in a hierarchy, proceeding from the means to the ends, with objectives placed at the top of the map. The following cognitive map was constructed (Fig. 2).

It is noteworthy that the map and its connections incorporate the views of the respondents. In order to use the map concepts to guide the simulation experiments, we reconfigured the map, preserving the links, to cluster the concepts. Fig. 3 shows five clusters that represent experiments related to the scheduling of rooms, human resources, structural aspects, patient-related problems, and material resources. The concepts are suggested actions that contribute to better system performance, each perceived by respondents as viable. Each cluster represents concepts that are not individually quantified, but rather correspond to a quantifiable experiment.

The system was simulated from the viewpoint of the patient, including the patient's arrival, the assemblage of the resources necessary for the surgery, the execution of the surgery, and the exit from the system. The model includes only the Surgical Centre, so other related hospital departments are not represented in the model.

A nursing technician, a surgical technician, and an anaesthesiologist made up the human resources. The anaesthesiologist is only active during surgical procedures. Nursing technicians prepare the operating room and move the patient between the different locations in the system, in addition to participating in the surgical procedures.

The patient
                         and the physicians are considered entities. Specialty attributes were created to account for different specialties and aid in the assignment of surgeries to patients. Thus, both patients and surgeons are entities related to the attribute that describes the required/offered specialty. Fig. 4 shows the Activity Cycle Diagram (ACD) model (Bloor Solutions, 2014).

Upon entering the system, a specialty attribute is assigned to the patient. Then, the patient is taken to the pre-operating room by a nurse technician, who is released from this phase of the work cycle after doing so. After the patient's arrival in the pre-operating room, the patient is matched with a corresponding physician with the requisite specialty and waits until the specified time for surgical preparation, after which he/she is sent to an operating room designated for his/her specialty attribute, when it becomes available.

At the beginning of the simulation, the physician with the requisite specialty arrives at the physician's waiting room and awaits verification of his/her correspondence with the patient's specialty attribute. After this correspondence is established, the physician waits to be called to the operating room. The physician is called for the patient, arrives in the designated operating room, and awaits the necessary human resources to perform the surgery, including the anaesthesiologist, nursing technician, and surgical technician. The simulation model was built using Medmodel (Harrell, 2006).

Because elective surgery is only performed for 9 hours on working days, resources were quantified using the different schedules and shifts of the available 24 nursing technicians, 12 surgical technicians, and 30 anaesthesiologists. We considered the availability of up to three groups composed of two specialised physicians on days designated for surgery, by specialty.

Surgery scheduling at the hospital follows the block system procedure for elective surgeries, characterised by setting aside periods for specific surgeries or specialties, as described in Cardoen, Demeleumeester, and Bëlien (2010). The daily surgery scheduling procedure used at the hospital determines when elective patients arrive. The Surgical Centre operates from Monday to Friday and has 12 operating rooms, one of which is reserved exclusively for emergencies. A slot is a whole day: hence, there are 55 slots in total per week, which are allocated on a repeating block basis to the 14 different clinical specialties that use the Centre. Surgeries of different specialties are not conducted in the same room.

We consider a proportional assignment for the total weekly number of surgeries among the slots determined for each specialty. Because surgeries are renewed on a daily basis, we opted to use a separate model for each day of the week, and the construction of these models was based on daily averages calculated for each specialty and on previous data. The schedule is created according to weekly planning for each specialty. Daily arrivals consist of binomial distributions. Although it may seem odd, as we are focusing only on the elective surgeries in the surgical centre, the actual system does not have a memory and is re-initiated daily, following the weekday schedule. If a scheduled surgery is not performed, it cannot be postponed to the following day because the hospital administration may not have a slot for that specialty on the next day. Given that we are dealing with elective surgeries, most patients have to return home and wait for a rescheduling for their surgery when there is a cancellation.

The three main causes for cancelling surgery were structural causes, related primarily to a lack of beds in the ICU and to other surgeries exceeding the allotted time; material causes, related to a lack of materials/equipment to perform surgeries and anaesthesia; and patient-related causes, related mostly to not being admitted or not being fit for surgery for clinical reasons.

The impact of surgery cancellations on patient entries is modelled through a Bernoulli distribution applied to patients’ admissions. This distribution was estimated from the ratio of cancelled to scheduled numbers of surgeries during the period from January 2008 to March 2009. Durations of surgeries in teaching hospitals may follow different statistical distributions than those based on surgeries performed in regular hospitals. Therefore, we used surgery time distributions estimated through data collected by Torres (2007) for the HUCFF. Based on the recommendation by Strum, May, and Vargas (1998), we used log-normal statistical distributions. These distributions were compared to the mentioned data and passed Kolmogorov–Smirnov tests. Table 3
                         shows the distributions considered and the p-values (further information is detailed in Appendix).

To validate the performance of the models with reference to the system's real data, we compared the data from 50 replications. It was necessary to perform this comparison with both planned surgeries and surgeries performed. We considered surgeries as ‘performed’ when the patient entered the operating room before the end of the workday.

When comparing the averages of the real data with the simulated results, the error was less than one standard deviation for any specialty regarding the planned surgeries. The worst performance was Paediatrics, which presented an error of 7 percent, with all other specialties having errors of less than 5 percent. Performed surgeries presented larger errors in the Thoracic (12 percent), Neuro (11 percent), Cardiac (11 percent), and Paediatric (6 percent) specialties. It is noteworthy that those specialties have the smallest numbers of surgeries. When comparing the total number of performed surgeries, the error was less than 2 percent.

@&#EXPERIMENTS@&#

Analysis of the cognitive map was based on the clusters presented in Fig. 3 (human resources, patient-related, structural, material, and room schedule), which reveal the following issues for the experiment:

                           
                              •
                              A – Eliminating causes of surgery cancellation: patient-related, structural, and material

B – Increasing human resources

C – Room scheduling

D – Combined issues A and B

E – Combined issues A, B, and increased elective surgeries.

In this way, the experiments relate to stakeholders’ suggestions to enhance Surgical Centre performance, which, in turn, relate to each cluster. In designing the scenarios, we first considered only the factors of one issue, after which, we considered a combination of factors from both issues A and B together. Issue C was discarded because the results were not relevant due to the restrictions imposed on room scheduling at the hospital.

A simulated sample with 50 replications for the total number of surgeries in the weekly interval resulted in a standard deviation of 13.1 surgeries.

The minimum number of replications needed can be estimated using the following formula: n = (zσ/c)2, where c represents the goal for the error, and z is the level of significance corresponding to the desired confidence interval. The goal was set at ±2 patients per week at a confidence interval of 95 percent, corresponding to z = 1.96, with a minimum of 164 replications. All the simulation results represent an average for 200 replications and the average behaviour of the model in the experiments. Thus, we use the results of 200 replications of the current situation as scenario 0.

This experiment relates to verifying the impact of reducing the causes of surgical cancellations on the current configuration. The data collected at the hospital on surgical cancellations describe the main cause of the cancellations but contain no information on cancellations caused by more than one factor. Therefore, in this experiment, we considered causes independently. This experiment should be interpreted as the maximum impact of the elimination of cancellations for each of the related causes. The grounds for cancellation are treated as random variables and are calculated by the historical average of cancellations by specialty (see Appendix). As resources (i.e. nurses and technicians) are shared by all specialties, and each specialty has different surgery durations, rough calculations would not reproduce the overall outcome of the surgery.

Scenario 1 refers to the resolution of structural problems. Along with an increase in the number of ICU beds, the cognitive map suggests that positive actions such as improving the scheduling of patient releases and making these beds available in a timelier fashion. One action to be taken that would facilitate bed availability is granting greater autonomy to the physician on call, who would be able to evaluate the release of patients from the ICU, thereby freeing more beds before the beginning of the surgeries scheduled for the day.

Material problems, such as a lack of materials and surgical equipment, which also affect specialties in a variety of ways, result in the type of cancellation constituting scenario 2. Actions to resolve these types of problems are related to the supply of materials and the maintenance of equipment.

To ensure the availability of equipment, it is necessary to perform corrective and preventive maintenance; we suggest agreeing to preventive maintenance contracts as opposed to performing emergency maintenance.

Problems related to patients include not being admitted or clinical conditions preventing the patient from having surgery; these are represented in scenario 3. Many of the patient-related problems are caused by a lack of communication between the physician/hospital and the patient. With inadequate communication, the patient may not follow important procedures to prepare for the surgery (i.e., proper fasting). These situations can be avoided through closer contact between the physician and the patient and by providing the patient with precise information; a patient guide could be useful.

The elimination of all cancellation causes at the same time is examined in scenario 4. Even though this scenario is extremely unlikely, it demonstrates the heaviest possible load of the Surgical Centre. Table 4
                            shows the results of the four scenarios.

We used scenario 4 as a reference for comparison of the combined issues experiments (D and E).

This experiment intends to evaluate the impact of an increase in the number of nursing technicians while maintaining current levels of surgery cancellations. The decision to increase the number of nursing technicians is based on the finding that nursing technicians have the highest utilization rate of all human resources. Fig. 3 depicts the possible ways of accomplishing such an increase, such as reallocating the nursing technician workforce of the Hospital to the Surgical Centre, renewing the workforce, and hiring more staff.

Even considering the best performance for each day of the week, the total gain in surgeries performed is less than 1 percent; thus, for current entry conditions, performance is not significantly improved through a mere increase in the number of nursing technicians.

We also sought to verify the combined impact of reducing cancellations and increasing resources to verify the optimal amount of resources for system operation. Table 5
                            compares scenario 4, where all causes of surgery cancellations have been removed but there is no increase in personnel, and scenarios 5, 6, 7 and 8, which cover the removal of all causes of surgery cancellations and the addition of 2, 4, 6, and 8 daily nurse technicians, respectively.

There was a significant increase in the number of surgeries for scenarios 5–6, and the resulting number of surgeries was close to the maximum. The performance with 2 more nursing technicians (i.e. scenario 5) was considered very good, especially for the short and medium term, which was the focus of this study.

We noted the good performance of the Surgical Centre in response to the elimination of causes of surgical cancellations, demonstrating the Centre's capacity to respond to this additional workflow. However, the additional workflow does not include more planned surgeries. A study on the capacity of the Surgical Centre to respond to an increase in demand would be useful.

This experiment showed the behaviour of the model with a daily increase of 1 or 2 additional scheduled surgeries for each operating room according to the allocated specialty, a daily increase of another 2, 4, 6, or 8 nursing technicians, and efforts to eliminate the causes of surgery cancellations.


                           Fig. 5
                            shows that the Surgical Centre can only absorb up to 2 additional surgeries per day if more than 6 nursing technicians are hired. The results for 2 additional surgeries show a decrease in the number of surgeries performed, which may result from increased congestion and bottlenecks due to additional workload. Another important result is that the percentage of performed surgeries (versus scheduled surgeries) rapidly decreases if the number of nursing technicians is not increased accordingly to accommodate the additional demand.

These results demonstrate the importance of nursing technicians in the event that there is an increase in demand for elective surgeries, and the need for an increase in current staff levels to maintain the current level of surgeries performed.

@&#SUMMARY@&#

The simulation model was limited by focusing on the sharing of Surgical Centre resources for all elective specialties. Nevertheless, it provided qualitative recommendations for feasible improvements using the cognitive map concepts. This study focused on providing recommendations for the short and medium term, based on specific observations using the same organisational/operational structure. Thus, profound changes in the administration of the Surgical Centre, which could improve performance, could not be evaluated.

As quantitative elements, the results presented lead to some important conclusions that could serve as a basis for decision-making:

                           
                              •
                              The number of surgeries performed is strongly affected by aspects that are technically outside the control of the Surgical Centre; these patient-related problems and key structural problems are obstacles to increasing performance.

An isolated increase in the number of nursing technicians, without making any other changes, provides a minimal gain to the system.

Although elimination of the main causes of surgical cancellations was well absorbed by the current system, the greatest increase in surgeries was obtained by eliminating these causes, and also adding more nursing technicians.

An increase in the number of scheduled surgeries rapidly lowers the performance of the system to levels beneath their current levels if a simultaneous increase in nursing technicians is not considered.

Issues involving the demolition of a deactivated part of the hospital necessitated a forced closure of the hospital for a long period and thus postponed the implementation. Because the model depends on strategic objectives, changes in priorities due to emergencies, or even changes in management priorities, affect the implementation.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

In this paper, we presented a model with quantitative and qualitative elements that is appropriate for situations where there is limited time, financial resources, and institutional cooperation. The proposed model was tested in a real case study using cognitive maps, which allowed for a commitment to the problem presented, the incorporation of a specialist view in performing simulation experiments, and the signalling of actions that could directly or indirectly, contribute toward the resolution of the problems analysed.

More than simply structuring the problem, cognitive maps cultivated trust among the interviewees and researchers. Trust was needed to collect accurate information for building the simulation model. The linkage of the maps to the simulation experiments assured interviewees that their views would be used to guide the simulation experiments. Indeed, the simulation model was capable of simulating feasible experiments because of those practical suggestions. This way, we had not only a rough estimate of the extent to which the number of surgeries could be increased, but also practical suggestions on how do so. Furthermore, mapping techniques can help identify causal structures that are difficult to quantify.

If we had used an ad hoc procedure for interviewing, it is likely that we would not have received such as rich and complex view of this problem before the simulations. Therefore, we would not be able to explore the topic as deeply or respect the cultural feasibility.

Comparing our method with the examples of SSM in DES, it is important to mention two significant differences. The first reflects the constrained nature of our method, in that only a fraction of the system is included and we do not simultaneously deal with the stakeholders or strive for a negotiated solution. Second, our method constructed the maps individually for each participant, which was intentional because this method was adapted for practical use when there is limited time and money.

Despite these remarkable differences in methods, we found some interesting similarities, as well. First, there is the importance of trust, as stated by Kotiadis (2007), as a means of helping clients understand the simulation without simplifying the DES model. Second, both methods ensure that the resultant model is perceived to be of high quality.Robinson et al. (2013) argued that greater stakeholder involvement resulted in a better model, and the use of PSM tools made stakeholders’ participation viable even without them having prior knowledge of the simulation (Kotiadis et al., 2014).

Despite not having a detailed framework for the interface between researcher and stakeholder, which is an aspect of interest mentioned in Howick and Ackermann (2011), a lesson learned in this study concerns the position of the researcher in relation to the object of study and the interviewees. We had the impression that the respondents were initially somewhat reluctant to note flaws and errors in the system; thus, focusing on positive aspects seemed a better approach, because, as Matlin (2003) stated, the cognitive process handles positive information better. Our respectful attitude toward the respondents and our awareness that the participants have greater knowledge about the problems being studied facilitated the process.

Transparency was another similarity between our study and that of Kotiadis (2007). The interviewees were able to identify their suggestions in the simulation because the cognitive maps showed how their concepts would be related to the experiments. This point is closely related to both the validity of the method and its acceptance. A method where system members participate in the study and guide the model development, thereby facilitating their acceptance of the results of the experiments, helps reduce the barriers mentioned in Kopach-Konrad et al. (2007). It is possible this occurs because the respondents have identified a way to express their views on how the system could work better without organisational constraints and without further exposure. Thus, it also provides an effective communication tool, a point made by Lagergren (1998). From a cultural perspective, we observed that the respondents showed better acceptance of the OR process with the knowledge that their perceptions guided the study and an analyst would not merely impose on them how the system ‘should work’. In addition, confidentiality was found to be desirable, since respondents feared being exposed because of the limited institutional cooperation.

It was noteworthy how the interviewees were surprised when they saw their own maps despite being very aware of the Surgical Centre's problems. The cognitive maps clarify relational aspects, which were not easily understood, thereby demonstrating their reflexive features, as described by Eden (1989). This was an unexpected benefit, providing the interviewees with a deeper understanding of their own perceptions of the problem, giving implicit feedback, and helping the participants see a broader picture, as mentioned by Hämäläinen et al. (2013). Given the variable schedules and respondents’ time constraints, the interview time was considered a precious resource that could not be wasted. As such, the cognitive maps provided an accurate view of the thoughts and perceptions of the respondents and were better able to facilitate both coding and validation compared with the linear structure of language.

The results were presented to the managers’ board with a positive response. Since the study did not incur any costs, there were no cost concerns regarding the use of mixed methodologies. On the other hand, the desire for model transferability and ease of use, an aspect of interest in Howick and Ackermann (2011), was evident, specifically regarding the simulation model.

Just as Kotiadis (2007) found, we noted that it was difficult to explore all the derived concepts in the simulation. On the other hand, the isolated use of DES, which tends to be focused on performing experiments, would not allow for a model as broad in scope as the current one, and would not provide the potential improvements that the cognitive maps were able to provide.

The solutions proposed herein emerged from the elicitation of knowledge on actions to improve the Surgical Centre performance. These actions were not quantitatively examined in this paper, but likely afford important benefits for hospital management. We also recognise that the structure of the maps allowed for constructive actions and solutions and enabled the model to inform practical recommendations.

In summary, the use of cognitive maps facilitated a dialogue between hospital staff and analysts, lowering barriers to participate in the research. Moreover, the use of cognitive maps improved the quality of the model by boosting its accreditation and acceptance (Robinson, 2002).

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The contribution of this paper is a proposal of a multi-methodological approach with a committed focus on problem solving; this approach incorporates specialists' views in simulation experiments and highlights actions that can lead to the resolution (or improvement) of real-world problems.

Future studies may develop a framework for client participation during the computational codification, which would bring the simulation phase closer to the facilitation modelling concept.

Regarding the proposed approach, it would be interesting to compare the outcomes produced by the traditional cognitive mapping and the approach used herein, where only positive/affirmative suggestions were used. Such a comparison could be particularly helpful for evaluating the hospital environment, as stakeholders are also concerned about ‘self-preservation’, and could validate impressions we discussed in the previous section. An additional exercise could include cognitive maps based on the patients’ perspective, to explore different concepts/negative opposites and garner suggestions for improvement.

Another field of interest would be proposing new alternatives of multi-methodological approaches applied in similarly constrained contexts, with a particular focus on situations with limited organizational involvement. Such alternatives would likely broaden OR use.

Finally, despite there not being a measurable success with the implementation of the findings of this case study, one result was a greater interest of the hospital regarding OR methods, which opens the door for future studies with full institutional cooperation and less distrust.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The authors thank all those who reviewed the article for their valuable feedback and suggestions. The second and third authors gratefully acknowledge the grants from CNPq process 304324/2013-2 and FAPERJ/CNE, which supported the present research.

Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.ejor.2015.04.007.


                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

