@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Public policy structuring incorporating reciprocal expectation analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           This paper proposes a method of structuring public policy by incorporating reciprocal expectation analysis.


                        
                        
                           
                           The proposed method visualizes the roles and perceptions of stakeholders in the public policy process.


                        
                        
                           
                           It derives three types of relationship among stakeholders from the feasibility analysis.


                        
                        
                           
                           It proposes three tests of feasibility to reach the agreement: information-sharing, bargaining, and reframing tests.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Problem structuring

Cognitive map

Public policy

Reciprocal expectation

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This paper proposes a method of structuring public policy by incorporating reciprocal expectation analysis. The proposed method is characterized by three components: identification of the problem structure perceived by stakeholders using cognitive maps, policy structuring analysis with a value–driver matrix and a reciprocal expectation matrix, and feasibility analysis of agreements among the stakeholders. The three types of relationship among stakeholders are derived from the feasibility analysis, which are “Dosho-imu”, “Isho-imu”, and “Domu”. Three tests of feasibility to reach the agreement are then proposed: “information-sharing test”, “bargaining test”, and “reframing test”. A case study is presented, applying the method to strategic transportation planning in the Kanto region of Japan. Finally, the potential functions of the proposed method in practice are discussed.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Generally, public policy is created to solve explicit or implicit social problems. In most cases, the public policy maker, such as the government or public agency, proposes and implements the public policies addressing social problems. The social problems tackled often affect a large number of people and arise from within a complicated structure with many interrelated factors. However, the perception of social problems may differ across participants. Therefore, in order to achieve successful outcomes, public policy makers need to understand these different perceptions and analyze the problem structure from a multidisciplinary viewpoint. This is particularly critical when more participants are involved in the social system of interest, because it becomes more challenging for public policy makers to fully comprehend the range of viewpoints. Indeed, inaccurate speculation and the misunderstanding of participants’ perceptions of social problems may lead to a deadlock in reaching agreements. A well-designed and sophisticated method for understanding a participant’s problem perception and its feedback to the stakeholders may contribute significantly to better planning and management of the social system.

In public policy studies, knowledge “in” public policy process is typically differentiated from knowledge “of” public policy process (Lasswell, 1971). Knowledge “in” public policy process is aimed at solving public policy problems, whereas knowledge “of” public policy process is aimed at analyzing public policy process. In the knowledge “in” public policy process, problem structuring is widely recognized as one of the preconditions of problem solving, particularly when different stakeholders have competing problem definitions (Bardach, 1981; Dunn, 2004). The appropriate method should be selected in public policy process, depending on the policy context (Dryzek, 1983; Linder & Peters, 1985; Bonrow & Dryzek, 1987).

In recent decades, a range of participatory and interactive methods called problem structuring methods (PSMs) have been developed, especially in Europe, as complements to traditional quantitative OR methods, rather than their alternatives (Ackermann, 2012; Mingers, 2011; Paucar-Caceres, 2011), in order to support group decisions in scenarios characterized by “practical problems” (Ravetz, 1971), “wicked problems” (Rittel & Webber, 1973), “messes” (Ackoff, 1979), and “swamp conditions” (Schon, 1987). These are methods for decision making in the presence of multiple actors, multiple perspectives, incommensurable and/or conflicting interests, important intangibles, and key uncertainties (Mingers & Rosenhead, 2004). Additionally, mixing of PSMs is an area of increasing interest (Howick & Ackermann, 2011). This paper adds a new method to the body of research related to PSMs in the context of public policy. As with conventional PSMs, the present paper highlights the agenda-setting stage, including the problem definitions in the public policy process. This stage represents a critical process in which policy makers search for potential policy options based on the broad range of information collected from the multiple actors under conditions of major uncertainty. The present paper also highlights the decision-making stage for problem solving, using a feasibility analysis of agreements.

This case-oriented paper includes the proposal of a new method, which is characterized by three components: identification of the problem structure perceived by stakeholders, policy structuring analysis, and feasibility analysis of agreements among stakeholders. First, the cognitive map approach is used to identify the problem structure. In particular, semi-structured interviews are utilized to collect information from the stakeholders. Second, a value–driver matrix and a reciprocal expectation matrix are developed in the policy structuring analysis. Finally, these matrices are used to assess the feasibility of agreements among the stakeholders. The paper categorizes the types of relationships among the stakeholders into three types. It should be noted that the evaluation of impacts of the policy option is out of our scope. A number of methods have been developed to evaluate the impacts of options from the viewpoints of plural criteria, including analytic hierarchy process (Saaty, 1980).

The paper is organized as follows: the motivation and goals of the paper are presented in Section 1. Section 2 presents the literature review. Section 3 describes the proposed method. Section 4 details an empirical case study with the proposed method and a discussion of the case study. Finally, Section 5 discusses the implications of these results for public policy.

@&#LITERATURE REVIEW@&#

Among the PSMs developed during the last decade, the most widely adopted approaches are soft systems methodology (SSM; Checkland, 2001), strategic choice approach (SCA; Friend, 2001), and causal/cognitive map-based methods (Eden, 2004). These cognitive map approaches include strategic options development and analysis (SODA) and its journey-making variant (Eden & Ackermann, 2001). In any of these methods, models are populated with data specific to the problem situation, are seen as transitional objects, and are designed to facilitate negotiation and agreement rather than to find optimal solutions (Eden & Ackermann, 2006). These methods have been successfully applied to various cases (Mingers & Rosenhead, 2004) in both the private and public sectors (Brown, Cooper, & Pidd, 2006; Eden & Ackermann, 2004; Georgiu, 2009; Sachdeva, Williams, & Quigley, 2007; Ulengin, Kabak, Onsel, Ulengin, & Aktas, 2010). Drama theory is another PSM, which proposes a model that aims to describe a situation where stakeholders try to bring about different outcomes and each side must try to take into account the others’ possible actions (Bennet, Bryant, & Howard, 2001).

The method proposed in the present paper also aims to facilitate negotiation and agreement. It is similar to the above methods in the following respects: first, it involves stakeholders who have some responsibility for decision making in the situation; second, the problem structure is generated by these stakeholders; and third, it assumes that increased and more equal participation from the stakeholders is likely helpful in increasing the overall productivity of group processes (Eden & Ackermann, 2006). In addition to the above features, our approach proposes a method for exploring potential policy options by analyzing the social values and the drivers of social change. Furthermore, this method highlights the three types of relationship among the stakeholders that potentially lead to agreements, which are derived from their actions, their reciprocal expectations, and the goals associated with the actions. It is expected that this method will facilitate agreements more strategically, particularly in the context of the public policy making process, where the stakeholders typically act more independently than they do in the context of in-organizational decision-making processes.

@&#METHODOLOGY@&#

The proposed method targets the following three goals: to comprehend the problem structure by understanding the stakeholders’ perceptions of the problems; to discover the potential policy options by analyzing the social values and the drivers of social change, and by identifying the actions that one stakeholder expects another to perform, using the reciprocal expectation matrix; and to assess the feasibility of the policy options by analyzing the value–driver matrix and the reciprocal expectations among the stakeholders. The proposed method highlights the diverse nature of the participants’ perceptions of the problems (see Fig. 1
                         for an overview).

First, the potential stakeholders are selected in relation to the problem. A “stakeholder” is defined as a participant who can influence or be influenced by the corresponding problem. For identifying stakeholders to be interviewed, various qualitative approaches have been proposed, such as stakeholder-led stakeholder categorization, actor-linkage matrices, social network analysis, and snowball sampling (Reed et al., 2009). Our case study applies the snowball sampling developed by Susskind, McKearnen, and Thomas-Lamar (1999). This is mainly because the interviews are expected to be more acceptable with this method, particularly in the context of Japan. Note that other approaches of stakeholder selections could be applied, according to the context of case study. In the snowball sampling, after selecting potential stakeholders as a “first circle” of stakeholders, each stakeholder is interviewed to suggest others who may be relevant to the problem. If they are not included on the list of the first circle of stakeholders, these subsequent stakeholders can be thought of as a “second circle” of stakeholders to be interviewed. This process ensures that all possible interests are included. The manner in which the first circle of stakeholders is selected depends on data availability. One common method for making a list of potential stakeholders is to convene a discussion with experts (e.g., local university professors) regarding a given social problem; such experts facilitate the process of identifying and approaching interviewees.

Second, potential stakeholders are sequentially interviewed in order to understand and document their perceptions of the problem structure. Hypothetical cognitive maps, prepared by collating their profiles via literature surveys or web searches, are used during the interviews. The interview itself consists of both structured and open questions. The structured questions are as follows: (1) What is (are) your or your organization’s goal(s)? (2) What is (are) the major constraint(s) limiting your activities to reach the goal(s)? and (3) How do you expect other stakeholder(s) to perform?

Third, the cognitive maps are then revised based on the interview results. The incorrect or less important factors or actions are deleted from the hypothetical map, and additional factors or actions are inserted if necessary. The resulting maps reveal the following two key stakeholder perceptions: causal flows in relation to the problems and impact flows in relation to the actions. With this information, the differences in problem perceptions among the stakeholders can then be analyzed, including a comparison of the viewpoints of the stakeholders’ missions, time, and spatial dimensions.

Fourth, the stakeholders’ cognitive maps are then structured into an integrated matrix, with exogenous drivers and social values abstracted from the cognitive maps. This structuring process is comprehensive in that all the drivers and social values identified by various stakeholders are brought together. A policy issue is defined as a product of a value and a driver, reflecting our hypothesis that a policy option contributes to a particular value under a particular exogenous factor (driver). Thus, potential policy options in a given policy issue are described in the cell of the matrix. In order to find out the additional exogenous drivers and potential policy options, multidisciplinary experts are brought together in a joint meeting. The stakeholders’ potential interactions are also analyzed by means of a “reciprocal expectation matrix”. The stakeholders’ expectations of the other stakeholders are also abstracted from the cognitive maps. The multidisciplinary experts also contribute to the identification of additional possible expectations.

Fifth, the feasibility of the agreements among stakeholders is analyzed with the driver–value matrix and the reciprocal expectation matrix. The three types of relationships among stakeholders that will potentially lead to agreements are identified. The feasibility of agreements is then tested. Finally, the analysis results are fed back to the stakeholders, and the implications of findings are discussed. This may include a feedback workshop.

In the present context, the term “cognitive map” means a graphical representation of an influence network between notions; it provides a communication medium for humans analyzing a complex system (Eden & Ackermann, 2004). The items in the map are grouped into (A) goal factors, (B) input factors, and (C) other factors. First, (A) goal factors refer to the values that are preferable to the stakeholders. They are classified into individual values and social values. Individual values are defined as the personal goals that lead to desirable results for the individual whereas social values are defined as potential policy goals believed to lead to the desirable results for an entire society by some members of that society. Individual values are distinguished from social values because this study is more concerned with public policy related to social goals rather than organizational policy related to individual goals. Second, (B) input factors consist of two types of factor: one is the stakeholders’ action that contributes to (A) goal factors, and the other is the exogenous factor that contributes to antecedents of these actions. The stakeholder’s action is further classified into two types of action: actions performed by the stakeholders for themselves and actions that stakeholders expect other stakeholders to perform. The distinction of these actions from exogenous factors is essential because the actions are the major sources for the analysis of policy options and the feasibility of agreements among stakeholders. Third, (C) the other factors are called intermediate factors, which are typically used as items connecting the actions with the values. In summary, the map contains the following six types of item: (1) individual values; (2) social values; (3) actions performed by the stakeholders for themselves; (4) actions that stakeholders expect other stakeholders to perform; (5) exogenous factors; and (6) intermediate factors. It is assumed that the stakeholders attempt to accomplish their (1) individual values and/or (2) social values by means of their (3) own actions and/or (4) other stakeholders’ actions. It is also assumed that the stakeholders take actions in response to (5) exogenous factors versus (1) individual values and/or (2) social values. The arc connecting the items denotes the two types of flow: the causal flow, which begins from a causal factor and terminates at its result factor, and the impact flow, which begins from an action and terminates at its outcome. The cognitive maps in a two-stakeholder case are illustrated in Fig. 2
                        .

As mentioned earlier, the cognitive maps are developed by revising the hypothetical cognitive maps through the interviews. This process is adopted because the hypothetical cognitive maps help the interviewees to disclose their honest opinions, particularly in the context of Japan, where individuals hesitate generally to express their frank ideas to others.

Policy structuring analysis aims to determine the potential policy options by interpreting and integrating the cognitive maps of the stakeholders. Our method uses a simplified approach to the interpretation and integration of the cognitive maps, namely, the value–driver matrix approach, although a more sophisticated method of analyzing the cognitive maps could have been used, such as the strategic map proposed in SODA (Eden and Ackermann (2001)), givens–means–ends analysis (Bougon, Weick, & Binkhorst, 1977), loop analysis (Bougon, Baird, Komocar, & Ross, 1990), or identification of clusters, identification of potential options, search for central concepts, complexity reduction, and shape analysis (Eden, 2004). The matrix approach is used because it enables us to identify the distribution of the observed actions concerning the stakeholders in a policy domain and to generate potential actions, or policy options, in addition to those already taken and/or identified by the stakeholders.

First, the value–driver matrix is created for policy structuring analysis. The matrix consists of multiple columns and rows. The columns include the values, representing social values, whereas the rows include the drivers, representing exogenous factors. These values are extracted from the cognitive maps. A cell in the matrix, which is generated from a given value and a given driver, contains the potential policy options to be selected. The derivation of the value–driver matrix from the cognitive maps is illustrated in Fig. 3
                        .

There are two steps for creating the value–driver matrix. The first step is to develop the original matrix directly from the cognitive maps. The “values” are found from the stakeholders’ social values, and the “drivers” are selected from the exogenous factors, which represent the background factors of the problems in the cognitive maps. The policy options are then entered into the cells of the matrix using those values and drivers from the cognitive maps. Note that the same policy option may be entered in multiple cells. This means that a policy option is not always derived from a single value and a single driver. In the second step, we input additional ideas that are often neglected by the stakeholders despite playing an important role in the system pertaining to a given policy. In this revision process, additional drivers are identified in the above list of drivers through the expert “brain-storming” discussion. New policy issues or policy options are then added to the original matrix based on this discussion. Incorporating the participation of experts with multidisciplinary backgrounds is the preferred method for generating such ideas.

Next, we construct a reciprocal expectation matrix presenting the actions that a stakeholder expects another to perform. It is assumed that a stakeholder is satisfied with the consequences of the other’s possible action if the consequence of that action conforms with his/her individual and/or social values. The first column of the matrix represents the list of stakeholders (subjects) who expect other stakeholders (objects) shown in the first row to perform some actions, whereas the first row represents the list of the objects who are expected to perform some actions by the subjects. The cell in the matrix contains the actions that a subject expects an object to perform. These are mainly extracted from the cognitive maps, although other possible expectations are added from the discussion of the multidisciplinary experts based on the cognitive maps of stakeholders. The derivation of the reciprocal expectation matrix from the cognitive maps is illustrated in Fig. 4
                        .

The relationships between stakeholders that potentially lead to agreements are identified using the value–driver matrix and the reciprocal expectation matrix. It is assumed that each stakeholder may have multiple values.

The identification process is classified into two types. The first type of identification process is aimed at obtaining a list of the actions contributing to the same values. The process is summarized as follows. Step 1: Choose a pair of stakeholders from a list of stakeholders; Step 2: select the values of one stakeholder that are the same as those of the other stakeholder using the value–driver matrix; Step 3: identify the actions contributing to the above-mentioned values for both stakeholders using the value–driver matrix; Step 4: do Steps 1–3 for all pairs of stakeholders. The identified actions through the above-mentioned process should be supported by both stakeholders because they contribute to the same values. We call the relationships between the stakeholders with those actions “Domu,” which literally means “different individuals have the same dream” in Japanese. This implies that the relationships have the potential to result in agreements between them.

The second type of identification process deals with the cases where the actions contribute to different values between stakeholders. The process is summarized as follows. Step 1: Choose a pair of stakeholders (for example, A and B) from a list of stakeholders; Step 2: select a value of stakeholder A that is different from any value of stakeholder B while selecting another value of stakeholder B that is different from any value of stakeholder A, using the value–driver matrix; Step 3: make a pair of the value of stakeholder A and the value of stakeholder B that were selected in Step 2; Step 4: identify an action and/or actions that satisfy Conditions 1 or 2 shown below for the pair of values that were made in Step 3, using the value–driver matrix and the reciprocal expectation matrix; Step 5: do Steps 3 and 4 for all pairs of values that were selected in Step 2; and Step 6: do Steps 1–5 for all pairs of stakeholders.

Conditions 1 and 2 are shown as follows:
                              
                                 
                                    Condition 1: One of the stakeholders prefers performing an action for him/herself when the expectation is that it be performed by another stakeholder.


                                    Condition 2: One of the stakeholders expects a second stakeholder to perform an action while the second expects the first to perform another action.

A series of above-mentioned steps outputs a list of the actions satisfying Condition 1 and a list of the sets of actions satisfying Condition 2. We call the relationship between the stakeholders with the former actions “Dosho-imu”, while we call the relationship between the stakeholders with the latter actions “Isho-imu”. “Dosho-imu” literally means “different individuals sleep in the same bed while having different dreams”. This implies that even if the stakeholders have difficulty in agreeing on their goals, they may agree on the actions as long as it conforms to their goals simultaneously. “Isho-imu” literally means “different individuals sleep in different beds while having different dreams”. Even if the stakeholders have difficulty in agreeing on their goals, they may reach an agreement through a so-called bargaining process when both stakeholders accept their expected payoffs.

Theoretically, there may be other conditions than Conditions 1 and 2 for describing the relationships between a pair of stakeholders. The above two conditions were highlighted because they have more practical implications for identifying the relationships between stakeholders that potentially lead to agreements. It should also be noted that Conditions 1 and 2 are not mutually exclusive, that is, the two conditions may be satisfied simultaneously between the two stakeholders.

This paper proposes three tests of the feasibility for reaching agreements among stakeholders. The first is to test the feasibility of sharing information on the value–driver matrix and the reciprocal expectation matrix among the stakeholders. Sharing information enables stakeholders to view their current conditions more accurately and encourage them to act toward the agreement under the relationships “Dosho-imu” and “Domu”. However, it may not be feasible when the information on the value–driver matrix and the reciprocal expectation matrix is not well trusted by stakeholders so that the information cannot be fed back to stakeholders.

The second is to test the feasibility of “bargaining” under the relationship of “Isho-imu”, where bargaining could be implemented when the both stakeholders accept their payoffs simultaneously. The stakeholders may accept their payoffs when the payoff of one stakeholder is comparable with that of other stakeholder. The agreement is reached if they come into equilibrium at the end of the bargaining process.

The third is to test the feasibility of a so-called “reframing”, which is defined as a change from any type of relationship into other types that may lead to the agreement, typically “Domu”. This is feasible when a long-term process of learning is acceptable in which the stakeholders change their values or come to accept new values through communications, education, and training.

The Kanto region is one of the nine regions of Japan and includes the following seven prefectures: Tokyo, Kanagawa, Saitama, Chiba, Tochigi, Gunma, and Ibaragi. The region covers about 10% of the total area of Japan and comprises over 30% of the total population. The region includes several megacities, such as Tokyo, Yokoyama, Kawasaki, Saitama, and Chiba, as well as the rural areas on the fringes of these cities. The regional population—over 30million (as of 2012)—has gradually increased as a result of domestic immigrants. The National Institute of Population (2006) has predicted that the regional population will continue to increase, although the total population of Japan has been decreasing since 2000. Detailed observations of the Tokyo metropolitan area reveal that the urban population has increased, whereas the rural population has decreased.

No statutory planning has existed for the regional multimodal transportation system covering both road transportation and public transportation in Japan. The strategic regional transportation plan considered in this case study was thus regarded as one of the key issues in the discussion of the multimodal regional transportation system in the Kanto region. This case study was implemented on behalf of the public transport authority of the Kanto region under the Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, and Transport.

First, the multidisciplinary brain-storming discussions by the authors identified over forty potential stakeholders in the Kanto regional transportation system. This list of potential stakeholders is pared down to eight stakeholders using our research scope and the relative importance of regional transportation policy. Four stakeholders were then added to the list through the discussions with transportation-related experts and interviews with stakeholders. Although more interviews with potential stakeholders are ideal to cover all potential problems, time constraints and financial resources prevented us from doing so. The final 12 stakeholders were the following: the highway authority of the central government, the national police agency, a local police agency, three prefectural governments, three private rail operators (two rail operators and one subway operator), a local bus operator, an automobile producer, and a public highway corporation.

After selecting the stakeholders, we next formulated the hypothetical cognitive maps of the stakeholders with regard to the regional transportation problems in the Kanto region. The stakeholders’ Internet web pages were browsed to create the hypothetical maps. These maps were then sent to the interviewees before the interviews.

The interviews began in April 2004 and were completed in March 2005. On average, each interview lasted approximately 2hours. After asking the structured questions, the interviewers requested that the interviewees respond freely to the hypothetical maps. In most cases, two or three individuals per stakeholder were interviewed. Most of those interviewed were chief executives or officials responsible for managing their organizations. All interviews were conducted by the present authors. Finally, the stakeholders’ cognitive maps were revised on the basis of the interview results. One of the revised cognitive maps is shown in Fig. 5
                        .

The stakeholders’ perceptions were compared in terms of the following five features: their mission(s); major stakeholders who interact with them; change of environmental conditions with respect to technological, social, and institutional aspects; spatial domain of interest; and time domain of interest. The stakeholders’ mission(s) is used to identify the social value in the policy structuring analysis whereas major stakeholders who interact with them are used to examine the reciprocal expectation matrix. The changes of environmental conditions are used as the drivers in the policy structuring analysis. Finally, the spatial and time domains are used in the feasibility analysis of agreements among stakeholders. Table 1
                         summarizes the comparisons.

An analysis of these comparisons reveals that the stakeholders, even those in the same category, have different perceptions on the same issue. For example, although all the rail operators understand the importance of networking with other rail operators, their attitudes toward railway networking vary with their missions. It is also important to note that the different stakeholders have different horizons of perspective. With regard to the spatial domain, the Automobile producer acts at a global level rather than in a domestic/regional market while Rail operator 1, Rail operator 2, and the Local bus operator act according to their operating geographical areas. With regard to the time domain, some of the private companies, such as the Automobile producer and Local bus operator, have longer time horizons, whereas governmental units tend to have shorter ones.

The value–driver matrix was made using the cognitive maps shown in Table 2
                           .

The following ten values were abstracted from the interview results: (1) “Mobility”, including the transportation service for social inclusion and participation; (2) “Level of service”, such as travel speed, travel cost, and traffic congestion; (3) “Environment”, such as the noise, vibration, local air quality, and global warming; (4) “Amenity”, including the comfort of the residence and the available transportation services; (5) “Safety/Security”, such as fatalities and injuries in traffic accidents, the risk of terrorist attacks, and the risk of natural disasters; (6) “Economic development”, mainly through infrastructure investment; (7) “Market fairness”, such as fair opportunity for firms participating in the market; (8) “Spatial balance”, such as the balance between rural areas and urban areas; (9) “Coordination”, such as the integrated service provision among stakeholders, including multimodal transportation service; and (10) “Enlightenment”, including education and training.

The following five potential drivers were also abstracted from the interview results: (a) “Aging population”, (b) “Globalization”, (c) “Change in perceptions of social values”, (d) “Economic downturn”, and (e) “Technological innovation”. In the process of making the value-driver matrix, the experts, along with the present authors, introduced a new driver of “(f) Women’s advances in society”, in addition to those highlighted by the interviewees through extensive discussions.

The actions in the cognitive maps were allocated to the cells of the value–driver matrix. The potential actions or policy options are also generated from the product of the new driver with the values. The introduction of (f) “Women’s advances in society”, for example, generated a new policy issue when combined with (4) “Level of service”, such as “Exploration of new transportation service under the work-sharing system” and “Child-care service at rail stations”.

Finally, the reciprocal expectation matrix was developed on the basis of the interview results. The multidisciplinary experts and the present authors were involved in the identification of possible expectations, using the stakeholders’ cognitive maps. For example, although the local police agencies currently do not expect local governments to actively intervene in their activities, they may benefit by requesting that local governments implement a program supporting the traffic safety of senior drivers. Table 3
                            shows the structure of reciprocal expectations among stakeholders, and Table 4
                            lists the components of the reciprocal expectations shown in Table 3.

Using the value–driver matrix and the reciprocal expectation matrix, we analyzed the feasibility of the agreements among stakeholders.

First, we identified the potential cases that could lead to “Domu”. One of them was observed in the pairing of the Automobile producer and Prefectural government 2. Both of them share a value of improving the “Environment”. One of the actions relating this value is traffic demand management. Both the Prefectural government and the Automobile producer support this action even though it may regulate car use. Since both of them pass the information-sharing test, they could reach an agreement on this action.

Second, we identified the potential cases that could lead to “Dosho-imu”. One of these was found in the pairing of the Local government and the Local police agency. The Local government has the value of improving “Mobility” for senior people, and the Local police agency has the value of improving traffic “Safety/Security” for senior people. One of the actions associated with the pairing of these two values satisfying Condition 1 is the introduction of discounting public transport services for senior people. The Local government can benefit from this initiative because it helps improve the mobility of seniors, and the Local police agency can benefit from it because it encourages senior drivers, who have a higher risk of traffic accidents, to change their travel mode from car to public transport. Note that the Local police agency has introduced a program that encourages senior drivers to give up their driving licenses. Since it is expected that the stakeholders pass the information-sharing test, they could reach an agreement on this initiative.

Third, the cases that could lead to “bargaining” under “Isho-imu” were identified. Such a case was generated by the pairing of the Automobile producer and the National police agency. The Automobile producer has the value of improving the “Environment”, and the National police agency has the value of improving traffic “Safety/Security”. One of the pairs of actions associated with the pairing of these two values satisfying Condition 2 is that the Automobile producer expects the National police agency to provide traffic data so that he can design an effective means of reducing CO2 emissions, and that the National police agency expects the Automobile producer to promote the installation of automatic stopping devices and in-vehicle accident recorders to help reduce the number of traffic accidents. It is not clear whether they pass the “bargaining test” because it is difficult to estimate their payoffs exactly. If their payoffs are well-balanced, the stakeholders could reach an agreement through “bargaining”.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The driver–value matrix and reciprocal expectation matrix were sent back to the stakeholders in March 2005. Stakeholders, especially Prefectural government officials, were interested in the matrix and the cognitive maps of stakeholders, saying that these were exactly the tools needed in their everday business. A concrete idea for agreement was also developed and picked up by participants in the discussion. The results of this feedback suggest that our methods can yield concrete benefits in a practical context. Overall, the proposed method has three potential practical functions, each important in public policy.

First, the method makes the problem structure identified by the stakeholders visible through the cognitive maps. The cognitive maps support the stakeholders by helping them visualize the problems more clearly. They also expand the scope of the problems identified by the stakeholders and thus help them discover approaches to policy issues that were previously overlooked.

Second, the proposed method helps in the search of potential win–win (i.e., Pareto-improvement) options, although it does not guarantee their discovery. Technically, it is impossible to cover all feasible actions in a limited time, given the cost and labor-force constraints. Thus, while the proposed method does not guarantee a comprehensive solution, it provides additional opportunities to reconsider the problems/solutions from a different perspective. In addition, even when agreements that result in Pareto-efficient solutions are theoretically possible, there can be a negotiation dilemma. One such example is the “bargaining” process in the Prisoners’ Dilemma. Even if the stakeholders understand the payoffs or the perception of the problems by all stakeholders in the system, they may not choose the action that leads to Pareto efficiency (e.g., when they do not trust others).

Third, the literature on the framing of public policy has so far highlighted how actors react differently to a single issue when it is presented through different frames (Goffman, 1974; Tversky & Kahneman, 1986). Schön and Rein (1994) paid particular attention to the notion of framing, suggesting that policy processes should be viewed in terms of framing, frame conflict, and reframing in intractable policy areas. They further asserted that frame conflicts can be reconciled through reflection and reframing, although those processes do not guarantee a resolution. This paper suggests other approaches to the resolution under the frame conflict, such as identification of “Dosho-imu” and “bargaining”, than “reframing”. This enables the policy makers to examine a wider range of actions that have potential feasibility for agreement among stakeholders.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

The contribution of this paper to public policy studies is threefold: the visualization of the roles and perceptions of stakeholders in the public policy process; the derivation of the three types of relationship between stakeholders: “Dosho-imu”, “Isho-imu”, and “Domu”; and the proposal of three tests of feasibility for reaching agreements among stakeholders: “information-sharing test”, “bargaining test”, and “reframing test”.

Further research issues in this area are summarized as follows. First, this paper does not attempt to demonstrate the superiority of our method to other approaches. The application of multiple methods to the same case is required to compare their performance. Second, in the feasibility analysis of agreements among stakeholders, it is implicitly assumed that the expectations shown by the stakeholder are not biased. It is possible that stakeholders present their strategic opinions for achieving better payoffs by guiding the discussions/negotiations into a specific direction, particularly when they face tough conditions. Thus, our analysis may be more suitable for strategic planning or policy-making processes in which less serious conflicts are expected. Third, the proposed method does not deal with how to solve problems, although it helps in the comprehension of the problem structure, the generation of policy options, and the assessment of feasibility of the policy options. For instance, the proposed method may identify the policy that makes one stakeholder better off but makes others worse off. This requires the decision maker to make trade-off decisions and open these up for further consideration. In order to examine such issues, it is necessary to set a priority rule that weights the social values involved and impacts a decision. Methods combining the comprehensive impact evaluation of the policy options with the feasibility analysis shown in our method may be required to solve problems. Fourth, although our method proposes three tests of feasibility for reaching an agreement among stakeholders, it does not outline the exact mechanism for reaching agreements. Thus, further studies should explore the mechanism for reaching agreements from the three types of relationship using the three proposed tests. Game theory and drama theory may contribute to this endeavor. Fifth, although citizens should be involved in the public policy making process, they are not included as a stakeholder in our case study. Although we actually tried to collect the opinions of some citizens in a specific region, their answers may not necessarily be representative of all individuals in the Kanto region. This does not mean, however, that the citizens’ opinions have been entirely neglected in our analysis, as they have been indirectly reflected in the responses of some stakeholders who were interviewed, including the local governments and transportation operators.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This research was funded by the Alliance for Global Sustainability project, organized by the University of Tokyo; the Program for Promoting Methodological Innovation in Humanities and Social Sciences by Cross-Disciplinary Fusing, organized by the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science; and the Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

