@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Quantitative models for sustainable supply chain management: Developments and directions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Formal models for sustainable supply chain management (SSCM) are reviewed.


                        
                        
                           
                           Models are categorized by dimensions of SCM, sustainability, and research foci.


                        
                        
                           
                           Comparisons between model-based and empirical SSCM research are made.


                        
                        
                           
                           Future research directions for model-based SSCM research presented.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Literature review

OR in environment and climate change

OR in societal problem analysis

OR in sustainability

Supply chain management

Sustainability

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Sustainability, the consideration of environmental factors and social aspects, in supply chain management (SCM) has become a highly relevant topic for researchers and practitioners. The application of operations research methods and related models, i.e. formal modeling, for closed-loop SCM and reverse logistics has been effectively reviewed in previously published research. This situation is in contrast to the understanding and review of mathematical models that focus on environmental or social factors in forward supply chains (SC), which has seen less investigation. To evaluate developments and directions of this research area, this paper provides a content analysis of 134 carefully identified papers on quantitative, formal models that address sustainability aspects in the forward SC. It was found that a preponderance of the publications and models appeared in a limited set of six journals, and most were analytically based with a focus on multiple criteria decision making. The tools most often used comprise the analytical hierarchy process or its close relative, the analytical network process, as well as life cycle analysis. Conclusions are drawn showing that numerous possibilities and insights can be gained from expanding the types of tools and factors considered in formal modeling efforts.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The integration of environmental and social aspects with economic considerations, known as the triple-bottom-line (TBL) dimensions of organizational sustainability (Elkington, 1998, 2004), has continuously gained relevance for managerial decision making in general and for supply chain management (SCM) (Carter & Rogers, 2008) and operations management (Drake & Spinler, 2013; Kleindorfer, Singhal, & van Wassenhove, 2005) in particular.

Organizations have rethought and redefined the concept of operations management using the supply chain (SC) perspective through the incorporation of upstream (input) and downstream partners (output) into the boundary of investigation and management (Bettley & Burnley, 2008). Traditionally, SCM has been defined as the management of physical, logical, and financial flows in networks of intra- and inter-organizational relationships jointly adding value and achieving customer satisfaction (Mentzer et al., 2001; Stock & Boyer, 2009). From a process-oriented or cross-functional perspective, SCM comprises planning, sourcing, production, and distribution logistics (Supply-Chain Council, 2008) but is not exclusively focused on one of these areas (Cooper, Lambert, & Pagh, 1997).

In contrast to traditional SCM, which typically focuses on economic and financial business performance, sustainable SCM (SSCM) is characterized by explicit integration of environmental or social objectives which extend the economic dimension to the TBL (Seuring & Müller, 2008a). In this context, SSCM focuses on the forward SC only (Seuring & Müller, 2008a) and is complemented by closed-loop SCM (CLSCM) (Guide & van Wassenhove, 2009; Lebreton, 2007) including reverse logistics, remanufacturing, and product recovery.

The increasing importance of this field, academically, socially, and economically, is reflected by the geometric growth of related scientific publications during the past two decades and especially so in the past decade (Min & Kim, 2012; Seuring & Müller, 2008a). In addition to a large variety of empirical research papers that utilize field research, case study, and broad-based empirical surveys, numerous publications employ formal, mathematical models for practice and theory-driven research. Models are a simplified representation or abstraction of reality, and related research differentiates between conceptual models defined as a set of concepts suitable to represent but not explain real-life objects or processes and quantitative models that are based on a set of variables and their causal relationship (Bertrand & Fransoo, 2002; Meredith, 1993).

For CLSCM, quantitative models are often applied and practical (Fleischmann et al., 1997; Srivastava, 2007; Sasikumar & Kannan, 2008a, 2008b, 2009). In contrast to this circumstance, the majority of models employed for SSCM are more conceptual. Only about one out of nine papers on SSCM utilizes formal models (Seuring & Müller, 2008a). In recent years, the quantity of formal modeling efforts has started to increase.

It is evident from literature that (reverse-oriented) CLSCM models are more popular (Ilgin & Gupta, 2010; Min & Kim, 2012), but a significant number of (forward) SSCM models do exist (Hassini, Surti, & Searcy, 2012; Min & Kim, 2012; Seuring & Müller, 2008a; and Seuring, 2012), many of which are quite recent in development. A comprehensive review of these models is not currently available and thus it is timely to take an ‘inventory’ of the research. The lack of a comprehensive understanding of modeling-based SSCM research is surprising since the non-sustainability modeling field has a well-developed traditional research focus on forward SCM. It may be that research focusing on CLSCM has caused many modeling researchers to overlook this forward SCM field in context to sustainability.

To help further catalyze research in this area, which has numerous opportunities to improve organizational, industrial, and commercial sustainability, further understanding of the common and unique modeling characteristics is needed. Some SSCM reviews currently exist, but most of these reviews are descriptive (e.g. Carter & Rogers, 2008; Fleischmann et al., 1997; Seuring & Müller, 2008a). Although somewhat descriptive, this paper provides additional insightful discussion, analyzing a number of important field advancing questions as discussed below.

Which aspects and factors are considered in existing quantitative SSCM models? What are the limits of these models and what issues remain? What feasible and fruitful opportunities for further research exist? To help understand the history and direction of SSCM modeling efforts and to answer these questions, this paper presents a content analysis (Krippendorff, 1980; Mayring, 2002, 2008) of related literature to assess recent developments and future directions of quantitative, formal modeling in the SSCM context. The rich descriptions offered and the overall lines of research identified this way, often have tremendous impact on future research. Therefore, we also discuss overarching lines of research as well as gaps and future research directions.

The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In the next section, a brief overview of related literature reviews on SSCM is given. The subsequent section describes the methodology applied in this paper and is followed by a representation of the results obtained by the content analysis. Remarks comprising the summarized findings and a related discussion, limitations, and future research perspectives conclude this paper.

To justify the need for the content analysis presented in this paper and to position its results to extant scientific research, former reviews of scientific literature on SSCM are summarized. Existing literature reviews on SSCM can be categorized into reviews published prior to 2008 and recent reviews published within the last five years. The purpose of this background on previous literature reviews is to help derive relevant information and structures for this study. The background literature also helps to identify open issues in model-based SSCM research. These recent reviews are assessed with regards to SCM perspectives, e.g. level and actor of analysis, sustainability, i.e. the dimensions of the TBL, and research designs.

The earliest related literature reviews (Gungor & Gupta, 1999; Kleindorfer et al., 2005) identify green product and process development, green operations management, remanufacturing, and CLSCM as areas to integrate planet- and people-related issues into SCM, but the reviews do not include social aspects of SSCM. Bloemhof-Ruwaard, van Beek, Hordijk, and van Wassenhove (1995) focused on operations research (OR) applications in the context of environmental management (EM) and suggest a conceptual SC-EM-framework. Daniel, Diakoulaki, and Pappis (1997) apply this framework in their survey of OR-related environmental planning and categorize related OR methods into descriptive approaches for observation and analysis and normative methods for solution identification. ReVelle (2000) provides an overview on the application of OR methods for the management of water resources, solid waste, and air quality and outlines different normative models for these areas. Sbihi and Eglese (2007) focused specifically on combinatorial optimization problems in green logistics, which comprises reverse logistics, waste management, and vehicle routing and scheduling. While these early published reviews paved the way for SSCM research, they are not able to inform on current developments and future trends of related model-based research.

Recent reviews of SSCM literature can be categorized as either general or focused on empirical research or quantitative models and metrics. Table 1
                         overviews 14 recent reviews regarding their research focus and characteristics, such as time horizon, number of reviewed papers, main journals, employment of keyword search and content analysis as well as taken perspectives on SCM and sustainability.

In contrast to reverse logistics or remanufacturing, OR methodologies and analytic approaches for forward SSCM play a subordinate role in the published research (Ilgin & Gupta, 2010; Min & Kim, 2012). As shown in Table 2
                        , approximately only one out of ten SSCM papers employs a research method which is based on quantitative models using formal OR modeling techniques.

With regards to the SCM perspective, extant research shows that sustainability is often externally motivated by government, customers, or stakeholders (Gold, Seuring, & Beske, 2010a, 2010b; Seuring & Müller, 2008a). The literature also shows that a vertical coordination and a SC-wide implementation are required (Carter & Rogers, 2008). In contrast to this focus, empirical research on SSCM mainly focuses on single firms and neglects inter-organizational aspects (Carter & Easton, 2011). This conflict leads to the question of whether model-based research takes into account the intercompany perspective and if the role and influence of legal authorities or other stakeholders is adequately reflected in quantitative SSCM models. Furthermore, Hassini et al. (2012) show that sustainability metrics are most often designed for manufacturing firms. Hence it should be assessed which SC sectors are in the focus of model-based SSCM research.

Holistic approaches of SSCM that reflect all three sustainability dimensions are relatively rare in the academic literature (Seuring & Müller, 2008a). However, empirical research shows the growing relevance of multiple sustainability dimensions (Carter & Easton, 2011). Given that SSCM can positively influence a firm’s profitability, performance, and competitive advantage (Carter & Rogers, 2008; Gold et al., 2010b; Golicic & Smith, 2013), SSCM research tends to focus primarily on environmental issues (Seuring & Müller, 2008a), while social facets are widely neglected in empirical (Gold et al., 2010a) and in analytical SSCM modeling research (Tang & Zhou, 2012). Tang and Zhou (2012) observe that environmental factors in quantitative models mainly include the consumption of natural resources and the emission of waste and pollution, while social aspects are related to only customers and producers. Assessing the literature’s usage of the three sustainability dimensions in greater detail, e.g. which metrics are suitable to represent sustainability factors in formal SSCM models and which perspectives are taken in holistic SSCM models, would identify what avenues exist to further integrate holistic TBL measures and the resulting performance impacts into SSCM formal modeling.

In contrast to SSCM research in general, which focuses on ‘win–win’ approaches to sustainability (Seuring & Müller, 2008a), formal modeling research is dominated by trade-off based modeling approaches (Seuring, 2012). An assessment of the main purposes (descriptive or normative) of SSCM models still requires investigation. Although a lack of multi-criteria decision making (MCDM) approaches for green logistics seems to exist (Dekker, Bloemhof, & Mallidis, 2012), preferred types and techniques for forward SSCM models have not been identified and analyzed. This lack of identification of prevalent modeling approaches is in contrast to Ilgin’s and Gupta’s (2010) findings for green (re-)manufacturing and product recovery, where discrete-event simulation (DES), fuzzy logic, genetic algorithms (GA), and mixed-integer linear programming (MILP) are identified as preferred modeling techniques.

The research design is important to consider in the literature review because it can help identify the current situation in the field and how it may be advanced by varying research methodology. Previous research has found that empirical SSCM studies are more prevalent than conceptual or formal modeling research designs (Seuring & Müller, 2008a). It has also been found that forward SSCM research can benefit from OR applications, ideally combined with rigorous empirical studies (Min & Kim, 2012; Seuring, 2012). But the findings in these papers have only started to identify these concerns, and further investigation can provide additional insights. For example, a sectoral focus of scientific SSCM research is of particular interest, which is not yet covered in model-based SSCM research. Empirical studies focus on transportation, textile, and consumer products sectors while the automotive, chemical, and electronics industries have fewer investigations (Carter & Easton, 2011; Gold et al., 2010a, 2010b). Again, determining whether model-based SSCM research considers similar sectoral emphasis would provide insight into what sectors are underrepresented and also shed light on why certain sectors might be overrepresented. A potential mismatch can be predicted by the fact that papers on SSCM metrics preferably deal with manufacturing sectors such as automotive or electronics industries (Hassini et al., 2012). Identifying a sectoral preference or lack thereof can provide guidance to policy makers and researchers on what sectors need further academic and policy intensive modeling research.

To assess research developments and directions for formal modeling in forward SSCM, we ask the following research questions:
                           
                              1.
                              Which SCM dimensions exist with formal models for SSCM?

Which sustainability aspects of forward SC are reflected in these models?

Which models and tools are employed in quantitative SSCM research?

What research designs exist and which future directions should be addressed?

Sustainability aspects within one or more industry sectors, e.g. CO2 emission of the manufacturing industry, or within geographical regions or macro-economies, such as rural, poor areas or developing countries, are included in our analysis. The paper’s focus is on formal, quantitative models capable of predicting the outcome of actions or theoretically evaluating various dynamic properties of complex problems (Mikkola, 2005). In the remainder of this paper, the terms “formal” and “quantitative” will be used interchangeably for models that include (descriptive and normative) OR methods but exclude statistical approaches, e.g. regression or structural equation models, to evaluate empirical data.

@&#METHODOLOGY@&#

To address the four research questions, a thorough review of papers on quantitative models for SSCM is performed. To ensure the required methodological rigor, this literature review employs the systematic process of content analysis (Krippendorff, 1980; Lage Junior & Godinho Filho, 2010) that consists of four iteratively executed steps (Mayring, 2002, 2008):
                           
                              
                                 Step 1. Material collection: The material to be collected and the unit of analysis are defined and delimited.


                                 Step 2. Descriptive analysis: Formal aspects of the material are assessed.


                                 Step 3. Category selection: Structural dimensions including the major topics of analysis and related analytic categories with detailed classifications of each structural dimension are selected to be applied to the collected material.


                                 Step 4. Material evaluation: The content of the papers is analyzed according to the structural dimensions and analytic categories to identify relevant issues and to interpret the results.

This literature review is bounded to only include: (a) scientific research from the last 15years; (b) formal models; (c) SSCM; and (d) forward SC. Hence, each reviewed paper had to match four filtering criteria:
                           
                              (a)
                              The manuscript must be written in English language and published in peer-reviewed journals between 1994 and 2012.

Empirical manuscripts using statistical approaches for evaluating causal relationships were excluded from the analysis.

Publications on ethical behavior of purchasers (e.g. corruption) or with a non-managerial focus (e.g. technical or political science) were excluded from the analysis.

Papers focusing on reverse logistics, remanufacturing, or CLSCM were not considered.

The most common way of acquiring the publications sample is through a keyword-based search using electronic databases and library services (Seuring & Gold, 2012). This approach is especially recommended for covering a specific topic that can be broadly addressed. Complementary, the paper search can be focused on selected journals. This allows employing a broader search string and thus makes it easier to assess all related papers on a certain topic, although some relevant papers in other journals might be missed (Seuring & Gold, 2012). These keyword-based searches can be complemented by cross-referencing for further relevant publications (Athanasopoulou, 2009) or by employing bibliometric software (Linnenluecke & Griffiths, 2012). These complementary search strategies were combined, resulting in four steps of paper collection applied in this paper.

In a first step, all papers reviewed by Seuring (2012, 36 papers) and Hassini et al. (2012, 87 papers) were considered. This reflects broad searches in databases (Emerald, Elsevier, Wiley, Springer, Ebsco, Scopus, Metapress) which were performed by these authors and limited by them to particular keyword combinations (e.g. “(sustainable OR green) AND (supply AND chain)”). Fifty-six papers reviewed by Tang and Zhou (2012) were additionally taken into account. Forty-six out of the total 179 papers matched the four filtering criteria for this study and were the initial sample set. Hassini et al. (2012), Seuring (2012) and Tang and Zhou (2012) identified Decision Support Systems (DSS), European Journal of Operational Research (EJOR), International Journal of Production Economics (IJPE), International Journal of Production Research (IJPR), Journal of Cleaner Production (JCLP), and Transportation Research Part E (TRE) as relevant journals for quantitative SSCM models (see Table 1 in Section 2.2 or Table 6 in Section 4.1 for the distribution of the 46 papers over these journals). Two reviews published in 2012 were not considered in this first step due to an undisclosed paper sample (Min & Kim, 2012) or a functional and purely environmental focus (Dekker et al., 2012).

In a second step, a journal-specific search was performed which was limited to the six journals using the broader search string “sustain*” in title, abstract, and keyword fields. This journal-specific search resulted in 1016 papers out of which an additional 81 papers matched the four filtering criteria and hence were selected for the review.

In a third step, the paper sample was completed by cross-referencing using ReVelle (2000, 39 papers), Radulescu, Radulescu, and Radulescu (2009, 30 papers), and Seuring (2012, 8 papers). Six papers out of these 77 cited manuscripts matched the four filtering criteria and hence were selected for the review.

In a fourth step, the literature sample was validated by employing the bibliometric software HistCite
                        TM (version 12.03.17) (Garfield, 2004). With this software, 25 manuscripts were identified that were cited by at least five of the selected papers. All but one of these 25 manuscripts describe a particular modeling method (e.g. Saaty, 1980, 10 citations from the paper sample) or literature reviews on SSCM models (e.g. Bloemhof-Ruwaard et al., 1995, 9 citations) or were already included in the paper sample (e.g. Sheu, Chou, & Hu, 2005, 8 citations). One additional paper (Handfield, Walton, Sroufe, & Melnyk, 2002, 7 citations) from these 25 manuscripts, which was not identified by the first three data collection steps, matched the four filtering criteria and thus was added to the paper sample.

In total, approximately 1400 papers were considered, out of which 134 were found to meet the criteria of this study. This selection ratio matches the 10% occurrence rate for modeling papers which was mentioned in Section 2.2. Table 3
                         illustrates the results of the paper collection process and the paper validation test.

The temporal distribution of papers over the study time horizon is assessed. For a more meaningful descriptive analysis, the distribution of manuscripts from the sample over time is compared to the overall growth trend of publications in SCM and modeling journals, as indicated by papers issued in EJOR and in IJPE, which are chosen as related journal proxies. In order to compare developments in empirical, model-based and general SSCM research, the temporal distribution of the paper sample is compared to the papers of Seuring and Müller’s (2008a) general review and to the empirical papers reviewed by Gold et al. (2010a, 2010b). Furthermore, the distribution of papers across journals is analyzed. To avoid bias resulting from a journal-specific paper search, this analysis also shows the distribution of the 46 papers selected from Hassini et al. (2012), Seuring (2012), and Tang and Zhou (2012). Additionally, the descriptive analysis provides information on geographical position of the contributing author affiliations (academic institutions), about influential research institutions (regarding the number of citations) and the citation impact of the reviewed paper sample. The HistCite
                        TM program was employed for the bibliometric citation analysis (Garfield, 2004).

Corresponding to the four research questions of this study, four structural dimensions – SCM, sustainability, modeling, and research directions – were defined and grouped by categories for this analysis. These analytic categories listed in Table 4
                         are derived deductively, before the material is analyzed, and inductively, developed from the analyzed material by means of generalization (Mayring, 2008; Seuring & Müller, 2008a).

The SCM dimensions are from a literature review presented by Halldorsson and Arlbjørn (2005) and from the Supply Chain Operations Reference (SCOR) model (Supply-Chain Council, 2008). The sustainability categories are based on variations of the TBL (Carter & Rogers, 2008). The modeling dimension is assessed based on model purpose and type. The model purpose distinguishes between the analytic categories as defined by Shapiro (2007). The model type keywords were quite extensive and linked to a multitude of tools and techniques and the employed solution approaches. The resulting category system, which is depicted in Fig. 1
                        , is based on the classification of Kleijnen (2005) and Sasikumar and Kannan (2009). In the research design dimension, the assessment is based on the industrial sector, the data basis of the presented applications, and the research perspective such as whether or not there is an extension.

To facilitate an exhaustive categorization of each paper, the analytic categories are supplemented with “various/other” and “not applicable” categories. Furthermore, the assignment of papers to analytic categories is unique for each structural dimension.

The required methodological rigor of this analysis is ensured in all steps of the content analysis (see Seuring & Gold, 2012, for further details). A replicable and hence reliable material collection is achieved by focusing both on papers that were assessed by three recent reviews on SSCM (Hassini et al., 2012; Seuring, 2012; Tang & Zhou, 2012) and on papers that are obtained by a keyword-based search in specific journals which were identified as most relevant by these three recent reviews. Internal validity is achieved by ensuring that the paper coding is performed by at least two researchers, thereby also ensuring inter-coder reliability. Resolving differences in the coding and reaching an agreement on how each aspect would be coded was the approach of choice. Most of the selected structural dimensions and analytic categories were taken up in a deductive approach, which ensures construct validity as this is based on respective literature (as described in Section 3.4). This was complemented by a few categories selected inductively. To strengthen external validity and rigor of the material evaluation, intermediate results of this analysis were presented to and discussed with scientific audiences at five international conferences.
                           1
                           4th World P&OM Conference and 19th International Annual EurOMA conference (July 2012, Amsterdam, Netherlands), 2nd International Workshop on Eco-Efficient Based Green SCM, (October 2012, Odense, Denmark), sessions of the German Academic Association for Business Research – scientific commissions “Operations Research” (January 2013, Wuppertal, Germany) and “Sustainability Management” (September 2012, Hamburg, Germany), workshop of the Gesellschaft für Operations Research e. V. (March 2012, Goslar, Germany).
                        
                        
                           1
                         Overall, the research process is documented in a transparent manner contributing to its objectivity.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Overall it can be stated that model-based SSCM is a comparably young and increasingly developing research discipline. This field’s robust growth is illustrated by the temporal distribution of this study’s sample of 134 papers when compared to the growth distribution of the overall set of publications within EJOR and IJPE (Fig. 2
                        ). Also, the temporal distribution of this study’s paper sample is compared to the distribution of the 191 manuscripts of Seuring and Müller’s (2008a) study (Table 5
                        ).

Since 1994, the number of analytical SSCM model papers shows a stronger growth (+24.5% compound annual growth rate (CAGR)) than the overall number of papers published in EJOR and IJPE (+12.6% CAGR). Fig. 2, which depicts the annual share of published papers and the number of SSCM papers on the ordinate axes, illustrates these trends in greater detail. In the first decade of the study’s time horizon, the annual share of published SSCM analytical modeling papers was lower (below 3.0%) than the respective share of papers issued in EJOR and IJPE (between 3.7% and 4.4%), which indicates the relatively smaller relevance of SSCM modeling in scientific research during that time. This result was reversed in 2003 for the first time (4.5% annual share of SSCM modeling papers vs. 4.2% annual share of papers published in EJOR and IJPE) and has continuously seen stronger shares since 2007 (on average an 11.7% annual share of SSCM modeling papers vs. a 7.2% annual share of papers published in EJOR and IJPE). More than half of the SSCM modeling papers (82 manuscripts) were published within the last five years of the considered time horizon.

Using Seuring and Müller’s (2008a) sample illustrates that the overall field of SSCM research was strong before 2007 while SSCM modeling papers published during this time were relatively uncommon. A comparison to the paper sample reviewed by Gold et al. (2010a, 2010b) leads to similar observations. These results, as depicted in Table 5, indicate that conceptual and empirical methods paved the way for a model-based prescriptive SSCM research.

The distribution of papers over journals as depicted in Table 6
                         shows that nearly two-thirds of the 46 papers chosen from Hassini et al. (2012), Seuring (2012), and Tang and Zhou (2012) in the first paper collection step were published in one of the six journals (DSS, EJOR, IJPE, IJPR, JCLP, TRE) which then were considered in the journal-specific keyword search. Beyond this, Table 6 depicts the overall distribution of all 134 papers over journals.

The analysis of the geographical position of the contributing author’s institutions reveals that universities from Europe (61 papers), North America (44 papers), or Asia (41 papers) represent the vast majority of publications. Australian (6 papers), Latin American (4 papers), and African (3 papers) research publications are severely underrepresented in this research area. Only 21 papers represent collaborative inter-continental research. These manuscripts mainly stem from research cooperation of North American universities (15 papers) with institutions from other continents (Asian: 8 papers, European: 5 papers, Australian and Latin American: 1 paper each).

A citation analysis shows that 2049 publications refer to at least one of the reviewed papers, i.e. on average each paper of the sample has more than 15 citations in Thomson Reuters’ Web of Science® while the median is 8 citations. Fifty-eight papers of the sample have at least 10 citations in total, and 80 papers are cited at least once a year, while only 34 papers of the sample are not yet cited. These figures indicate the overall scientific relevance of the reviewed paper sample. However, the paper sample does not show a strong internal coherence with regards to citations; only 31 papers are cited by another paper of the sample. This indicates that the scientific field of model-based SSCM research is still scattered, and major streams of thought have not yet developed. Furthermore, the citation analysis identifies that five of the most influential institutions are located in the USA: Clark University (325 citations), Michigan State University (184 citations), Boston College, Emory University, North Carolina State University (165 citations each).

The SCM dimensions, as shown in Table 7
                           , include four major characteristics: (1) the primary actor that is the focus of the study; (2) the organizational level of analysis ranging from internal functions to broad macro-economic focus; (3) the SCOR process covered in the model, and (4) the functional application area (e.g. SCM, logistics, or product development).

In SSCM models, manufacturing companies dominate as primary actors of analysis (67 papers), while carriers (Lee, Dong, & Bian, 2010; Lovric, Li, & Vervest, 2012), distributors (Zanoni & Zavanella, 2011) and retailers (Edwards, McKinnon, & Cullinane, 2010) are seldom the focus of these studies. A considerable number of papers analyze industry sectors (15 papers) and legal authorities (11 papers) or remain unspecific (18 papers “various”, 19 papers “n. a.”) on the primary actors. The level of analysis shows a clear preference for the intra-organizational models that focus on a specific function or firm (66 papers) when compared to models that take an inter-organizational perspective on a dyad, chain, or network (38 papers) or macroscopic views on an industrial sector or a macro-economy (25 papers).

In 42 papers SSCM models are not limited to a particular SCOR process. The majority of models support some planning processes (53 papers). Yet, sourcing (12 papers), transformation (18 papers), or delivery processes (9 papers) are less often modeled. None of the selected papers focus on the return stage, but that is due to our elimination of reverse logistics oriented papers from our analysis.


                           Functionally, SSCM modeling research targets production (40 papers) or general SCM (16 papers). Manufacturing-related papers can be found in nearly every year of the study horizon, while nine of the general SCM papers were published within the last five years. In the nine logistics-related papers as well as in the 11 sourcing-oriented ones, the intra-organizational and the inter-organizational perspectives on the level of analysis are evenly distributed. Network design models (13 papers) seem to represent a new trend in SSCM research, because only the publication of Agrell, Stam, and Fischer (2004) is older than three years. Issues of product design are considered in nine papers which in seven cases deal with a manufacturer as a focal company. Whitefoot and Skerlos (2012), who elaborate on design incentives from a legal authority perspective, and Andersson, Hogaas Eide, Lundqvist, and Mattsson (1998), who integrate sustainability aspects in product development from an industry point of view, are the two exceptions.

In the evaluation of this dimension we consider the three levels of modeling from Fig. 2, but also a general purpose-environment characteristic is added (see Table 8
                           ). The purpose-environment focuses on the type of research for which normative (prescriptive, problem solving oriented) or descriptive (seeking to evaluate or understand a phenomenon) models are used. The assumed environment may include a deterministic or stochastic approach. Thus four categories (descriptive–deterministic, etc.) exist for the purpose-environment evaluation of the modeling dimension. The remaining three dimensions in Table 8 are directly linked to the modeling levels in Fig. 1.

Normative SSCM models (75 papers), which mainly employ analytic hierarchy process/analytic network process (AHP/ANP) (20 papers) and linear programming/mixed integer linear programming (LP/MILP) (18 papers) as solution approaches, are the more popular model purposes when compared to descriptive models (59 papers). Descriptive modeling efforts are most often utilizing systemic models (39 papers), in particular life cycle analysis (LCA) (24 papers), input–output-analysis (IOA) (4 papers), and metrics (8 papers) as solution approaches. Combining the SCM perspectives and the modeling categories (see Table 9
                           ) shows that managerial decision making is often supported by optimization methods while in macroscopic contexts, models are most often employed to explore or explain the interplay of various factors. On the intra-organizational level of a single firm or a particular function, normative SSCM models are more often employed (42 papers) than descriptive models (24 papers). In contrast, descriptive models (20 papers) represent the vast majority of 25 papers that contain models for industrial sectors or macro-economies.

Stochastic approaches (12 normative, 3 descriptive) are not well represented in this literature. Normative stochastic models most often focus on manufacturers and strive for improving company-wide planning processes (Chen & Fan, 2012; Hu & Bibanda, 2009; Linninger, Chakraborty, & Colberg, 2000; Radulescu et al., 2009; Tsai & Hung, 2009; Wu & Chang, 2004) or the implementation of cleaner production technologies (Tseng, Lin, & Chiu, 2009). Other approaches deal with network design at a carrier (Lee et al., 2010) or the product sustainability assessment in the automotive industry (Ghadimi, Azadnia, Yusof, & Saman, 2012). Normative stochastic models that take an inter-organizational perspective focus on green SCM in the electronics industry networks (Hsu & Hu, 2008; Che, 2010) or on sustainability policies in a macroeconomic context (Munda, 2009). Descriptive stochastic models are all at the inter-organizational level (Kainuma & Tawara, 2006; Saint Jean, 2008; van der Vorst, Tromp, & van der Zee, 2009). The limited amount of stochastic models provides opportunities for further SSCM research. But uncertainty may also be investigated using various scenarios, each evaluated with a deterministic approach.

Multi-criteria decision making (MCDM) (25 papers) and mathematical programming (35 papers), with only two papers (Gunson, Klein, Veiga, & Dunbar, 2010; Yura 1994) optimizing a single-objective function, are most often chosen model types and techniques to investigate SSCM. These results may occur because (1) the application nature of the journals supports more normative approaches; and (2) the multi-dimensionality of the sustainability problem requires integrating a variety of factors and objectives simultaneously. A hybrid model is developed by Fichtner, Frank, and Rentz (2004), who combine a MILP approach for economic optimization with a technical process simulation and a LCA for the ecologic assessment of energy supply systems.

Surprisingly, solution approaches based on genetic algorithms (Radulescu et al., 2009) – as well as dynamic programming (Hu & Bibanda, 2009), goal programming (Tsai & Hung, 2009; Yura, 1994), and neural networks (Kuo, Wang, & Tien, 2010) models – occur only in very few papers. This result is in contrast to Ilgin and Gupta’s (2010) observation of modeling approaches for green (re-)manufacturing and product recovery.

For the industry focus (see Table 10
                           ), model-based SSCM research focuses on technology-related sectors (39 papers on energy, electronics, or automotive), consumable goods (18 papers on agricultural or food & beverage industry) or on macro-economic contexts (10 paper), while surprisingly, from an environmental perspective, the transportation industry (Lee, Geum, Lee, & Park, 2012; Lovric et al., 2012; with a macroscopic view: Ülengin, Kabak, Önsel, Ülengin, & Aktas, 2010) has not been as well covered in this literature. Clearly, there is room in a number of industries for formal models to be applied. The imbalance in industrial perspectives could be due to variations in the relative importance of sustainability topics or to convenience and data availability. But the diffusion of modeling efforts to other industries is clearly a valuable research direction.

In SSCM modeling papers, the numerical analysis (see Table 11
                           ) is based on empirical data (105 papers), but most of these numerical sections may not be easily replicable and are with limited rigor in the underlying empirical research methods. This result is in line with Seuring’s (2012) observations and points towards the need to combine empirical and model-based research as addressed by Hassini et al. (2012).

Furthermore, specific areas for generalizable future research are seldom addressed (only 24 papers, see Table 11). These deductively identified research directions, which include recommendations on research design, models and metrics, resources and processes, and interfaces with customers and various systems, are now briefly summarized. For research design a higher degree of integration between empirical and theoretical research is recommended (Ukidwe and Bakshi, 2005). A fertile model-based research direction is developing new solution methodologies for green SC network design (Wang, Lai, & Shi, 2011). Additional modeling suggestions include employing asymmetric competition models to assess sustainability triggers (Yalabik & Fairchild, 2011) and integrating the decision maker in the evaluation of solutions (Harris, Naim, Palmer, Potter, & Mumford, 2011). Tools to model ecological factors in processes and the definition and implementation of related effective ecological metrics have also been recommended (Smith and Ball, 2012).

As mentioned in Section 2.2, transportation has been neglected in SSCM modeling. Metrics are needed to incorporate specific fuel consumption figures for transportation (Harris et al., 2011) or to consider transportation modes or demand uncertainties (Wang et al., 2011). Addressing opportunity costs to assess environmental impacts and their tradeoffs are additional issues that can be incorporated in various models (Figge & Hahn, 2012; Mouzon, Yildirim, & Twomey, 2007).

For resources and processes, further understanding of resource reduction impacts on production activities is needed (Smith & Ball, 2012). Innovative production process investigation, such as the development of machines with multiple sleep mode states, product design process improvements, eco-design technology initiatives and their evaluation, are all directions (Bovea & Wang, 2003; Kengpol & Boonkanit, 2011; Mouzon et al., 2007). Assessing and improving the manufacturer-retailer-interface to eliminate sources of environmentally unsustainable practices, and relating these to consumer utility and reactions from firms is needed (Darlington & Rahimifard, 2007; Yalabik & Fairchild, 2011; Feng, Li, Duan, & Zhang, 2007). In addition, sustainability benefits of collaboration, coordination, information sharing, and communication within an SC can be assessed further using quantitative methods (e.g. see Kainuma & Tawara, 2006).

This dimension focuses primarily on social and environmental factors of sustainability and their interplay and overlap with each other and the economic factor. Most formal SSCM models include environmental factors and aspects of eco-efficiency while the social dimension is neglected. Holistic models that cover all sustainability dimensions have gained attention in the last ten years. Ecological and social dimensions are often modeled using generic factors, although more specific metrics are employed as well. The main evaluation results of the sustainability dimension are depicted in Fig. 3
                           .

Forty-one papers focus on environmental issues exclusively and comprise all model purposes, most of the primary actors, all SC levels, and processes of analysis. The functional focus of analysis is predominantly within “production” (19 papers) or the other traditional SCM functions “sourcing”, “logistics”, and “SCM” (14 papers in total). Other papers investigate the design of products (Andersson et al., 1998) or networks (Gunson et al., 2010) or are technology-related (Kaldellis, Simotas, Zafirakis, & Kondili, 2009; Kiwjaroun, Tubtimdee, & Piumsomboon, 2009; Saint Jean, 2008). More general approaches for environmental management practices are suggested by Sarkis (1998). Most of these 41 manuscripts were published after 2007 (27 papers), only six papers before 1999 and eight between 2002 and 2006. Sixty-one papers from the sample deal with the interface between environmental and economic issues and can be labeled eco-efficiency papers, which cover normative (36 papers) and descriptive models (25 papers) in a deterministic (51 papers) as well as in a stochastic way (10 papers). All actors, levels, processes, and most of the functions of analysis are evaluated on eco-efficiency. The “green” research areas are comprehensive and cover about 90% of all 67 manufacturer-related SSCM models.

Compared to the extensive model-based research on environmental issues of SSCM, the social aspects are neglected. Only four papers elaborate on social issues (Yura, 1994) or the socio-economic (Brent, Rogers, Ramabitsa-Siimane, & Rohwer, 2007; Abreu & Camarinha-Matos, 2008) or socio-environmental (Clift, 2003) interfaces.

Twenty-eight papers from the sample set describe holistic SSCM models that cover all three sustainability dimensions. All of these papers, except Georgopoulou et al. (1998), were published after 2004, and more than half (15 papers) were published within the last three years. This indicates that holistic SSCM models represent one of the more recent areas of SSCM research investigation. The large majority of these 28 holistic SSCM models have a normative purpose (21 papers), which is in contrast to the balance between normative and descriptive models observed in all 134 reviewed papers (see Section 4.2.2). With regards to the SCM perspective it is detected that the 28 holistic SSCM models are often employed for macroscopic analyses. Every third holistic SSCM model focuses on legal authorities or an industrial sector, while these actors of analysis are taken into account in less than 20% of all 134 reviewed papers (see Section 4.2.1). Furthermore, the high share of models for manufacturers in the overall paper sample (every second paper, see Section 4.2.1) is not observed in the 28 holistic SSCM models; only 7 papers deal with manufacturing firms. These findings are explained by the circumstance that social effects, e.g. employment rate changes or other societal impacts, are usually reflected in macroscopic contexts but not on the microeconomic level of a firm or function.

To conclude the assessment of the sustainability dimension, metrics that were used to represent sustainability factors in formal SSCM models are summarized. Although sustainability aspects are often modeled using generic factors such as “sustainability criteria”, “social benefit”, or “ecologic impact”, more specific metrics can be found for each sustainability dimension. Economic aspects can be categorized into microeconomic factors such as cost, profitability, or revenue (Lovric et al., 2012) and macroeconomic metrics including gross domestic product or growth rate (Agrell et al., 2004) as well as labor productivity, market concentration, or import dependency (Yakovleva, Sarkis, & Sloan, 2011) or overall macro-economic development (Feng, Li, Duan, & Zhang, 2007). Environmental aspects comprise input-oriented factors including renewable energy sources (Georgopoulou, Sarafidis, & Diakoulaki, 1998; Munda, 2009), natural resources (Liu, Li, Wang, & Dong, 2011), water and energy consumption (Yakovleva et al., 2011), or water quality (Feng et al., 2007). Output-oriented environmental factors focus on waste (Yakovleva et al., 2011) and pollution (Georgopoulou et al., 1998). Beyond this, ecological factors can be distinguished into environmental impacts of construction, normal operations, and failure (Dey, 2006). Specific social aspects are related to internal factors such as wages, employees, or employment gender ratios (Yakovleva et al., 2011) and furthermore point towards external influences including individual customer needs and requirements (Lovric et al., 2012), social acceptance and contribution to employment (Georgopoulou et al., 1998), or population growth (Feng et al., 2007). There are papers such as Handfield et al. (2002) or Hassini et al. (2012) that suggest a broad set of environmental factors which can be grouped at multiple levels.

By aggregating the various research evaluation dimensions discussed, a research model can be formed by integrating the core arguments of the analysis together (see Fig. 4
                        ). The ultimate choice/solution begins with consideration of the SCM-dimensions modeled, which are influenced by the respective industrial context. The sustainability aspects to be considered then serve as a kind of moderating variable that drives the modeling purpose. This approach is based on Seuring’s (2012) contention that trade-offs among the economic and environmental dimension are key assumptions for much of the model building. These tradeoffs can occur amongst any combination of the sustainability dimensions. The high share of multi-criteria decision making models underpins this contention, as the trade-offs serve as a starting point that is easier to model. Considering the broader set of tradeoffs expands the solution space. Many researchers have argued for sustainability evaluation in sustainable supply chains among the economic and social dimension (or) the environmental and social dimension (e.g. Seuring & Müller, 2008b) and calling for more research on such interactions.

In many of the research approaches evaluated here, research tended to focus on the production processes of a manufacturing company and then analyze the results on a specific function or at the factory level, with a focus on environmental issues (in line with the findings of Seuring, 2012). In these situations why such research is published under the label sustainable supply chain management, can be called into question. A more critical perspective might be needed avoiding that the conceptual borders of sustainable SCM are increasingly blurred. Just because a research paper has utilized and argued that sustainable SCM is being considered, the validity of such suppositions needs to be carefully evaluated. This type of validation will require that a clearer definition of sustainable SCM be derived and agreed upon by the research community.

As a further issue, while there are a number of papers dealing with supplier selection criteria (e.g. Kuo et al., 2010; Saint Jean, 2008), suppliers and the extended supply chain still require considerably more attention in respective research. Whereas empirical surveys are difficult to complete for multi-tier supply chains, modeling efforts are more flexible in the number of players involved and allow evaluating sustainable supply chains. As the field continues to mature, more complex and insightful modeling can be integrated.

Expanding the development of criteria sets for sustainable supplier selection to integrate environmental and especially social aspects is required. The challenge is a sufficiently comprehensive and precise simultaneous modeling effort, such that the solutions are not trivial, but still solvable problems.

From an industry modeling perspective, the lack of specific industry focused studies on ‘sensitive’ industries is especially surprising. For example, the transportation industry with its heavy carbon emissions, energy, and materials usage is relatively sparsely represented. The chemical/pharmaceutical industry with its potentially hazardous waste management is an environmental dimension that seems to be overlooked. Finally, the apparel and textile industry with its prevalence of social issues (e.g. underpaid workers, unsafe and dangerous working conditions) would be a prime consideration for social sustainability issues. How to integrate and develop models into each of these areas requires careful consideration of the intangibility of the measures and modeling.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

This paper employs a systematic and methodologically rigorous process to review quantitative SSCM models. This study uses content analysis to assess a large sample of related papers and to identify current gaps and future perspectives of model-based SSCM research.

Before turning to them, we discuss the contribution of this paper. As the title clearly states, the paper describes the body of literature on quantitative models for sustainable supply chain management is which is the core contribution. We show the increasing publication output and use a number of categories for providing insights into this body of literature. A general meta-research model is presented as well. This research model allows for consideration of how the various review elements fit together and can aid in further development of a research agenda.

Additional avenues for future research on SSCM models were not only determined deductively from the research opportunities suggested in the assessed papers (see Section 4.2.3) but also inductively from the results and the discussion of the analysis presented here. These inductively identified research directions are related to both research content and research methodology.

Model-based SSCM research can advance the inter-organizational perspective of SCM and extend this to the level of industry sectors (e.g. Kannegiesser & Günther, 2013; Kannegiesser, Günther, & Gylfason, 2013). Economic contributions of vertical coordination in the SSCM context can be assessed quantitatively. Furthermore, quantitative models could be employed to elaborate on the interplay of regulatory decisions made by legal authorities and managerial decision making in firms, supply chains, or industries.

Beyond the inter-organizational aspects, research gaps can be identified at the functional SCM level. Taking into account that most papers focus on production or general SCM, a thorough analysis of sustainability in transportation and warehousing is recommended. Decision making in intermodal transportation to reduce greenhouse gas emissions or vehicle routing under consideration of workers’ time preferences might be adequate examples for related research questions.

Environmental risk management has been widely neglected and hence offers significant potential in model-based SSCM research. The lack of social aspects in SSCM models points towards future research perspectives in related research, because such factors need to be incorporated in SSCM models. With regards to input factors and resource consumption, models that include the option of reducing supply offer another research perspective.

Further SSCM research is needed with regards to the integration of model-based methods with empirical research, which has a strong focus on eco-efficiency and environmental aspects as well. Empirical research methods should be employed to identify social factors in SCM and their economic prerequisites and implications, while model-based research methods are needed to quantitatively investigate this context. A lack of social sustainability research may cause a mistaken impression that holistic sustainability and the TBL concept are simply theoretical constructs with limited relevance. Employing case study research rigorously (e.g. Seuring, 2008; Stuart, McCutcheon, Handfield, MacLachlin, & Samson, 2002) is highly recommended not only for SSCM models in particular but also for model-based research in general. Linking empirical and model-based research, as suggested by Golicic, Davis, and McCarthy (2005), could broaden the scientific field of SSCM with regards to the focused industries. The food, apparel, or automotive industries represent sectors that are thoroughly investigated by only one of these two methodological designs while being neglected by the other. Expanding this industry focus of the employed scientific approaches would balance this existing research bias. Furthermore, the chemicals & oil sector seems to be neglected so far by both empirical and model-based research.

Focusing on developments and directions of SSCM models leads to the question of why some of the sophisticated modeling approaches have been widely neglected so far. Dynamic programming, evolutionary algorithms, or local search methods represent normative approaches to solve complex problems that offer large optimization potential. The fact that these solution approaches are employed only seldom in context to SSCM models outlines further research opportunities and raises the question of whether the complexity of SSCM problems and their optimization potential are already fully exposed.

The need for further research on OR applications and hybrid qualitative and quantitative approaches (Min & Kim, 2012) as well as more empirical rigor in numerical analyses of SSCM models (Seuring, 2012) are conclusions reinforced by this study. This study also confirms the relative lack of social factors in (model-based) SSCM research (Seuring, 2012; Seuring & Müller, 2008a; Tang & Zhou, 2012). There are some contradictions to other reviews that find a strong environmental focus but an increased consideration of social factors in empirical SSCM research (Carter & Easton, 2011). We found that the green focus of model-based SSCM research remains unchanged.

In further contrast to empirical research, which has predominantly investigated the food, apparel, and consumer products sectors (Carter & Easton, 2011; Gold et al., 2010a), the results of this paper indicate that model-based SSCM research mainly focuses on technology-related industries. This industry focus does support other SSCM modeling literature reviews (Hassini et al., 2012). Unlike empirical research, which focuses on intra-organizational level (Carter & Easton, 2011), formal SSCM models integrate inter-organizational interdependencies. Beyond this, SSCM models do include the perspective of legal authorities and hence are capable of reflecting external triggers of sustainability (Gold et al., 2010a, 2010b; Seuring & Müller, 2008a).

In terms of modeling results, the findings do confirm the high relevance of AHP/ANP, LCA, and MCDM for SSCM models (Seuring, 2012), but DES or GA are not as important for SSCM as for product recovery and (re-)manufacturing (Ilgin & Gupta, 2010). The unexploited potential for goal programming in green logistics (Dekker et al., 2012) is substantiated for SSCM research by this study, although the lack of MCDM applications in green logistics (Dekker et al., 2012) cannot be confirmed for forward SSCM.

This paper reviewed almost two decades worth of research focusing on SSCM quantitative, formal modeling. One hundred thirty-four articles were identified and utilized in the analysis of the research. Overall, the number of publications in this topical area is not as large as empirical and conceptual work, but it is growing. The findings included variations in focus by function, research perspective, methodology, and the type of sustainability focus of the supply chains. The results also provided opportunities to identify gaps in the research that could be addressed and potentials for further research directions. Some major findings for fertile areas of research include the integration of social issues into modeling, expanding the scope and diffusing modeling from one industry to another, and the need for more stochastic approaches in modeling to relay a more realistic uncertain decision environment associated with these many and complex environmental factors identified with SSCM.

Although this study was rigorously completed, there are still limitations that we encountered, but these limitations provide opportunity for future research. Despite the fact that several researchers were involved in the validation and the content analysis of this study’s paper sample, the categorization of these papers remains interpretative and hence subjective. Furthermore, statistical methods (e.g. Wolf, 2008) could be employed to cluster the paper sample and to analyze contingencies of different categories. Additionally, more comprehensive bibliometric citation analyses represent another rigorous and structured approach to assess related scientific literature (e.g. Linnenluecke & Griffiths, 2012). These limitations leave room for future analyses and reviews of SSCM modeling publications.

As can be seen, the SSCM modeling field is on the research upswing; significantly more modeling based research can and needs to be completed to more fully understand and integrate SSCM into business thought and practice.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

