@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#A review of trade credit literature: Opportunities for research in operations

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We provide an integrative review of the existing literature of trade credit in the interface of operations and finance.


                        
                        
                           
                           We analyze in detail four literature areas: trade credit motives, order quantity decisions, credit term decisions and settlement period decisions.


                        
                        
                           
                           The main findings of the literature review is that trade credit increases the economic order quantity and could serve as a buyer–supplier coordination mechanism.


                        
                        
                           
                           We derive a detailed agenda for future research around two core themes: opportunities arising from inside operations management and opportunities arising from outside operations management.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Trade credit

Permissible delay in payment

Interface operations and finance

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Trade credit arises when a buyer delays payment for purchased goods or services. Its nature has predominantly been an area of inquiry for researchers from the disciplines of finance, marketing, and economics but it has received relatively little attention in other domains. In our article, we provide an integrative review of the existing literature and discuss conflicting study outcomes. We organize the relevant literature into seven areas of inquiry and analyze four in detail: trade credit motives, order quantity decisions, credit term decisions, and settlement period decisions. Additionally, we derive a detailed agenda for future research in these areas.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Trade credit is a regular component of market transactions and constitutes a major source of short-term financing. Estimates suggest that more than 80% of business-to-business transactions in the United Kingdom (UK) are made on credit (Wilson & Summers, 2002), while about 80% of United States (US) firms offer their products on trade credit (Tirole, 2006). Large, non-financial businesses in the US generate 15% of their financing from accounts payable and small businesses rely even more on it (Elliehausen & Wolken, 1993; OECD, 2006). Internationally, these levels can be even higher and trade credit exceeds, by far, short-term bank credit (De Blasio, 2005; Rajan & Zingales, 1995). The average level of trade credit in use, however, varies significantly from country to country. A comparison of accounting data of industrialized nations shows that median accounts receivable range from 13% to 40% of sales and, with the exception of Italy, are relatively stable over time (Fig. 1
                     ). Similarly, trade credit varies from industry to industry. US data suggest that relative accounts receivable increase in the distance to the end-consumer (Fig. 2
                     ). While accounts receivable tend to exceed accounts payable in most sectors, the retail sector is a notable exception; this is most likely due to the proximity to end-consumers. Ng, Smith, and Smith (1999) find that credit terms show high variation between industries but low variation within them. The degree of within-variation seems to differ from industry to industry, at least as indicated by actual payment delays (Seifert & Seifert, 2011). In this study, one of the roughly 30 managers interviewed stated: “When we began [our project] last year, we discovered that we had over 1000 different credit terms globally!” Thus, in some industries firms seem to vary credit terms from customer to customer (Wilson & Summers, 2002).

Such a widespread phenomenon of varied credit terms is likely to raise questions. Its existence is already perplexing. Why do suppliers offer credit when there are specialized financial intermediaries? If trade credit is cheaper than bank credit, the question is how do suppliers generate the competitive advantage? If bank credit is cheaper than trade credit, then why do banks ignore the opportunity? Additional questions revolve around the practical management of trade credit. How do firms set credit policies and which credit policies are optimal? While generous credit terms might spur sales, the additional working capital and bad debts may outweigh the benefits. At what point in time is it optimal to pay? Although late payment might entail additional interest costs, reduced inventory costs might outweigh these financial drawbacks.

The wide range of these potential questions has led researchers from various domains to analyze trade credit. While finance scholars have contributed the most to the research, trade credit has also received considerable attention in the literature of economics and marketing. Researchers from other domains, however, have provided relatively little input. This is especially remarkable for operations management since financial flows are considered a key element of purchasing and supply chain management (Mentzer, 2001). Recognizing this deficit, a growing number of operations management researchers have begun to investigate the interface between operations and finance (Birge, Kouvelis, & Seppi, 2007; Protopappa-Sieke & Seifert, 2010; Kouvelis & Zhao, 2011; Gupta & Dutta, 2011). The aim of this article is to support this investigation by providing researchers who wish to contribute to this field with (1) an integrative review of the existing literature and (2) a tabulation of untapped areas for future research.

The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the search strategies and classification methods. Section 3 reviews trade credit works from the finance and operations management literature. Section 4 discusses avenues for further research. Section 5 concludes.

@&#METHODOLOGY@&#

In order to ensure a comprehensive accumulation of literature sources we began with the identification of the search terms and keywords, as suggested by Tranfield, Denyer, and Smart (2003). Our aim was to showcase the range of the existing knowledge base by drawing from a significant sample of articles. We identified 27 relevant search terms and keywords to be applied to titles, abstracts, and full text articles.
                        1
                        Trade credit, trade debt, vendor finance, vendor financing, trade finance, supplier credit, relationship lending, direct lending, accounts receivable, accounts payable, delay in payment, delayed payment, late payment, payment delay, payment terms, payment policy, payment period, payment time, settlement period, credit terms, credit policy, credit period, credit time, two-part terms, payment discount, cash discount, and credit risk.
                     
                     
                        1
                      We used three strategies to search both the theoretic and the empirical literature on trade credit both in published journals and unpublished work. First, we conducted an exhaustive search of the EconLit database, which reaches back to 1969, to find relevant references to trade credit in published articles. Second, we completed a search of the Social Science Research Network database, dating back to 1995, to identify unpublished work from universities and public institutions. Finally, we carried out a manual search to screen sources cited in reference sections, as well as relevant journals. During our search we perceived different research domains (economics, marketing, finance, operations) to address similar research questions with different methodologies. In order to capture the diversity of the topic we included 14 highly rated journals
                        2
                        European Journal of Operational Research, IIE Transactions, International Journal of Production Economics, Journal of Business Finance & Accounting, Journal of Finance, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, Journal of Financial Economics, Management Science, Managerial and Decision Economics, Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, Naval Research Logistics, Operations Research, Production and Operations Management, and Review of Financial Studies.
                     
                     
                        2
                      from these four aforementioned research domains (please refer to footnote 2 for a complete list of the journals considered). Following Cooper (1998), we aspired to be overly inclusive during our search and judged conceptual relevance during data evaluation only. Our search produced a significant number of highly cited articles published in these journals. Overall, our searches yielded 205 related studies, 182 of which we included in our analysis. We excluded the remaining 23 studies for several reasons: Eleven of the studies considered trade credit only peripherally, five offered only limited contributions compared to included works, and seven of the unpublished studies lacked rigor or originality.

Throughout our search we continuously sought to classify articles. To develop a taxonomy, we first grouped articles by research domain, e.g., economics, because research domains were likely to address similar research questions. Whenever we perceived a domain to contain multiple questions, we split the domain into these groups. Because our aim was to provide an integrative review, we periodically checked if there was any overlap between groups from different research domains. Whenever we found two or more groups that overlapped, we merged them. At the end of our search, we were left with seven groups: Monetary policy implications, factoring economics, credit risk models, trade credit motives, order quantity decisions, credit term decisions, and settlement period decisions. The first, monetary policy implications, investigated how monetary policy should account for trade credit (Meltzer, 1960; Jaffee & Modigliani, 1969; Gertler & Gilchrist, 1993). The second, factoring economics, examined which credit administration functions should be subcontracted to third party specialists (Mian & Smith, 1992; Smith & Schnucker, 1994; Summers & Wilson, 2000). Since neither of these two seemed anchored in operations management or directly related, we excluded them from the review. The third, credit risk models, studied the amount
                        3
                        In contrast to timing, which is the main concern in works on credit term and settlement period decisions.
                     
                     
                        3
                      of credit to be granted to potential debtors. Dating back to at least the 1950s, this group formed a well-established stream in the operations management literature (Cyert & Trueblood, 1952; Cyert, Davidson, & Thompson, 1962; Mehta, 1968; Bierman & Hausman, 1970; Beranek & Taylor, 1976; Kolesar & Showers, 1985). Reviews of this literature were readily available (Rosenberg & Gleit, 1994; Thomas, 2000; Crook, Edelman, & Thomas, 2007). We therefore excluded this group from the review, too.

For each of the remaining four groups, we developed coding sheets (Tables 1–4
                     
                     
                     
                     ) and included relevant characteristics and excluded irrelevant ones as the coding progressed. We sorted works by their order of appearance. Additionally, we included the number of citations received by each work to facilitate access for researchers new to the field. Furthermore we distinguish between firm and industry characteristics (e.g., size and type), methodology (e.g., type of analysis), and main propositions and findings.

@&#LITERATURE REVIEW@&#

The reasons why firms offer credit has been actively researched for more than 30years. While the issue is still far from being resolved, researchers have provided several motives
                        
                           4
                           Unfortunately, researchers have used this term somewhat arbitrarily, sometimes describing goals (e.g., increase revenues) and sometimes describing enablers (e.g., credit access). Because there are many potential enablers but only two goals (increase revenues, reduce costs), it is – for the purposes of this review – more useful to discuss enablers. Nevertheless, we use the term motive throughout the text because researchers are likely to encounter this term in the literature.
                        
                        
                           4
                         as potential answers.

One way to structure these motives is by differentiating between supply-side and demand-side motives. On the supply side, the finance literature has identified six major motives: capital access, product market position, price elasticity, collateral value, credit information, and non-salvageable investment. The first, capital access, views trade credit as a marketing expense that enables buyers to increase their purchases because the time value of money effectively lowers the price. Then, the attractiveness of trade credit as a marketing tool increases with a supplier’s access to capital markets (Schwartz, 1974). Consequently, well-established firms should offer relatively more credit due to their better access to capital. Empirical data, however, suggests the opposite. Wilson and Summers (2002), Fabbri and Klapper (2008), and Van Horen (2007) therefore argue that product market position determines trade credit offer. The product market position argument, however, begs the question why do suppliers not simply compete on price. Scholars have therefore hypothesized that trade credit contains additional functions: First, price elasticity differences between buyers might enable suppliers to price discriminate and increase overall sales (Brennan, Maksimovic, & Zechner, 1988; Petersen & Rajan, 1997). Second, suppliers might have an advantage in salvaging value from sold goods (Frank & Maksimovic, 2005). Third, suppliers might act as intermediaries between buyers and banks because the first possess superior information (Emery, 1984; Jain, 2001). Finally, trade credit might protect non-salvageable investments in buyers by acting as a screening device that elicits information about buyer default risk (Smith, 1987). The author presents a trade-credit model consisting of buyers, sellers and financial institutions to argue that default risk information is valuable for non-salvageable investments. Giannetti, Burkart, and Ellingsen (2011) present a simple formal framework from the supply side to explain why suppliers are willing to give trade credit. Even though the authors use a static framework, they identify collateral liquidation, moral hazard, information advantage and imperfect competition as main reasons. Along the same lines, Lee and Rhee (2011) also discuss trade credit from a supplier’s perspective but they further present trade credit as a tool for supply chain coordination.

On the demand side, the finance literature has identified three major motives: transaction pooling, credit rationing, and control protection. The rationale of reducing costs by pooling transactions was first identified by Ferris (1981) and subsequently tested by Elliehausen and Wolken (1993) and Summers and Wilson (2002). Trade credit in this view is an instrument that facilitates trade by providing a contractual alternative to immediate money use. Uncertainties in firms’ exchange of goods lead to uncertainties in money flows and thus, stochastic money holding costs. Firms reduce these costs by agreeing on payment terms and creating information about money requirements and expected receipts. Another reason for demanding trade credit might be credit rationing. If information asymmetries cause banks not to be able to distinguish risky borrowers from safe ones and if borrower liability is limited, borrowers with risky projects are better able to bear the ensuing higher interest rates. Therefore, charging higher interest rates does not help banks in sorting borrowers so banks resort to credit rationing (Chant & Walker, 1988; Biais & Gollier, 1997; Ono, 2001; Howorth & Reber, 2003; Danielson & Scott, 2004). A final reason for demanding trade instead of bank credit might be control protection. Wilner (2000) and Huyghebaert (2006) argue that trade credit is commonly more costly than institutional credit because suppliers, desiring to maintain an enduring product market relationship, grant more concessions to buyers in financial distress than lenders in competitive credit markets. Therefore, the desire to protect control may drive buyers to use trade credit.

The presence of trade credit affects the holding cost of inventory and thus the economic order quantity (Beranek, 1967). Extensive operations management literature has therefore been developed, which studies economic order quantities under permissible delay in payment (Haley & Higgins, 1973; Kingsman, 1983; Chapman, Ward, Cooper, & Page, 1984; Goyal, 1985; Aggarwal & Jaggi, 1995; Jamal, Sarker, & Wang, 1997; Hwang & Shinn, 1997; Teng, 2002; Teng, Krommyda, Skouri, & Lou, 2011; Su, 2012). Even though these models are based on deterministic environment assumptions, they provide interesting insights. A first review of this literature may be found in Chang, Teng, and Goyal (2008). We provide an update of their review because optimal order quantity decisions under permissible delay in payment represent a highly active area of research. For compatibility purposes, we continue the previous review’s classification into models (1) without shortage and without deterioration, (2) without shortage but with deterioration, (3) with shortage, (4) with trade credit linked to order quantity, and (5) with inflation. Our results suggest that most contributions fall in the first category. Here, models in which both buyers and suppliers offer credit (so called two-stage models) seem to have been a particular focus. In such models a supplier offers a credit period to the retailer who in turn offers a credit period to customers. Other categories, however, seem to have received less attention.

In the first category of inventory models with no deterioration and no shortage, Jaggi, Aggarwal, and Goel (2007) present an economic order quantity model for a retailer that simultaneously receives trade credit from a supplier and offers trade credit to his customers where the customer demand depends on the credit period. Numerical examples suggest that as the credit elasticity of demand faced by the retailer increases, the optimal order quantity decreases. The authors also investigate the effect of differences between interest earned and interest paid on the optimal order quantity. In most cases, the optimal order quantity is less than the traditional economic order quantity. Huang and Hsu (2008) present a similar two-stage trade credit model (for which Chung (2008) provides additional proofs) but assume end-consumer demand to be credit inelastic. Teng and Chang (2009) relax the assumption that the credit period offered by the retailer is shorter than the credit period offered by the supplier. Chen and Kang (2010b) compare one-stage and two-stage trade credit financing and conclude that two-stage financing lowers supply chain profits. Thangam (2012) presents a two-stage trade credit model for perishable items that further extends not only the existing literature of determining the optimal replenishment policy but also the optimal price discounting policy.


                        Goyal, Teng, and Wang (2007) and Chung (2009) extend Haley and Higgins (1973) by introducing a “regular interest” period after the net period. Soni and Shah (2008) introduce a three-stage interest scheme consisting of an interest-free period, a period costing interest rate Ic
                        1, and a period costing interest rate Ic
                        2
                        >
                        Ic
                        1. Sana and Chaudhuri (2008) model a similar progressive scheme and additionally test seven different demand functions. They find that different demand functions lead to similar outcomes.


                        Chung and Liao (2009) study a discounted cash flow approach, Chen and Kang (2010a) study imperfect items, Huang, Tsai, Wu, and Chung (2010) investigate order-processing cost reductions, and Teng (2009) analyzes a retailer who offers full trade credit to “good” and partial trade credit to “bad” customers. Tsao (2009) investigates two types of trade allowance, promotional effort cost sharing and price discounting in a multi-item setting. Increased trade credit reduces the need for effort cost sharing or price discounting to achieve channel coordination.

In the second category of inventory models with deterioration and no shortage, Liao (2008) investigates the economic production quantity under exponential decay and two-stage trade credit. Numerical examples suggest that the retailer’s order quantity increases as the retailer offers more credit to its customers.

Finally, in the category of models with trade credit linked to order quantity, Ouyang, Ho, and Su (2008) present an integrated inventory model with variable production rate, price sensitive demand, and a freight charge according to a weight schedule. Ouyang, Teng, Goyal, and Yang (2009) additionally generalize a number of previous works by incorporating deterioration and partial payments. Liao, Huang, and Chung (2012) present a model that combines the second and the last category (without shortage but with deterioration and trade credit linked to order quantity). Their contribution to the existing literature is the consideration of two storage facilities (an owned warehouse and a rented warehouse). Apart from identifying the optimal replenishment cycle time and the optimal order lot-size to minimize, they further discuss the decision of the retailer to rent an additional warehouse.

The exchange of goods and/or services usually requires buyers and suppliers to agree on trade terms. These trade terms often consist of prices and delivery and payment conditions. While payment conditions may be exceedingly simple (e.g., cash on delivery), suppliers may also grant payment delays. The optimal length of these payment delays is the core concern of credit term decisions. The finance literature
                           5
                           Because our aim is to support researchers from operations management, we restrict ourselves to a short summary of the finance literature and review the operations management literature in detail.
                        
                        
                           5
                         investigates optimal payment delays mainly by evaluating the net benefits of credit term changes. Researchers have identified two alternative approaches: The opportunity cost approach which analyzes whether the net benefits exceed the opportunity cost of the funds to be used for a credit policy change (Oh, 1976; Dyl, 1977; Walia, 1977) and the net present value approach which discounts the net benefits (Lieber & Orgler, 1975; Atkins & Kim, 1977; Kim & Atkins, 1978; Hill & Riener, 1979; Sartoris & Hill, 1981). After several years of active discussion, it is now widely accepted that the net present value approach leads to better decisions (Kim & Feist, 1995). The formulae developed by the finance literature, however, still require estimates in how changes of credit terms impact demand. Scholars – predominantly from operations management – have therefore begun to apply insights from inventory control to predict these changes. Therefore, we review these works in the following paragraphs, which are presented roughly in order of increasing complexity.


                        Schiff and Lieber (1974) develop an integrated model for the credit and production decisions of a single firm. Demand is modeled as a deterministic function of time, credit period, and inventory. An oscillating parameter introduces seasonality into the demand function, which prompts the firm to change its production and credit decisions. When demand increases, production increases but credit decreases. When demand decreases, the opposite pattern occurs. Kim, Hwang, and Shinn (1995) develop a deterministic model to find the optimal credit period. Assuming a lot-for-lot policy, fixed wholesale price, and no collaboration, they solve a supplier’s problem based on expected retailer behavior. The authors do not make any assumptions about the above-mentioned trade credit motives. However, their work documents a trade credit motive that has largely gone unnoticed in the finance literature: the stimulation of end-consumer demand. Based on the impact of the supplier’s credit on the retailer’s pricing, they show that trade credit increases end-consumer demand and thus the retailer’s order size. Therefore, trade credit increases both the supplier’s and the retailer’s profits. Shi and Zhang (2010) incorporate default risk into the supplier’s decision. If the buyer defaults, the supplier salvages the remaining inventory. Numerical examples suggest that the optimal credit period increases with the buyer’s capital cost and decreases with the supplier’s capital cost. Moreover, the optimal credit period decreases with the demand rate, the probability of default, and the buyer’s inventory holding costs. Of these factors, the probability of default has the highest impact on the supplier’s profits but the lowest impact on its credit period. Therefore, the authors conjecture that the role of default risk is to determine whether to grant trade credit. Du, Banerjee, and Kim (in press) present a model for the coordination of a two-echelon supply chain under a deterministic operating environment and determine the optimal retail price, order quantity, and credit period offer. The authors find that a policy that incorporates quantity discount and a credit payment option is superior as it increases total supply chain profitability.


                        Abad and Jaggi (2003) introduce cooperative behavior, modeled as a set of Pareto-efficient solutions. The particular solution depends on a profit-sharing parameter that the supplier and the retailer establish through negotiation. Example problems suggest that under both behaviors it is advantageous to offer trade credit. However, under non-cooperative behavior this result holds only if the supplier has a lower cost of capital. Abad and Jaggi (2003) also find that homogeneous policies, e.g., low price/short credit period, are more profitable than mixed policies, suggesting that unit prices and credit periods should be optimized simultaneously. Jaber and Osman (2006) relax the lot-for-lot assumption. Yang and Wee (2006) focus on deterioration and finite replenishment rates. Their sensitivity analyses indicate that credit-induced surplus profits increase with the price elasticity of consumer demand, with setup costs, and with the deterioration rate of inventory but decrease with holding costs and with the supplier’s replenishment rate. Chen and Kang (2007) provide sensitivity analyses for the profit-sharing parameter in an imperfect quality setting. Shi and Zhu (2006) and Shi and Zhang (2007) address the negotiation process with an Aumann–Shapley solution
                           6
                           A review of cooperative bargaining solutions such as the Aumann–Shapley and other solutions may be found in Thomson (1994).
                        
                        
                           6
                         and Shi, Zhang, and Zhu (2007) with data envelopment analysis. Sarmah, Acharya, and Goyal (2008) study the negotiation process between a manufacturer and multiple buyers, and the optimal credit period that entices buyers to accept coordinated shipments. Jaggi, Goyal, and Goel (2008) investigate a situation in which both the supplier and the retailer offer trade credit. Assuming the supplier’s credit period as given, they present an algorithm to jointly determine the retailer’s optimal cycle time and credit period. Numerical examples suggest that changes in the supplier’s credit period do not greatly affect either the retailer’s cycle time or the retailer’s credit period.


                        Kouvelis and Zhao (2012) model only non-cooperative behavior but introduce stochastic demand. Using a capital-constrained newsvendor model, the authors find – differing from Abad and Jaggi (2003) – that trade credit is always advantageous for the supplier. They also find that a supplier will always offer interest rates below the risk-free rate and that a retailer will always prefer trade credit to bank credit when offered an optimally structured scheme. Furthermore, trade credit improves supply chain profits, and, while the supplier always improves its profits, the retailer’s benefits depend on its working capital endowment. Gupta and Wang (2009) formulate a basestock model to investigate the relationship between cash discount and discount period. A smaller cash discount implies a longer discount period. If the discount period exceeds the shelf life of the goods, offering a cash discount becomes uneconomic. Charharsoogi and Heydari (2010) introduce cooperative behavior and uncertain lead times. As in Kouvelis and Zhao (2012) trade credit is always advantageous for the supplier. Numerical examples suggest that, in general, the optimal credit period decreases with the lead time uncertainty and the shortage cost. The authors also investigate the sensitivity to setup and holding costs both at the buyer’s and the supplier’s end. Overestimation by the buyer (supplier) decreases (increases) the credit period and is thus an undesirable strategy. Underestimation results in credit-related gains but distorts operational decisions. Thus, neither the buyer nor the supplier have incentives to misjudge their parameters.


                        Luo (2007) and Sarmah, Acharya, and Goyal (2007) compare trade credit and quantity discount contracts in an economic order quantity framework. Trade credit is more efficient if the supplier’s cost of capital is lower than the buyer’s cost of capital; otherwise quantity discounts are more efficient. Lee and Rhee (2010) consider quantity discounts, buy backs, two-part tariffs, and revenue sharing in a newsvendor framework. Under the assumption of positive inventory financing costs and if both the buyer and the supplier rely on bank credit, all four contracts fail to coordinate. However, adding trade credit restores coordination in the presence of quantity discount and two-part tariffs, and restores coordination in the presence of buy back contracts if the supplier has a sufficiently low cost of capital. Revenue sharing contracts are always less profitable. Boyaci and Gallego (2002) compare trade credit and inventory consignment contracts. They conclude that consignment coordination is more desirable because trade credit coordination causes the buyer’s and the supplier’s capital costs to converge and thus renders the contract infeasible in the long term.

Once firms have contractually agreed upon credit terms, they still face a decision problem regarding actual collection and payment. Although accounts receivable may be overdue, stringent collection may damage buyer relationships. And although accounts payable may exist, early payment may reduce liquidity and create unnecessary financial costs. The finance literature has tackled these decision problems primarily by correlating measures of working capital management with measures of firm profitability (Soenen, 1993; Shin & Soenen, 1998; Fisman, 2001; Wang, 2001; Deloof, 2003; Cull, Xu, & Zhu, 2007; García-Teruel & Martínez-Solano, 2007). While nearly all authors conclude that early collection increases profitability, the consequences of early payment are controversial. Although theory suggests that early payment should decrease profitability, data suggest the opposite. Deloof (2003) therefore argues that this observation may be a consequence of endogeneity (payment delay affecting profitability but, at the same time, profitability also affecting payment delay). This shortcoming of the financial literature creates opportunities for analytical research, which we present in the following.


                        Haley and Higgins (1973) consider a buyer’s lot-sizing problem under trade credit financing. They derive the optimal order quantity and settlement period when the supplier offers two-part terms. Payments are assumed to occur within the net period
                           7
                           Two-part terms are usually described as a combination of cash discount, discount period, and net period, e.g., 2/10 net 30.
                        
                        
                           7
                        . If the permissible delay in payment is longer than the cycle time, the standard solution of separate optimization holds. Otherwise, however, order quantity and settlement period must be determined simultaneously. Huang and Chung (2003) develop decision rules to facilitate the determination of the settlement period in practice. They first calculate the optimal cycle time and then “deltas” that help to determine the optimal settlement period quickly. Huang (2005) provides an efficient solution procedure. Ouyang, Teng, Chuang, and Chuang (2005) relax the assumption of an infinite replenishment rate and develop a shorter decision rule, for which Chung (2010) provides an improved search procedure.


                        Jamal, Sarker, and Wang (2000) investigate the optimal settlement period for a retailer in a deteriorating-item inventory situation where a wholesaler allows a specified credit period to the retailer for payment without penalty. The authors model the retailer’s decision as a cost minimization problem and solve it via iterative search. Their results indicate that depending upon several parameters it can, in some cases, be advantageous for the retailer to pay after the permissible credit period and incur late payment penalties. Song and Cai (2006) improve the previous authors’ work by showing that a single decision variable suffices to solve the optimization problem. Using the same example, they show that the optimal payment time is in fact shorter.


                        Liao and Chen (2003) additionally include inflation. Inflation provides an incentive for the retailer to defer payment as it effectively reduces the wholesale price. Based on a numerical example, the authors find that the retailer’s optimal settlement period equals the permissible delay when the delay is short and the cycle time when the delay is long. The authors conclude that retailers should devote time to finding the inflection point for supplier negotiations. However, this binary behavior is caused by the assumption that M
                        ⩽
                        P
                        ∗
                        ⩽
                        T
                        ∗, where M is the permissible delay in payment, P
                        ∗ is the optimal settlement period and T
                        ∗ is the optimal cycle time. Future research should relax this assumption, especially because the authors indicate that the settlement period associated with minimal total costs violates this constraint in many instances. Sarker, Jamal, and Wang (2000) continue under the same assumption and find that inventory cycle time and order quantity are concave with respect to inflation. Intuitively, total inventory costs decrease with inflation. The decline is steeper when unit costs are higher. Chang and Wu (2003) build on their work and provide an efficient algorithm that yields lower total costs.


                        Ho, Ouyang, and Su (2008) present a model that integrates credit term and settlement period decisions. In their study, a supplier offers two-part terms to a retailer who faces price sensitive demand. Numerical examples suggest that integration yields higher profit solutions than isolated decision-making.

As noted in the introduction, and as expressed by the number of recent contributions in the previous sections, research at the interface of operations and finance is growing fast. In this section, we therefore develop an agenda for future research to address remaining shortcomings in this domain. We build this agenda around two core themes: opportunities arising from inside operations management (e.g., based on insights from existing operational models) and opportunities arising from outside operations management (e.g., based on insights from the finance literature). The first theme, opportunities arising from inside operations management, suggests that multiple product settings, alternative credit schemes, operational uncertainty, cash flow timing, and incomplete information are promising avenues for future research. The second theme, opportunities arising from outside operations management, suggests that the study of multiple echelons, default risk, and late payment presents exciting opportunities for future research.We exclude opportunities for works that are primarily concerned with order quantity decisions. Such opportunities may be found in the review by Chang et al. (2008). Our update of their review suggests that, except for supplier buyer coordination, these opportunities continue to be relevant.
                        8
                        To add to their opportunities, we screened works that had been published after their review. These works recommended to additionally model shortages (mentioned six times), to include other trade terms (5), to model other demand functions (4), to model other deterioration functions (4), to introduce stochastic demand (3), to introduce inflation (2), and to model finite replenishment rates (2). Furthermore, authors recommended to investigate multi-buyer settings, progressive interest schemes, other shipping options, and unequal shipping lots.
                     
                     
                        8
                     
                  

Inventory models may be classified along 13 dimensions: product, decision variables, decision making structure, time, demand, objective function, ordering/production costs, holding, shortages, supply, physical system, information structure, and resource usage (Porteus, 1990). Most of these dimensions range from simple (e.g., one decision maker) to complex (e.g., multiple decision makers) but, perhaps, more realistic modeling choices. Therefore, opportunities for future research arise in dimensions in which extant models do not fully reflect business realities. In the following, we discuss such opportunities. We restrict our discussion to dimensions that, in our eyes, require attention. Although this selection represents an arbitrary choice, we believe that the risk of omitting important dimensions is limited as Tables 3 and 4 document the state of most of these dimensions.
                           
                              1.
                              
                                 How should credit terms be structured in the presence of multiple products?
                              

Most of the credit term models in Section 3.3 develop recommendations for firms with one product. While such firms exist (startups, for example), they may not be representative of the economy. Typically, firms carry several products and offer industry-specific credit terms (Smith, 1987). The possibility of carrying several products directly raises two questions: (1) Are credit terms calculated from single product models still optimal? and (2) How should credit terms be structured in the presence of multiple products? For example, there may be one credit term per product, there may be one credit term per buyer, there may be one credit term per group of products and/or buyers, or there may be only one credit term regardless of products and buyers. Since some cost parameters are product-specific (e.g., holding costs) but others are buyer-specific (e.g., capital costs), research is needed to investigate if averages of these parameters continue to be optimal. Similarly, and linked to this question, research is needed that investigates if and how credit terms may be structured.


                                 Are there other relevant decision variables?
                              


                                 Table 3 reveals that, while certain decision variables are part of most credit term models (e.g., credit periods, order quantities, lot size multipliers), other decision variables are discussed less often (e.g., prices, cash discounts). However, these decision variables may always be present or at least be very common. Ng et al. (1999), for example, report that 11 out of 27 industries in the US offer cash discounts. Furthermore, these decision variables affect the buyer’s and the supplier’s profits. Therefore, future research should study additional decision variables. Next to price, cash discounts and two-part terms in general, future work should investigate alternative credit terms such as progressive interest schemes and date terms (e.g., Robb & Silver, 2006). Finally, research is needed that compares the performance of these credit terms and develops recommendations for when to use which type of credit term.


                                 Can trade credit be used to alleviate the effects of operational uncertainty?
                              

While the consideration of stochastic demand may not be important in itself (cf. the heuristics literature, e.g., Zheng, 1992), there is reason to believe that trade credit may alleviate the effects of demand uncertainty. If demand is deterministic, buyers may calculate inventories, cash, and borrowings precisely. If demand is stochastic, however, buyers may experience cash flow shortfalls and may be unable to purchase raw materials. In such cases, trade credit may help buyers to carry out production decisions, avoid supply disruptions (Fisman, 2001) and reduce transaction costs for suppliers (e.g., for call centers that handle overdue accounts). Trade credit should therefore increase with demand uncertainty. Similarly, trade credit may increase with lead time uncertainty. Numerical examples in Charharsoogi and Heydari (2010), however, suggest that trade credit decreases with lead time uncertainty. More research is therefore needed to investigate how trade credit relates to operational uncertainty and if trade credit may be used to alleviate its effects.


                                 Is it important to account for cash flow timing in the objective function?
                              

The objective function of credit term and settlement period decision models may be formulated in either of two ways: based on the opportunity cost approach or based on the net present value approach. The opportunity cost approach adds the trade credit benefits to the objective function. Therefore, under the opportunity cost approach, the objective function closely resembles the original economic order quantity model, can often be solved in closed form, and is perceived to be simple to analyze. The net present value approach, on the other hand, adds the discounted trade credit benefits to the objective function. Therefore, it is an accurate measure of value creation, which maximizes wealth. The net present value approach, however, is much less popular; perhaps because its objective function is more complex or perhaps because its analysis is more difficult. Similar to the discussion in the finance literature (cf. Kim & Feist, 1995), research is therefore needed that compares the outcomes of these two approaches. If there is no significant cost improvement linked to the net present value approach, future research may use the more popular opportunity cost approach. While this comparison may be a stepstone only, the results would represent an important foundation for other contributions.


                                 How do credit terms change when information is incomplete?
                              

Often, credit term and settlement period models analyze buyers and suppliers that use trade credit to coordinate order quantities or to share capital access. Most of these models assume complete information, meaning that the buyer and the supplier know all parameters and have the same information. In reality, however, buyers and suppliers may not have the same information. The contracting literature suggests that if information is held asymmetrically, joint profits may be either lower or higher depending on the contract type (Corbett & Tang, 1999; Corbett, Zhou, & Tang, 2004). Interestingly, the most common trade term, i.e., the combination of a fixed wholesale price and a net credit term, may be interpreted as a two-part nonlinear contract (with a fixed wholesale price) suggesting that joint profits are higher when trade credit is the supply contract. Thus, one may conjecture that trade credit alleviates the consequences of asymmetric information. Although interesting, neither the argument nor the contracting literature (since it ignores capital costs) explains how to set credit terms under incomplete information. Therefore, future research should investigate optimal credit terms under incomplete information.

The models reviewed here, and summarized in Tables 3 and 4, build on a number of the trade credit motives in Table 1. Some motives are at the core of several models, e.g., product market position and price elasticity of demand. Other motives, however, have been discussed less often, e.g., collateral value and credit information. Yet, these motives and the insights associated with them may be important to incorporate. We, therefore, outline how operations management research may be advanced by building on the additional trade credit motives. For this purpose, we sort these remaining motives into three groups (capital access; collateral value, credit information, and non-salvageable investment; transaction pooling, credit rationing, and control protection) and propose corresponding research questions.
                           
                              1.
                              
                                 How should credit terms be structured in supply chains?
                              

Similar to the recent interest in two-stage credit models in order quantity decisions (cf. Section 3.2), research should investigate how trade credit should be structured in supply chains. While we possess knowledge about how order quantities react to changes in capital cost parameters in the presence of accounts receivable and payable (Teng & Chang, 2009), we lack insights into how credit offered should react to credit received, especially across several echelons. Data suggest that accounts receivable increase relative to the distance to the end-consumer (cf. Fig. 2). However, this observation may be due to price rather than credit term differences. Even if differing credit terms are at the heart of this observation, it is not well understood if cascading credit terms are optimal. While they may serve as equity stakes in the buyer’s production process (Kim & Shin, 2007) or as instruments to protect non-salvageable investments (Smith, 1987), cascading credit terms may just be a relict that leads to inefficient capital allocation (Long, Malitz, & Ravid, 1993). Research is therefore needed that investigates how to allocate capital along supply chains with the help of credit terms.


                                 How does the possibility of default affect the credit term decision?
                              

Recent research suggests that the buyer’s risk of default affects the credit granting rather than the credit term decision (Shi & Zhang, 2010). Thus, their functional separation in practice may be efficient and the incorporation of default risk into credit term models may not be a priority. However, this research is based on net terms. Other credit terms, e.g., two-part terms, may be sensitive to default risk. For example, the theoretical models in Smith (1987) and Wilner (2000) suggest that cash discounts in two-part terms depend on buyer default risk and predict that cash discounts will be deep when buyers are deemed risky or when suppliers make significant non-salvageable investments. Therefore, future research should investigate if buyers that differ with respect to default risk should be offered different credit terms or if, perhaps, a limited set of credit terms may be sufficient.


                                 How does the possibility of late payment affect the settlement period decision?
                              


                                 Howorth and Reber (2003) document that late payment, i.e., the settlement of invoices after the due date, is common in firms that lack cash to finance their operations. They also document that suppliers react to late payments by withholding further supplies or levying penalty charges. The current literature on settlement period decisions reflects these successive activities only partially. For example, some works assume that payments can never be late (Haley & Higgins, 1973; Huang & Chung, 2003; Ouyang et al., 2005; Ho et al., 2008), while other works assume that payments are always late but entail no supplier reaction (Jamal et al., 2000; Sarker et al., 2000; Liao & Chen, 2003). While the validity of the second assumption depends on the business environment (Shi & Zhang, 2010, for example, describe that supplier reactions to late payment are less common in developing countries), the first assumption may be easily criticized. Therefore, future research should relax the assumption of timely payment and integrate supplier reactions. The absence of such reactions may then be regarded as a special case of a more general model.

@&#SUMMARY@&#

This article provided an integrative review of several streams of the trade credit literature and deduced questions for future research. We began by highlighting the well-developed literature on trade credit motives. This literature proposed six major supply-side motives (capital access, product market position, price elasticity, collateral value, credit information, and non-salvageable investment) and three major demand-side motives (transaction pooling, credit rationing, and control protection). We also presented three emerging literature streams that covered order quantity, credit term, and settlement period decisions. One of the main findings of the literature on order quantity decisions was that the presence of trade credit increased the economic order quantity. One of the main findings in the literature on credit term decisions was that trade credit could serve as a buyer–supplier coordination mechanism. Finally, one of the main findings in the literature on settlement period decisions was that in many instances order quantities and settlement periods needed to be determined jointly.

Following the literature review, we derived an agenda for future research. We built this agenda around two core themes: Opportunities arising from inside and opportunities arising from outside operations management. For order quantity decisions, our analysis suggested that the research opportunities in Chang et al. (2008) continued to be relevant and we therefore focused our research agenda on credit term and settlement period decisions. The first theme, opportunities arising from inside operations management, suggested that multiple product settings, alternative credit schemes, operational uncertainty, cash flow timing, and incomplete information were promising avenues for future research. The second theme, opportunities arising from outside operations management, suggested that the study of multiple echelons, default risk, and late payment presented exciting opportunities for future research.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The authors thank the Editor Prof. Robert Dyson, University of Warwick, as well as the anonymous referees for their constructive feedback that improved this paper.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

