@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#What is a good result in the first leg of a two-legged football match?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We use data on 6975 two-legged ties in pan-European club football tournaments.


                        
                        
                           
                           We estimate a probit model to assess probabilities of reaching the next round.


                        
                        
                           
                           The model accounts for team strengths.


                        
                        
                           
                           Estimates are for use once the result of the first leg is known.


                        
                        
                           
                           What is a “good” first-leg result for a club has changed substantially over time.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

OR in sports

Football

Two-legged matches

Home advantage

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The most important pan-European football tournaments include ties where two clubs play each other over two matches and the aggregate score determines which is admitted to the next stage of the competition. A number of stakeholders may be interested in assessing the chances of progression for either of the clubs once the score of the first match (leg) is known. The paper asks what would be a “good” result for a team in the first leg. Employing data from 6,975 contests, modelling reveals that what constitutes a good result has changed substantially over time. Generally, clubs which play at home in the first leg have become more likely to convert any given first-leg result to eventual success. Taking this trend into account, and controlling for team and country strength, a probit model is presented for use in generating probability estimates for which team will progress conditional on the first-leg scoreline. Illustrative results relate to ties where two average teams play each other and to ties where a relatively weak club plays home-first against a relatively strong club. Given that away goals serve as a tie-breaker should aggregate scores be equal after the two matches, the results also quantify how great the damage is when a home-first club concedes an away goal.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The two pan-European competitions organised by UEFA (the Champions League and the Europa League) are the most lucrative club football tournaments in the World. For the organisers, they generated commercial income, principally from the sale of television rights, of more than €1.6b in 2013–14 (www.uefa.com). Their structure has varied over time, no doubt in order to increase this commercial income further, but currently features both ‘group’ and ‘knock-out’ stages.

The group stage comprises mini leagues in which each club plays each other club at home and away to determine which two in the group will proceed to the next phase of the competition. The knock-out stages, including the rounds leading to the Final, are organised on a straight elimination basis such that pairs of clubs play each other twice (once at each of the home stadia) and the aggregate score over the two matches (‘legs’) determines which will survive to the next round. If the aggregate scores are equal, the first tie-breaker is the number of away goals scored by each club. If this still does not settle the issue, resort is made in the second-leg, first to 30 minutes extra time and then, if necessary, to a penalty shoot out.

Operational researchers have investigated a range of issues in sport (Wright, 2009, 2014) including proposing models for the evaluation of performance after a contest (Fried, Lambrinos & Tyner, 2004) and for forecasting final outcome as an event unfolds (Klaasen & Magnus, 2003). This paper touches on both these themes. It seeks means of offering guidance to interested parties once the first-leg score in a European tie has been determined, in terms of how satisfactory the result was for a club and what the prospects are of the club advancing to the next round.

A probabilistic assessment of which club will progress is likely to be useful in decision taking by a variety of stakeholders. For example, the organisers of the competition will likely wish to assign the best qualified referees to second-leg ties where the outcome of the tie is still most in the balance. Broadcasters in many markets have to choose which of several matches on the same night to show on television or assign to their principal channel; the degree of suspense remaining over which team will survive to the next round will be relevant. Supporters of the club which played at home in the first-leg must decide whether it is worthwhile to make an expensive international journey to attend the second-leg; they may wish to conserve their funds if they would be travelling for an almost lost cause. Coaches and players have to decide how much effort to place into the second-leg; here again it matters whether the second-leg is almost a ‘dead rubber’ or whether everything remains to play for (for example, a coach may rest key players to conserve their energy for upcoming domestic matches where the probability of advancement in Europe is either very high or very low). Finally, bettors and bookmakers may wish to engage in wagering on the ultimate outcome of the tie and therefore need to assess the probabilities at the mid-way point.

To all these actors, the model we propose has potential value in decision making in the time between the first- and second-legs. For coaches, the model may also have utility prior to and during the first-leg. In formulating strategy, a coach will need to think about what would be an appropriate target result. Possible strategies, ranging from very defensive to very offense-orientated, carry different degrees of risk. A coach may, for example, eschew further risk (and switch to emphasising defence) once his team has established a goal superiority which, if maintained until the end of the first match, would give a satisfactory probability of progression to the next stage of the competition. In offering a means to estimate probabilities of progression, the paper therefore serves also as a contribution to sport analytics, the application of statistics and operational research to strategy formation in sport.

We employ a data set we assembled which includes all 6975 two-legged ties played in the Champions League and the Europa League, and their predecessor competitions, from the introduction of the away goals rule (for settling ties where aggregate scores are level) in the 1960s to the end of season 2012–13. Controlling for team strength, we investigate the significance of different first-leg scores for the chances of either team progressing to the next phase. What constitutes a favourable outcome for a club will prove to have changed over time and we will therefore present illustrative probabilities based on estimation of a model using only the final sixteen years of the data period.

We first collected data on all past results in the histories (1955–2013) of the UEFA Champions League and the Europa League and their predecessor competitions.

The source data archive was that provided by the Rec. Sport Soccer Statistics Foundation (www.rsssf.com), which has been compiled and curated by volunteers over a long period.

This data archive offers an invaluable resource; but extracting information to be used in data analysis and for generation of predictor variables involving clubs’ past performances is not straightforward and presents many challenges. For example, the structure in which the data are held varies over matches and club and country names are often entered inconsistently (one club name, Ferencvárosi T.C. appeared in eight different variants). Our process for building our own data base from the source data base included (i) crawling the files at www.rsssf.com, (ii) using Information Extraction techniques to obtain information on match and tie outcomes, (iii) using Information Integration to address the problem of inconsistent club names, and (iv) creating covariates based on performances in previous seasons of European competition prior to the subject tie taking place.

From the data set we constructed, we use in modelling only ties played under the away goals rule for determining progression to the next round when the aggregate scores are level (in early years, either a coin was tossed or a third game was organised in a neutral country). This means that we do not include in subsequent analysis any ties played before 1965 and only a proportion of those which took place between 1965 and 1970. This still permits consideration of 6975 two-legged ties.

Our focus was on probabilistic prediction of the outcome of a tie conditional on the score in the first-leg. But, clearly, the probabilities for a given score will vary with the strength of the two clubs.


                     Page and Page (2007) presented an unconditional model for forecasting the outcome of a tie (i.e. to be used prior to the first-leg score becoming known), employing a large data set which had several years in common with ours but which combined contests with and without the away goals rule in force. In constructing their control variables for team strength, they did not seek to capture domestic records of participating clubs (by metrics such as win-ratios or league position) because there is so much heterogeneity across Europe in the quality of opposing teams faced by clubs in their respective domestic competitions. Instead, they based their ‘ability’ variable directly on the official UEFA club ratings used in seeding within its competitions.

Currently the UEFA rating is an unweighted average of the number of ‘points’ won by a club in European competitions in each of the preceding five seasons, where points are earned according to its match results and the phase of the competition to which the club survived. For example, taking part in the group stages of the Champions League gives a club 4 points; it earns 2 points for each win and 1 for each draw; and it receives 5 more points for making it from the group stage to the last 16. In addition, a club's rating also includes 20% of the value of a similar index calculated according to the performances of all the clubs from its national league in the preceding five seasons.

From the perspective of using it in a statistical model, the official index has obvious weaknesses. It treats performances over the previous five seasons equally whereas information from more recent seasons may be more relevant to predicting the outcome of a tie. Further, the relative weights given to performances by the club itself and by all clubs from its national league appear to be arbitrary. Therefore we created our own indices to capture strength though based on the same informational input as the official ratings.

We use separate ratings of club and country strength as covariates in the statistical model to avoid the arbitrary weightings used in UEFA's calculations. We also give more weight to more recent years (the most recent year has the weight one, the preceding year a weight of one-half, the year before that of one-third, and so on). Of course, it could be argued that imposing a particular rate of decay of weights is itself arbitrary. Therefore we re-estimated the models below, replacing the ratings of club and country strength for the two teams using separate indices for each of the five years on which the strength variables are based. This has the virtue of allowing the data to determine weights and the number of observations is comfortably large enough to accommodate the increase in the number of parameters to be estimated. However, the gain achieved, as measured by forecasting efficacy, was always marginal (for example varying the Brier score by no more than 0.1). Therefore, in the interests of parsimony, we report only results from a model where clubs’ strengths are measured by single indices of each of club strength and country strength.

Points for inclusion in the strength indices were calculated as follows.

Whenever a club was observed to have reached a round with n clubs remaining in the competition, it was awarded 1/n points for the particular season. This award was doubled if the competition was the Champions League (or its predecessor, the European Cup) as opposed to the lower status Europa League (and its predecessor tournaments).

Because there were changes in the number of rounds or phases over time, a club's score (total points) for any particular year was then normalised by the total score calculated across all clubs in the competitions that season. Finally, this normalised score was multiplied by 1000 (to avoid working with very small numbers). This was our club score for a single season. The club's strength at season t was the weighted average of its scores between seasons t-5 and t-1, as described earlier.

Country strength indices were similarly calculated, with the same points generated whenever any club from its national league progressed to a further round. In the cases of Russia, the Czech Republic and (unified) Germany, the country strength index was calculated such that, when the new jurisdiction was established, it was presumed to have “inherited” earlier performances by clubs in the CIS, in Czechoslovakia and in West Germany respectively.


                     Table 1 presents summary statistics for the measures of club and country strength variables for each of three periods within our data set and for other data to which reference is made below. The three periods defined are of equal length though the number of observations in each period increases over time because of changes in the size and structure of the tournaments.

It may be noted that the means of the club and country strength variables for home-first clubs (those which played host in the first-leg) are always lower than those for away-first clubs. This reflects that, in a (limited) number of ties, the order in which the two legs are played is not determined by random draw. For example, after the Champions League group stage, the top two clubs in each group proceed to the knock-out Round of Sixteen. Here group winners are seeded to play group runners-up and the former are allocated to play away-first. Subsequent rounds of the competition are, however, drawn randomly without seeding.

Generally, there appears to be a slight advantage to playing away-first as, in each period, (significantly) fewer than one-half of home-first clubs progressed to the next phase (Table 1). However, this away-first advantage could be illusory given that mean strength is greater for away-first clubs. Therefore, in preliminary analysis, we estimated an unconditional probit model for each of our three periods where the probability of progression by the home-first club was a function of just the club and country strength variables. We then predicted the probability where all four strength variables were set equal to their respective mean values. Predicted probabilities for the three periods were .463, .467 and .473. Each of these estimates was significantly different from .500 (p < .05 in the first two cases, p = .05 in the third). Therefore, after adjusting for strength, playing away-first was found still to confer an advantage albeit one of modest magnitude.

Several authors (e.g. Flores, Forrest & Tena, 2012; Goddard & Asimakopoulos, 2004) have modelled the results of football matches using an ordered probit estimator, where the three possible outcomes are home win, draw and away win. In this paper, we are interested in a binary outcome and therefore use a probit model where the outcome for which probability is predicted is that the home-first club progresses to the next stage of the tournament.

The model assesses the probability conditional on the score realised in the first-leg of the tie. This is represented by ten indicator variables, each representing a scoreline. Some of these describe particular scores, such as 0–0, whereas others aggregate to avoid having categories with small numbers of observations. In particular, away-first victories by more than two goals are relatively rare in the data set and always resulted in ultimate victory in the tie: therefore, all away-first wins by two or more goals are grouped together in one category.

The ten indicator variables denoting the first-leg score together cover all possible first-leg results. This means that the probit is estimated without a constant term (in effect, each of the ten coefficients is a constant term specific to the state of the world described by that indicator variable).

The probability to be estimated is that of home-first progression and the regressors are: home-first club strength index, away-first club strength index, home-first country strength index, away-first country strength index, and dummy variables representing first-leg results of

                        
                           (i)
                           0–0 draw

Score draw

Home-first team won 1–0

Home-first team won 2–0

Home-first team won by 3 or more goals without reply (e.g. 4–0 or 6–0)

Home-first team won by 1 goal with away goal(s) (e.g. 2–1 or 3–2)

Home-first team won by 2 goals with away goal(s) (e.g. 3–1 or 4–2)

Home-first team won by 3 or more goals with away goal(s) (e.g. 4–1 or 5–2)

Away-first team won by 1 goal

Away-first team won by 2 or more goals

The proportions of first-leg results in each scoreline category are displayed in Table 1. It is striking that the relative frequency of scores favourable to the home team diminished over time. Aggregating, 56.2% of first-legs were won by the home team in 1965/6 to 1980/1, but only 52.8% in 1981/2 to 1996/7 and 46.1% in 1997/8 to 2012/13. This negative trend in home advantage mirrors that reported by Dobson and Goddard (2011, p. 57) for Europe's top-division domestic leagues. For example, the proportion of German matches won by the home team declined from 54.3% in 1973–81 to 45.3% in 2005–9. Speculation on the reasons for a lessening in home advantage has included focus on factors such as improvement in travel, making for less fatigue, and improved training to make players less sensitive to pressure from a hostile crowd.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The first three columns of Table 2 display estimates for the probit model applied to each of the three periods. Estimation used the stata software package with the command ‘probit’.

Interpretation of the coefficient estimates in a probit model is not as straightforward in probit as it is in linear regression. Probit is a non-linear model. Consequently, the impact on the predicted probability of a one unit change in the value of a covariate will vary according to the current values of that and all other covariates in the model.

To assist interpretation, we used the three equations to generate corresponding probability estimates for home-first progression in the competition for the case where the four ‘strength’ variables were set equal to their respective means as observed separately in the three periods. These probability estimates are displayed (with standard errors) in the first three columns of Table 3
                     .

The pattern revealed is that, for any given scoreline, home teams have become more adept at converting that result to success over the whole tie. For example, in the first period (column 1), the closest to a neutral result was 1–0. This gave a probability of .533 that the home-first club would win the tie (and a .467 probability that the away-first club would win the tie). The final outcome was still “in the balance”. But, from data on the most recent period (column 3), 1–0 now gives the home-first club a probability of .653 (and the away-first club a probability of .347). Now a first-leg win by 1–0 must be considered a good result for the home-first club, giving it an almost 2-to-1 advantage going into the second-leg.

Similarly, winning by one goal but conceding an away goal (in a large majority of the cases in the sample, this meant a 2–1 scoreline) had to be considered a poor result for the home-first club in the first data period: it would have been the underdog in that its probability of progression would have been only .380. But now, from the most recent data, it can view itself as slight favourite (probability .553). In fact, this outcome, of the ten possible outcomes we have defined, is now the closest to being neutral: it is the result which yields the most balanced contest going into the second leg.

It is of interest also to use the probabilities to illustrate the importance of the away goals rule: “if the two teams involved in a tie score the same number of goals over the two legs, the team which scores more goals away qualifies for the next stage” (Regulations for the Champions League, www.uefa.com). The damage inflicted on the home-first club by an away goal in the first leg proves to be severe. Comparing the probability of home-first progression for a one-goal win with or without away goals reveals a gap of exactly ten percentage points, using the most recent period. Similarly, a score draw, compared with a 0–0 draw, is also associated with a fall in probability of ten percentage points. Indeed, a score draw leaves the visiting club an underdog by nearly 3-to-1 concerning progression to the next stage.

It is understandable in the context of these estimates that commentators note a tendency for home-first clubs nowadays to emphasise defence in the first-leg. Arsène Wenger (Arsenal F.C.), one of Europe's longest serving head coaches, has argued that the away goals rule has resulted in less attractive matches because “at home, the first thing managers say is let's not concede goals” (The Guardian, December 21, 2013). Their defensive mind set is validated by the data here, which illustrate the damaging effect of an away goal, such that, for example, a 1–0 win is much to be preferred to a 2–1 win from the perspective of the home-first club.

Returning to our main exercise, the significance of a given first-leg result during the final period proved in most cases to be very different from that of the same result in the first period or the second period. This leads us to the conclusion that only data from the final period should be employed in modelling when the intention is to provide guidance for stakeholders in the present. However, a complication arises. There is a change towards higher probabilities of home-first progression (conditional on the first-leg scoreline) as we go from the first period to the second and from the second to the third. This is suggestive of a long-run trend. Our third period extends over sixteen seasons and the effects of any trend within that sixteen year period should be accounted for when preparing estimated probabilities relevant to stakeholders at the end of the period.

We re-estimated the probit model, for the third period only, adding ten interaction terms (in each case, a time trend multiplied by the indicator variable for a particular scoreline). However, only two of these were significant at the 10% level (time
                     *
                     0–0 draw and time*score draw) and so only these two were retained in our final estimation (Table 2, column 4) to be used to generate final probability estimates.

The corresponding probability estimates are presented in the fourth column of Table 3. Again, the values of the club and country strength variables have been set to their respective means. Time has been set to its value at the end of the period (season 2012/13). The trend towards home-first clubs becoming more likely to overcome being held to a first-leg draw is evident in the increased probability estimates compared with those reported in the third column of the table. Now a 0–0 draw is only marginally unfavourable for the home-first club, reflecting that single-match home advantage has been falling such that the tie is still relatively open when it travels for the second-leg with no goals yet on the board for either side. In fact, by the end of the period, 0–0 has become the result closest to leaving each side with the same chance of progression. This scoreline of 0–0, and also a scoreline like 2–1 (a one-goal win by the home-first club but with away goal(s)), are the only two of the ten defined outcomes which leave anything approaching parity between the two teams following the first-leg. This implies, for example, that such matches might, all things being equal, be considered strong candidates to be considered for television coverage in the second-leg. In the column (4) results, the marginal damage associated with conceding a goal at home (a score draw rather than a 0–0 draw) is shown now also to be greater than before (the gap is now more than 13 percent points), justifying any tendency for home-first clubs to have become increasingly defensive-minded in first-legs.

The implications of the model have been illustrated by reference to the case of a tie between two ‘average’ clubs of equal strength. Of course, probabilities could be generated corresponding to other possible scenarios. In the final column of Table 3, we present probability estimates (derived from the estimation results in Table 2, column 4) for the case where a relatively weak club (club-strength = .0903) is home-first to a relatively strong club (club-strength = .4044), the values for club strength being set at the 25th and 75th percentiles. Country strength variables are still set equal to each other at the mean across all clubs and time is set at the value corresponding to the final season of the data set for the third period.

Naturally, since the home-first club is now weaker than its opponent, its probability of progression conditional on the first-leg scoreline, is always lower than in the previous exercise (though the marginal damage from an away goal is similar). Now a 0–0 draw leaves the home-first club emphatically the underdog (probability .369) but a 1–0 win gives it the edge (probability .558) over its more illustrious opponent, going into the second-leg.

The probabilities for home-first progression corresponding to each possible first-leg scoreline are summarised by Figs 1 and 2
                     
                      for the two cases of a contest between two average teams and a contest where a ‘weak’ club is home-first to a ‘strong’ club.

Finally, we considered the possibility that constructing our own club and country strength variables might have unduly influenced the results. Therefore, we re-estimated all the equations substituting the strength variables with the official UEFA club ratings, used in seeding and described in Section 3 above. There are no separate country strength variables but ratings for clubs incorporate a measure of past country performance in the calculations of the figure for each club. The method for calculation used by UEFA was subject to changes made in 1999, 2004 and 2009 such that ratings each time took on a different scale than before. Therefore we used standardised values of the club ratings to represent club strength.

We repeated the estimation of the four probit models for which results are reported in Table 3 but with the four strength variables now replaced by two new variables, the standardised UEFA rankings for the home and away clubs. Model fit proved inferior for each of the four models, relative to our original specifications with our own-constructed strength variables. This was true in each case whether we evaluated using the Akaike information criterion (AIC) or the Bayesian information criterion (BIC). Therefore there appears to have been value in separating out club and country strength and in attaching greater weight to performances in more recent seasons. Of course, users of the model in the future might find it cheaper in terms of effort to employ published UEFA rankings. Therefore we provide Table 4, which shows corresponding results to those reported in Table 3 but using standardised UEFA ratings to control for strength. This may allow a judgement to be taken on how much practical difference it makes to use the (statistically) inferior model.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

We set out to provide a model which could be used by stakeholders to assess the chances of success for either club in a two-legged European football match when the result of the first-leg is already known. We expected the results also to be of inherent interest to followers of European football. Our data set encompassed all such matches in UEFA club competitions since the away goals rule was introduced in the 1960s.

It became evident that the answer to the question of what is a good first-leg result in a two-legged contest is not static. For example, what used to be a neutral result for the home-first club is now a “good” result. This reflects that single-match home advantage has been diminishing in European football generally and now home-first teams have a better chance of defending a given score when it is their turn to travel.

For those, such as broadcasters, who want to identify second-leg matches where there is greatest uncertainty of tie outcome, suspense will be maximised where the first-leg score is 0–0 or 2–1 if all the matches are between average strength teams. But the model can be employed to generate probabilities across a heterogeneous set of matches and we found that a 1–0 win for an underdog gave it a better-than-evens chance of causing an upset in the tie as a whole. In this circumstance, the fans may find it worthwhile to travel and the clubs to field full-strength teams!

@&#REFERENCES@&#

