@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Exploring two explanations of loyalty in application service provision

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We model two conflicting explanations of loyalty in application service provision.


                        
                        
                           
                           One stream of literature focuses on partnership-trust.


                        
                        
                           
                           Other literature focuses on service quality-satisfaction.


                        
                        
                           
                           We test our model using a survey of 135 ASP client firms.


                        
                        
                           
                           We find that satisfaction, not trust, predicts ASP loyalty.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

OR in service industries

Application service provider

Partnership

Service quality

Trust

Loyalty

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  While the application service provider (ASP) market continues to grow, it is fiercely competitive, and ASPs encounter difficulties in retaining customers and achieving long-term profitability. One stream of prior literature suggests that customer loyalty is driven by service quality, while another argues that loyalty is driven by partnerships between the firms. However, to date these competing explanations have not been tested together in the ASP context. This empirical study contributes to the literature by unifying these two previously separate streams of research on customer loyalty. Using a survey of 135 ASP clients, we find a significant relationship between the service quality perspective and the partnership perspective. We thus argue that service loyalty models ought to include both of these constructs in order to effectively explain service loyalty.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Application service providers (ASPs) represent an important evolution of information technology (IT) outsourcing services. The ASP model differs from conventional IT service outsourcing in that services are delivered on demand (Liu, Methapatara, & Wynter, 2010). ASP services can be engaged and disengaged at short notice, thereby allowing customers from a range of industries to achieve capital and infrastructural savings in ownership of their software solutions (Benlian & Hess, 2011; Kern, Kreijger, & Willcocks, 2002). The application services market is hence more diverse and complex than the traditional service market, and firms are struggling to understand how best to manage these differences (Gartner Research, 2009). The contribution of ASP to small, medium and large companies is currently significant and further research into ASPs and the SME market is required (Bayrak, 2013; Demirkan & Cheng, 2008): the ASP market is forecast to reach $69.8billion by 2015 (Global Industry Analysts, 2011), while the Asia–Pacific region has a projected growth of more than 18% over the period 2011–2015, as the demand for contractual IT services increases.

While this expected growth is a positive outcome for ASP as a business model, a closer look indicates a less than comfortable situation. Application service providers have encountered significant competition in retaining customers and achieving long-term profitability. International financial pressures mean that “clients are deferring project decisions, consolidating their vendor relationships, and starting to renegotiate prices with their existing providers” (Forrester Research, 2008, p. 1). Competition between ASPs is becoming more fierce: recent practitioner literature describes how “vendors will jockey to position themselves as thought leaders, strategic advisors, aggregators and implementers of architected solutions” (Gartner Research, 2011, p. 10). Contractual agreements are typically much shorter in the ASP context (Chang, Yen, Ng, & Chang, 2012; Susarla, Barua, & Whinston, 2009; Yao & Murphy, 2005), so customers need not remain with unsuitable providers. Retaining the loyalty of customers is thus a key challenge facing ASP managers.

The academic explanation for loyalty in the ASP context is not clear. One stream of research has argued that partnership builds trust, which leads to customer loyalty. More specifically, effective commercial partnerships enhance the trust, communication, cooperation, and functionality of the relationships that exist among parties, thus reducing conflict (Anderson & Narus, 1990). For example, Heart (2010) observed a positive relationship between trust and partnership in the SaaS context, while Rustagi, King, and Kirsch (2008) explored the use of control mechanisms to improve trust between partners in outsourcing relationships. Another stream of research has argued that service quality contributes to satisfaction, yielding long-term customer retention and loyalty (Heskett, Sasser, & Hart, 1990). For example, Ma, Pearson, and Tadisina (2005) examined how increases in service quality affected satisfaction among current and future ASP clients. Liu, Du, and Tsai (2009) also examined the relationship between service quality and satisfaction and its effects on service portal use.

However, in the context of loyalty, these two streams assume conflicting positions. On one hand, perceptions of service quality depend on explicit activity signals (Bhargava & Sun, 2008; Zeithaml, Parasuraman, & Malhotra, 2002). To improve service quality, managers must carefully assess and evaluate their customer needs (Fan, Kumar, & Whinston, 2009; Väyrynen & Kinnula, 2012). These explicit signals must be well documented, so that both parties have evidence of the other’s requirements and behavior (Dabholkar, Shepherd, & Thorpe, 2000; Grönroos, 1984). However, the other stream assumes that loyalty is based on trust, which can exist without explicit signals. Reichheld and Schefter (2000, p. 107) state that “to gain the loyalty of customers, you must first gain their trust”, Rosanas and Velilla (2003, p. 56) write that “loyalty and trust…represent the two sides of the same coin”, and Uys (2008, p. 907) argues, “loyalty requires trust”. Harris and Goode (2004) also claim that loyalty depends on trust. However, trust entails “a...level of faith in the intentions of the other party” (Rousseau, Sitkin, Burt, & Camerer, 1998, p. 400), and so formalized indicators and contractual mechanisms of behavior may be ineffective (Granovetter, 2008; Shapiro, 1987; Sitkin & Roth, 1993). Moreover, formal mechanisms “may not only fail to restore trust, but may lead to an escalating spiral of formality and distance that increases distrust” (Sitkin & Roth, 1993, p. 386). For this reason, Rosanas and Velilla (2003, p. 56) argue that “both trust and loyalty…cannot be expressed in the formal rules of an organization that specifies the results to be obtained”.

Because one explanation of loyalty depends on trust (positive beliefs in the absence of evidence), and the other depends on explicit requirements (clear signals of service requirements), the two explanations are in conflict. These two perspectives thus need to be tested together in order to better understand this situation. We argue that the current understanding of trust in the outsourcing literature is incomplete: to resolve this incompleteness, we use an explanation from trust theory which posits that interdependent partnership among parties will motivate and build trusting behaviors (Rousseau et al., 1998). We apply the construct of partnership to a model of loyalty in the outsourcing context, using the wider service literature as a basis. We argue that these trust perceptions may not hold in the ASP context, where partners cannot easily monitor each other’s behavior. In this case, service partners may lack the positive belief-based evidence that allow them to trust.

The focus of this study is thus to examine the relationships among partnership, service quality, and customer loyalty. Our objective is to unify the partnership-trust and service quality-satisfaction explanations of loyalty. Based on prior attitude-behavior research, we argue that the customer evaluations of the ASP’s level of partnership and quality of service would influence their affective states (i.e., trust and customer satisfaction) which, in turn, affect customer loyalty (i.e., behaviors). Nevertheless, we also argue that customer loyalty is more influenced by customer satisfaction than trust. Furthermore, based on the existing literature, we anticipate that partnership would lead to a higher level of service quality perceptions by customers. The results of this study could provide the literature with new insights into how working partnerships and service quality affect customer loyalty (Anderson & Narus, 1990; Delone & McLean, 2003; Grover, Cheon, & Teng, 1996; Lee & Kim, 1999; Sharma & Gupta, 2002). This work also has implications for ASPs that are interested in establishing continuing partnerships. Our results help ASP firms understand how to retain customers in the highly dynamic application service market, thereby growing their businesses and obtain and maintain competitive advantage in the digital era. We especially contribute to calls for a better understanding of the SME response to ASP services (Altaf & Schuff, 2010; Bayrak, 2013; Jeong & Stylianou, 2010).

Application service providers deliver business-to-business e-commerce services for small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) that cannot otherwise afford to implement expensive and complicated information systems (IS) (Heart & Pliskin, 2002; Smith & Kumar, 2004). ASPs are thus an outsourcing solution for SMEs that offer a leasing arrangement rather than a purchasing decision (Dibbern, Goles, Hirschheim, & Jayatilaka, 2004). However, the use of ASPs differs from typical IT outsourcing in terms of adoption, use and consequences, in particular in relation to SMEs (Smith & Kumar, 2004). The ASP model has been attractive to firms because it appears less risky, with fewer barriers to investment than traditional IS outsourcing (Ekanayaka, Currie, & Seltsikas, 2002). For example, SMEs can switch to different ASPs when their services do not match business needs and expectations (Barthelemy, 2001; Bennett & Timbrell, 2000; Fulford & Love, 2004), and thus retaining customer loyalty is a major challenge faced by ASPs.

The general service literature provides a basis for examining these phenomena. In explaining customer loyalty, the marketing management and IS literatures have emphasized both service marketing (Jiang, Klein, & Carr, 2002; Susarla, Barua, & Whinston, 2003; Zeithaml, 2000) and relationship marketing (Sheth & Parvatiyar, 2002). For the most part, these two streams of studies have developed without much overlap (Berry, 2002; Fullerton, 2005a), even though some of the related studies both focus on the same customer loyalty-related dependent variables (Fullerton, 2005b; Morgan & Hunt, 1994).

One view, principally based in the marketing literature, holds that service quality leads to customer loyalty (Zeithaml, 2000). A number of mechanisms have been proposed to explain this relationship, reflecting the popularity of loyalty as a construct in prior service research (Bloemer, De Ruyter, & Wetzels, 1999; Han, Kwortnik, & Wang, 2008; Jones & Taylor, 2007). For example, higher service quality results in more of the service partner’s needs being met in a cost-effective and timely manner. This relationship results in greater satisfaction, and a desire to continue it (Fullerton, 2005b). Higher service quality demonstrates a sensitivity to partner expectations (Brady & Cronin, 2001; Parasuraman & Grewal, 2000), and has been seen as a key factor in prior literature, whereby relational partners develop feelings of commitment (Allen & Meyer, 1990) because they enjoy dealing with the partner on an ongoing basis (Morgan & Hunt, 1994). This enjoyment reinforces satisfaction between partners, and raises the perceived switching costs involved in finding alternative partners (Fullerton, 2003), resulting in greater loyalty. Higher service quality also means that the relationship partners are more likely to accept price increases (Anderson, 1996; Zeithaml, Berry, & Parasuraman, 1996), be willing to act as a reference customer for promotional purposes (Anderson, 1998; Zeithaml et al., 1996), and to spread positive news of the relationship to others by word of mouth (Zeithaml, 2000).

Another view of loyalty is based on the effects of interrelated partnership in the service relationship, and this has largely been examined separately from the service quality perspective discussed above (Fullerton, 2005b). It holds that loyalty is driven by mutual trust between the partners, which, in turn, is motivated by the desire to achieve shared goals (Mohr & Spekman, 1994). Partnership builds trust by demonstrating a willingness to make significant relationship investments (Gundlach, 1995), establish an understanding of service and quality level requirements (Ma et al., 2005), and aim for compatibility, commitment and cooperation with regard to strategic goals (Jeong & Stylianou, 2010). This partnership behavior also establishes a vested interest between both parties to engage in behaviors that promote long term interaction and interdependence (Kumar, Scheer, & Steenkamp, 1995). The more durable and intimate the level of partnership, the higher the trust between the service partners, and the greater the level of loyalty and retention. These factors lead to higher confidence in the service relationship, and contribute to trust between partners.

After entering into a relationship with an ASP, a firm develops perceptions about the ongoing health and suitability of the partnership. These perceptions affect each party’s attitudes to the relationship, in turn affecting their intentions to end, change or preserve it (Ajzen & Fishbein, 2005; Fishbein & Ajzen, 1975). Positive perceptions are likely to lead to positive attitudes and behaviors. In the case of ASP relationships, positive perceptions of partnership and service quality are likely to lead to positive trust and satisfaction attitudes, which, in turn, lead to positive loyalty and continuance behaviors (Kettinger & Park, 2009). By contrast, negative perceptions of partnership and service quality will lead to negative attitudes towards trust and satisfaction, which can then result in lower continuance and loyalty affiliation behaviors. In this behavioral context, a valid relationship between the two parties can thus lead to continuance of the partnership (Klein, Crawford, & Alchian, 1978) and greater loyalty (Fullerton, 2005b; Fullerton & Taylor, 2002). Continuance is also rooted in switching costs (Gilliland & Bello, 2002) and scarcity of alternatives (Allen & Meyer, 1990). Based on this discussion, the overall research model is presented in Fig. 1
                     .

As Fig. 1 shows, we model both explanations for customer loyalty in the ASP context theorized in the prior literature. Our model also includes four hypotheses, each of which are detailed below.

Trust is seen as a vital attribute in an IT outsourcing relationship (Sabherwal, 1999). Empirical evidence has noted that trust increases commitment, enhances relationship longevity, reduces conflict between business partners, and can moderate the negative effects of uncertainty (Anderson & Narus, 1990). Trust is regarded as a safety net for financially-constrained small- and medium-sized enterprises when they are looking for IT outsourcing service, because they generally cannot secure tangible assurances in the form of mutual investments (Sharif, Kalafatis, & Samouel, 2005). However, the literature remains inconclusive with regard to whether a higher degree of partnership between small- and medium-sized firms and their ASPs could help to create more trust. Moreover, this study supposes that if a firm considers that its ASP is honest, capable, and providing a high quality service, then the firm is more likely to trust and rely on it. As partnership and quality of service represent antecedents that can elicit a firm’s positive perceptions of its ASP, this study thus presents the following hypothesis:
                           Hypothesis 1
                           The degree of IT outsourcing partnership has a positive effect on the firm’s trust of its ASP.

Loyalty is an important construct in prior service research (Han et al., 2008). A number of prior studies have drawn attention to the effect of trust on a firm’s behavior with regard to IT outsourcing (Lee, Huynh, & Hirschheim, 2008; Sharif et al., 2005), and mutual trust has been positively linked to outsourcing success (Lee et al., 2008), while trust also positively affects a firm’s long term orientation (Sharif et al., 2005). We argue that the more a small- and medium-sized firm trusts its ASP, the more likely the firm will continue its IT outsourcing relationship with the ASP. Therefore, the second hypothesis is as follows:
                           Hypothesis 2
                           There is a positive relationship between a firm’s trust of its ASP and its loyalty to its ASP.

Service quality leads to satisfaction by improving the relationship between a customer’s service expectations and the level of service provided to them (Oliver, 1980), and a number of prior studies have examined this relationship. For example, Liu et al. (2009) found a significant relationship between service quality and customer satisfaction in online portals. Bardhan, Demirkan, Kannan, Kauffman, and Sougstad (2010) illustrated how IT service providers work to increase quality assurance in order to improve satisfaction by improving the design and delivery of the outsourced IT services. Tallon (2010) presented similar empirical evidence regarding service quality from the banking industry, while Anderson, Fornell, and Mazvancheryl (2004) illustrated how a reduction in quality can also negatively affect service satisfaction. Consistent with this prior literature, we anticipate a positive relationship between service quality and satisfaction in the ASP context. This leads to our third hypothesis:
                           Hypothesis 3
                           The quality of service provided by an ASP has a positive effect on the firm’s satisfaction with its ASP.

Studies of business-to-business buyer behaviors have found that satisfaction with a product or service has a positive impact on attitudinal brand loyalty (Bennett, Hartel, & McColl-Kennedy, 2005). From a marketing viewpoint, a consumer’s continuance intention can be determined by their level of satisfaction (Anderson & Narus, 1990; Grover et al., 1996). Similarly, satisfaction has a strong linkage to repurchase intention (Anderson & Sullivan, 1993) and customer retention (Bolton, 1998; Rust, Zahorik, & Keiningham, 1995). Therefore, we argue that when a small- and medium-sized firm is satisfied with the IT outsourcing service they receive, they are more likely to remain loyal to the outsourcing relationship with their current ASP. Our fourth hypothesis is thus as follows:
                           Hypothesis 4
                           There is a positive relationship between a firm’s satisfaction with its ASP and its loyalty to its ASP.

In addition to our core hypotheses, the model includes three controls in order to eliminate alternative explanations. These controls are discussed below.

Prior IS studies have emphasized the importance of partnership in outsourcing (Lasher, Ives, & Jarvenpaa, 1991; Lee & Kim, 1999). Recent research has noted that healthy relationships can significantly enhance the benefits for both firms and their service providers (Lee, Huynh, Kwok, & Pi, 2003). In the marketing realm, researchers have identified a number of factors that affect working partnerships between firms and their service providers, such as communication, cooperation, and conflict resolution (Anderson & Narus, 1990). However, the literature is still ambiguous with regard to the partnership effects that arise between ASPs and small- and medium-sized firms, even though previous research indicated that the concept of partnership includes both benefits and risk sharing (Goo, Kishore, Nam, Rao, & Song, 2007). Therefore, this study considers partnership as a key factor in improving the performance of IT outsourcing, because ASPs should develop strategic partnerships that seek long-term relationships with small- and medium-sized firms.

IT outsourcing is provided by an external service provider, and can involve various facets of a firm’s IT development, operations and management (Rustagi et al., 2008). A key variable in measuring the overall success of an information system is the whole quality of service, which includes information quality, system quality, and service quality (Delone & McLean, 2003, 1992). Since services are fundamentally different from physical goods, a client firm will always consider an ASP’s trustworthiness and willingness to provide services as part of the quality of service (Lee & Kim, 1999). Because of the imprecise nature of services and the difficulty of ensuring consistent quality, firms often form ongoing relationships (i.e., partnerships) with their service providers (Grover et al., 1996), and these are formed with respect to specific service requirements and desired quality levels.

Satisfaction is based on a pleasurable level of service fulfillment (Oliver, 1996), or a post-purchase evaluation of quality given pre-purchase expectations (Anderson & Sullivan, 1993; Woodruff, Cadotte, & Jenkins, 1983). IS researchers have posited that user satisfaction is one of the most important measures of information system success (Delone & McLean, 2003, 1992). A client firm’s satisfaction with their ASP is thus influenced by the perceived performance of the focal service and the quality of the interaction with the service provider (Cronin & Taylor, 1992). Therefore, this study includes this relationship – the influence of expected service quality, as well as the quality of the ongoing partnership, will both directly affect the satisfaction of small- and medium-sized firms with their IT outsourcing – to enhance the external validity of our hypothesis testing.

A firm may not switch their IT outsourcing relationship to another ASP if there are no alternative providers to turn to. The availability of alternative ASPs thus means that a client firm is not bound to a single provider, and so we hence add the availability of alternatives to our model as a control variable.

@&#METHOD@&#

This section describes the field study this work carried out, including the survey constructs and items based on prior studies, the study participants, and the data collection processes.


                        Table 1
                         gives the definitions of the latent constructs and the number of measurement items for each of these. Each latent construct is modeled as a reflective construct consisting of its indicators. The prior literature has argued that constructs should be modeled as reflective if the following decision rules hold: the measure is expected to be correlated, dropping an indicator does not alter the meaning of the construct, measurement error is taken into account at the item level, the construct captures surplus meaning, and a scale score does not adequately represent the construct (Jarvis, MacKenzie, & Podsakoff, 2003). The survey used a seven-point Likert scale to capture the degree of respondent agreement with each statement, ranging from “strongly disagree” to “strongly agree”.

Participants were recruited in two ways. First, we contacted a group of ASPs and asked them to deliver the questionnaire to their customers. Second, we made direct contact with small- and medium-sized firms that had IT outsourcing experience and continued to do business with their ASP. After the first contact had been made, we sent e-mail reminders, providing respondents with the option of receiving another copy of the survey by regular mail or completing the survey online. The address of the online questionnaire was made available only to the small- and medium-sized firms which were first contacted directly.

In total, we received 158 responses via return mail, online submission, and e-mail. We found that 53 responses were invalid, leaving 135 complete responses, giving a usable response rate of 85.4%. Table 2
                         describes the demographic characteristics of the sample. Most respondents had more than five years’ operational experience, which suggested a good level of familiarity with their business processes. The sample consisted of various ASP service application providers, including e-commerce (29.6%), groupware (25.2%) and office automation (16.3%) companies. The industry breakdown suggests a reasonable sampling across industry groups, and no industry is significantly over-represented.

We conducted structural equation modeling (SEM) to assess the measurement and structural models (Anderson & Gerbing, 1988). For the reflective constructs, we conducted confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) using AMOS 6.0 to test convergent and discriminant validity. Harman’s (1976) single factor test was used to detect common method variance. In the unrotated factor structure, the first factor failed to comprise a majority of the variance from the five constructs, suggesting an absence of common method variance.

We then conducted a CFA of the six constructs for the 17 measurement items. Estimation of the CFA with five constructs resulted in acceptable goodness of fit statistics (X
                        2
                        =180.84; df=105; X
                        2/df=1.722; NFI=0.905; CFI=0.957; GFI=0.862; RMSEA=0.073). The results indicated that all factor loadings were above the recommended level of 0.5, and thus were significant (see Table 3
                        ).

Convergent validity in the CFA model was demonstrated by calculating composite reliability and average variance extracted (AVE). Composite reliability should be greater than the 0.7 threshold, which indicates adequate internal consistent among the respective constructs (Hair, Black, Babin, Anderson, & Tatham, 1995). AVE shows the ratio of the sum of the variance captured by the construct and measurement variance, and this was applied as the measure for convergent validity (Bagozzi & Yi, 1988). The composite reliability for each construct was above the recommended level of 0.7, and the AVE for each construct was greater than the recommended level of 0.5. These findings support the convergent validity of the model.

The estimated correlation between construct pairs and the shared AVE squared root of each construct were used as criteria to assess discriminant validity. The AVE squared root of each construct should be greater than its correlation with the other constructs (Fornell & Larcker, 1981). Table 4
                         shows that the AVE square root of each construct is greater than its correlation with the other constructs, showing evidence of acceptable discriminant validity.

The hypotheses were tested using SEM analysis with maximum likelihood estimation. Estimation of the structural model with five constructs resulted in good fitting statistical results (X
                        2
                        =198.044; df=113; X
                        2/df=1.753; NFI=0.896; CFI=0.952; GFI=0.854; RMSEA=0.75). The ECVI of the structural model was 2.075, which is less than the 2.284 and 14.527 values of the saturated and independence models, thus supporting model stability.


                        Fig. 2
                         shows the structural coefficients. For Hypothesis 1, the degree of partnership between a small- and medium-sized firm and it ASP had a positive impact on the firm’s trust of IT outsourcing. (β
                        =0.68, p
                        <0.001). For Hypothesis 2, the overall quality of service provided by an ASP had a positive impact on the firm’s satisfaction with IT outsourcing. (β
                        =0.33, p
                        <0.001). For Hypothesis 3, there was a positive relationship between a small- and medium-sized firm’s trust of IT outsourcing and its loyalty to its current ASP (β
                        =0.1, insignificant). For Hypothesis 4, there was a positive relationship between a small- and medium-sized firm’s satisfaction with IT outsourcing and its loyalty with regard to the continuance of IT outsourcing with its current ASP (β
                        =0.60, p
                        <0.001). The control relationships were also accepted: partnership had a positive impact on the quality of service. (β
                        =0.65, p
                        <0.001) and the firm’s satisfaction with IT outsourcing. (β
                        =0.66, p
                        <0.001). Estimated R
                        2 values for the three dependent variables were all quite high, at 61%, 82% and 48% for trust, satisfaction and loyalty, respectively. Further, the direct effect between service quality and loyalty was fully mediated by satisfaction. The significance of these path coefficients provides additional evidence in support of the research model (see Table 5
                        ).

The path analysis in Fig. 2 shows that partnership and quality of service are antecedents which can improve a firm’s perceptions of IT outsourcing, based on satisfaction and trust. Moreover, if a firm has positive perception of IT outsourcing, then it will express a certain degree of loyalty and choose to continue outsourcing its IT with the current ASP.


                        Table 5 shows the research hypotheses and their results. The results support the contention that partnership is positively linked to quality of service. Prior studies have noted that firms would like to form partnerships with their service providers in order to reduce uncertainties (Grover et al., 1996), and these ongoing relationships are normally formed to meet specific service and quality requirements. The results of this study confirm this argument. In addition, the evidence indicates that a higher degree of partnership between a small- and medium-sized firm and its ASP could help to raise trust (H1). This study also found that if an ASP can provide high quality services, the client firm is more likely to feel satisfied with its provider (H3), consistent with prior studies (Cronin & Taylor, 1992; Delone & McLean, 2003, 1992). Surprisingly, trust is not a significant direct antecedent of loyalty (H2) in this research model. Overall, the results are interesting because partnership does positively affect trust (H1), and the composite reliability (CR) of the trust construct is also high (.95, see Table 2), as is the average variance extracted (AVE) – .86. This unexpected result is interesting, since prior studies have indicated that trust can affect satisfaction (Lee & Kim, 2007) and long term relationship orientation (Sharif et al., 2005), and can also positively influence individual and organization benefits (Lee & Kim, 2007). Finally, when a firm is satisfied with the IT outsourcing services receive, they are more likely to continue the outsourcing relationship with their current ASP (H4).

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

This work has unified two previously separate streams of research into customer loyalty in the application service provider context. The first perspective on loyalty argued that higher service quality leads to greater customer satisfaction, in turn encouraging loyalty. The second perspective held that superior partnership behavior produced trust among service partners, thus contributing to loyalty. However, few prior studies have examined both partnership and quality of service as key factors in IT outsourcing relationships. In this work we first reviewed the literature on working partnerships, outsourcing relationships, and service quality (Anderson & Narus, 1990; Delone & McLean, 2003, 1992; Grover et al., 1996; Lee & Kim, 2007), employing satisfaction and trust as IT outsourcing cognition constructs (Sharif et al., 2005; Weitz & Jap, 1995). Using a questionnaire survey of 135 firms, we built a structural equation model to unify these theoretical perspectives. The results showed that partnership explained 61% of trust and, together with service quality, 82% of customer satisfaction. Our model explained almost 50% of the overall loyalty construct. As prior marketing and psychology literature has theorized that customers’ continuance intention is a consequence of their service satisfaction and trust (Fullerton, 2003; Klein et al., 1978), this study provides evidence to support the view that satisfaction can enhance loyalty toward an IT application service provider.

Our novel model provides a number of contributions to the literature, building on prior theories of service quality in two ways. First, the model shows the significant antecedent role played by partnership with regard to service quality. In unifying the two theoretical perspectives of partnership and service quality, our model highlights the importance of considering both views when exploring the ASP loyalty relationship, since a higher degree of partnership (based on joint problem solving, assistance and partner interaction) contributes to better service quality perceptions. The significant relationship between these two concepts underlines the fact that service loyalty models should include both of these constructs in order to effectively explain service loyalty. Our second contribution is that we illustrate the antecedent importance of partnership with regard to perceptions of service quality in the ASP context. With regard to the role of partnership, prior theory has held that greater interdependence, interaction, understanding and cooperation yield improved trust between partners. This partnership behavior builds trust between parties by demonstrating a willingness to be open and productive with each other. Our expanded model builds on this understanding by demonstrating that partnership behaviors can also increase customer satisfaction. Satisfaction and trust, two conceptually separate phenomena (Garbarino & Johnson, 1999; Kim, Ferrin, & Rao, 2009), both stem from partnership, because, in developing the heightened commitment and cooperation needed to meet strategic goals, partner needs are met, and partners perceive that they are engaged in a more trustworthy, participative and involved relationship.

We also contribute to a better understanding of the effects of satisfaction on loyalty in an ASP context. Whereas some prior studies have emphasized the importance of trust in the service relationship, our model demonstrates that trust alone is not enough to inspire customer loyalty. Instead, customer satisfaction is a significant driver of loyalty. However, despite the weak path between trust and loyalty, the two streams of partnership and service quality are both important in explaining loyalty, because of the significant antecedent effect of partnership on satisfaction.

The study may be subject to three limitations. One is that we only surveyed current ASP customers, which does not provide any insights into those customer relationships that have failed or were deemed unsuccessful. Second, the results of this study may include some bias, since the sample was restricted to SME firms in one geographic area. Studies conducted on larger client firms in other geographical regions may obtain slightly different results. Third, loyalty, while not the core focus of this paper, is related to a number of constructs in prior literature and these also deserve examination in future work.

This study adds evidence to the body of knowledge concerning how to retain a firm’s ASP IT outsourcing relationships. With regard to the implications for practitioners, as firms increase their IT outsourcing investments, it is necessary to better understand IT outsourcing and relationship outcomes with regard to ASP engagement. This study helps firms to reconsider the key IT outsourcing factors when recruiting an ASP. For managers considering engaging an ASP, our model illustrates that they should seek a provider with a positive and trustworthy attitude to customer service and relations, and look for a firm that maintains a participative, cooperative and mutual approach to conducting business. For ASP providers, our model shows the importance of loyalty and satisfaction in retaining customers. However, the model also shows that adequately tailoring ASP services to client needs is critical, and that even when controlling for the presence of other ASPs in the market, a truthful, competent and positive approach will encourage client loyalty. ASP managers would also benefit from advertising these aspects of their business to the market, and publishing detailing of successful working relationships should make their services more attractive to potential clients. Finally, while our study focuses on the market for ASP services, studies into general IT service provision could apply our model and theoretical development to further develop these findings in a broader context.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

