@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#A methodology for supporting strategy implementation based on the VSM: A case study in a Latin-American multi-national

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We crafted an enhanced methodology for organizational redesign based on the VSM.


                        
                        
                           
                           First documented use of the VSM as tool for strategy implementation in a large MNC.


                        
                        
                           
                           We describe in detail a successful application of mixed research methods.


                        
                        
                           
                           Innovative, participatory practices, which sought to overcome VSM’s limitations.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#




                     (I) OR in developing countries




                     (S) Complexity theory

Problem structuring (P)




                  

Viability theory

Organizational redesign

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Soft OR tools have increasingly been used to support the strategic development of companies at operational and managerial levels. However, we still lack OR applications that can be useful in dealing with the “implementation gap”, understood as the scarcity of resources available to organizations seeking to align their existing processes and structures with a new strategy. In this paper we contribute to filling that gap, describing an action research case study where we supported strategy implementation in a Latin American multinational corporation through a soft OR methodology. We enhanced the ‘Methodology to support organizational self-transformation’, inspired by the Viable System Model, with substantive improvements in data collection and analyses. Those adjustments became necessary to facilitate second order learning and agreements on required structural changes among a large number of participants. This case study contributes to the soft OR and strategy literature with insights about the promise and constraints of this soft OR methodology to collectively structure complex decisions that support organizational redesign and strategy implementation.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


                     Dyson, Bryant, Morecroft, and O’Brien (2007) view the strategic development process as one that explicitly incorporates reflective engagement and analytical reasoning, supported by models to help assess and rehearse strategic options. Systemic and soft OR researchers have traditionally contributed to the development of strategic management through the provision of methods and tools. Nevertheless, there is still a pervasive scarcity of resources to assist managers in dealing with what has been called in the strategy literature the “implementation gap” (Atkinson, 2006). In particular, the difficult task of adapting structures to the requirements of a newly agreed structure, has not been covered yet by any soft OR researcher.

In this paper we present an example of a soft OR methodology, the “Methodology to support organizational Self-Transformation” (Espinosa & Walker, 2012), adapted and used for such a purpose in a Latin-American multinational corporation. In order to be fit for this purpose, the intervening consultants had to further develop the methodology. This was achieved through the use of mixed methods in data gathering and analysis, and by the innovative design of meetings and workshops to support strategic agreements. These new tools, sought to: (a) investigate the structural constraints that prevented effective strategy implementation in a large organization and (b) facilitate the emergence of a political consensus among members representing all levels of organization, on cultural, structural and technological changes to mitigate such existing constraints.

In the final section, we reflect on the way that the innovations in methods and tools supported group learning, and provided improved reliability and robustness to the analyses. We close with a critical assessment of the experience, based on the feedback received from organization members through different assessments and suggest open paths for continued research in this field.

@&#LITERATURE REVIEW@&#

According to Mingers and White (2010), systems thinking and soft OR pioneers like Ackoff, Mintzberg, Pidd, Dyson and others have importantly influenced strategy theory developments. Particularly relevant is the Strategy Development Process (SDP) model from Dyson, Bryant, Morecroft, and O’Brien (2007) and Tomlinson and Dyson (1983), which presents a systemic view of the strategy development process. O’Brien (2011) identifies a range of soft OR applications in strategy as ‘strategic development support’, which involves the use of systemic frameworks, models and methods to support strategic development of an organization.

A review of the OR literature shows that tools based on OR/MS approaches are strongly present, both at the strategy level and in supporting operational issues which are important in creating strategic advantage (O’Brien, 2011). According to Stenfors, Tanner, Syrjänenc, Seppäläb, and Haapalinnab (2007), while most OR tools are used to achieve efficiency at the operational level, some of them are also employed to support strategic management. Mingers and White (2010) summarize the way soft OR methodologies have contributed to address issues of ‘strategy support’. Tables 1 and 2 (see Appendix A present relevant applications from soft OR approaches that aim to support different aspects of strategic management. Table 1 presents a summary of key examples of the soft OR approaches most commonly identified as offering contributions to strategy support – namely SSM, critical systems, systems dynamics, and more recently complex adaptive systems.

From Table 1, we find that SSM has been perhaps the most used soft OR for strategy support. In particular, Ormerod has used it extensively to structure strategic information systems planning (1995, 1996, 1997, 1998, 1999, 2001, 2009). His work includes detailed guidelines on how to use this soft OR approach to support IS strategy, but not organizational strategy. Eden and Ackermann (2000), Gregory and Midgley (2000), Jacobs (2004), and Kocher, Kaudela-Baum, and Wolf (2011) also offer insightful tools and examples on how to develop strategic direction using SSM. However, none of these authors offer criteria to address issues of strategy implementation, once such capabilities have been identified. Some explain insights from critical systems to support strategy development at a very generic level, but not specifically addressing the implementation gap – e.g. Cao, Clarke, and Lehaney (2004), Lyneis (1999), Lyneis, Cooper, and Els (2001). Also, there are a few promising works on the combined use of the strategy development process (SDP) and complex adaptive systems theory to support strategy, but not focused on implementation (Mason, 2007; Hammer, Edwards, & Tapinos, 2011; Houchin & MacLean, 2005).

Even if the VSM has not been recognized widely as a tool for strategy support, there is ample evidence of the potential of VSM applications to support strategic management and organizational changes, as shown in Table 2. Gregory (2007), Paucar-Caceres (2009), and Preece, Shaw, and Hayashi (2013) all use VSM with other soft or systemic approaches to support performance management or strategic information management. Other authors have used VSM to support strategy or policy formulation – i.e. Clemens (2009), Devine (2005), Stephens and Haslett (2011) – strategic relationships management (Golinelli, Pastore, Gatti, Massaroni, & Vagnani, 2011), and operational planning (Kinloch, Francis, Francis, & Taylor, 2009). While other authors in Table 2 offer examples of application of the VSM to support strategic changes in organizations, none of them has explained in detail the whole process and stages in a large systemic intervention aiming to align strategy and structure. They offer evidence of interventions to support organizational strategic developments that we may call, following Yearworth and White (2014), “non-codified uses” of Problem Structured Methods for strategic developments.

In summary, we could not find any application of a Problem Structured Method, or more broadly, a soft OR approach, that supported alignment of the organizational strategy and structure in a large company. The few available published applications of soft OR methodologies to support strategy and organizational changes do not present in detail the stages used for the analysis, the tools used to gather and analyze the data collected, and to structure collective decisions. This lack of detail makes it difficult to deal with the complexity of dealing with a large organization, as it leaves a lot of responsibility on the analyst’s judgment. This is acceptable for experienced analysts, but difficult for the uninitiated. Moreover, to our knowledge no study has explored the use of soft OR tools to engage in organizational redesign as part of the implementation of a newly crafted strategy.

We address this gap in the literature by presenting a complete redesign of a large Latin American multinational company, using an enhanced version of the ‘Methodology to support organizational self-transformation,’ focused to address the implementation gap in a large organization. The improved version of the methodology provides far more detail in the tools for data collection (surveys, interviews) and data analysis (VSM analysis combined with qualitative software and mind maps) than the original one. It also provides more structure in the interaction with customers, by designing a better context for collective decision-making: namely, workshops in which double loop learning is facilitated at different stages during the intervention.

By early 2012, Marval S.A.
                        2
                        www.marval.com.co.
                     
                     
                        2
                      (hereafter “Marval”) was the largest building company in Colombia, by revenue.
                        3
                        For tax related reasons, the organization is broken up nominally in two different corporations, Marval S.A. and Urbanizadora Marin Valencia S.A., by revenue the 2nd and 6th largest building companies in 2011, respectively. However, if both are consolidated, they become Colombia’s largest building corporation, outstripping SFM S.A, its main competitor, by 14%. Source: “Gestor Comercial y de Crédito”. Database, www.gestorcc.com, retrieved 3-on March 15–12, 2013.
                     
                     
                        3
                      The company was present in all Colombian major cities (Bogotá, Bucaramanga, Barranquilla, Cartagena, and Cali), and had a nascent presence overseas, with operations in Peru and Panama. It employed 1,050 people directly and about 4,500 indirectly --it is common practice in the building industry to outsource most labor at the building site. In some ways, Marval epitomized the successful Colombian family business. It had been founded and run by brothers, who managed to keep the company on a path of sustained growth throughout the years, despite ups and downs of its business and the wider political context. However, these achievements had been the product of intuition and trial and error;
                        4
                        A process that Professor Henry Mintzberg would label “emergent” strategy (1994).
                     
                     
                        4
                      the company had never gone through the exercise of crafting a deliberate course of action.

In early 2012, senior management approached one of this paper’s co-authors to assist them in their first strategic planning exercise. The initial consulting engagement developed between January and April 2012, and its results can be summarized as follows. Environmental analysis by and large showed positive trends in the short and mid-term. The industry as a whole would continue to grow at robust rates. In the mid to long term, however, some caution was advised. Within the building industry, various lines of business showed relevant differences in terms of barriers to entry or exposure to economic cycles. The analysis showed good reasons to change company positioning, lowering exposure in some sectors and moving decisively into others with a more attractive industry structure and less exposed to macro-economic risks. Geographically, the company decided to expand into middle cities and to boost its international expansion. In turn, such a decision called for changes in the company value chain, addressing a number of weaknesses identified by the management team who took part in the exercise.

This initial exercise in strategy formulation set the stage for the authors’ 2nd engagement. In June 2012, company management contacted us again asking if we could assist them in the implementation phase; by July both parties had reached an understanding on the engagement’s terms of reference, and were ready to start working. The objectives were defined contractually as follows: (a) To identify the structures, functions and roles that Marval needed to consolidate its existing positioning and move into new lines of business and geographic markets. (b) Develop an implementation plan to carry out those changes, to be delivered by March 2013.

In our minds, we had an additional goal: to facilitate second order learning. 
                     Argyris and Schon (1996) present second order learning as a type of double-loop learning that allows organizational members to ‘learn to learn’ – that is, to discover and modify the organizational learning system. The learning system is described by rules that recreate patterns of organizational inquiry in the organization, so as to make change possible; They considered that the role of academic consultants in an intervention should be to enhance the capabilities to develop second order learning: in this case regarding ways of organizing themselves. As Gharajedaghi argues, as long as the organizing principles of an organization remain unchanged, so will its members’ behavior. To develop, “these systems [organizations] need to go through an active process of unlearning and redesign. Unlearning is an iterative and collective process of the second order learning that demands freedom to question the sacred underlying assumptions” (2007). As explained in the next section, we decided to use the Viable System Model as our framework to support the systemic intervention. Although it has not been traditionally considered a Problem Structuring Method, we considered its case one of non-codified use (see Appendix B). We expected that the chosen methodology and approach would encourage second order learning.

In this particular systemic intervention, our intention was to support our clients in their learning process on the required structural changes to implement the previously agreed strategy. They had previous knowledge about our expertise in supporting strategic management and organizational changes from a systemic perspective, and were keen to learn jointly with us on the use of soft OR tools for their needs. The research context satisfied the characteristics described by Checkland and Holwell (1998) for an action research project.

We were aware of action research being “a potent tool for intentional change, in a collaborative context,” and also aware of its limitation in terms of validity and generalization – as described by Reason and Bradbury (2006). This is related with the knowledge specificity that characterizes the process, considering that a sole organization offers limited observation opportunities. On the same line, the researcher’s involvement with the observed events may hinder the observation process (West, 2011). This author has also expressed concerns about power relationships between facilitators and participants, considering that the action research project’s ultimate goal is to empower the organization. Nonetheless, this approach draws on participants’ knowledge --considered expert knowledge – on the issues considered problematic, recognizing that those challenges will be better understood by the main actors.

We expected that participants, having to address strategic issues of major impact for organizational development, would be “willing to act on what has been learned in the course of the research” (Reason & Bradbury, 2006, p. 451). Previous experiences had convinced us of the merits of working with a systemic approach to management. As Flood (2010) has suggested, action research carried out with a systemic perspective in mind promises to construct meaning that resonates strongly with our experiences within a profoundly systemic world.

Following these ideas, we framed our intervention on an action-research approach, which allowed us to agree with the participants on intended changes for the organization aiming to implement their previously agreed strategy. In the next section we describe the action research case study, following Checkland and Howell suggested description of an action research project: the FMA: Framework, Methodology and Area (Checkland, 1981; Checkland & Holwell, 1998; West & Stansfield, 2001).

Inspired by R Ashby’s pioneering theories of self-organization and complexity management, as well as W Mc Culloch’s model of the brain as a neural network, S Beer developed the Viable System Model (VSM) as the theory of viability in complex organizations, or the theory for effective management of complexity (1979, 1981, 1985). The VSM offers a meta-language to describe recurrent patterns of interaction, and the way different roles and groups deal with complexity in an organizational context. It is not the intention of this paper to provide a detailed description of the VSM; for such purpose see Beer (1979, 1981, 1985), Espinosa, Harnden, and Walker (2008), or Espinosa and Walker (2011). Appendix C provides a brief summary of the core aspects of the VSM as a meta-language for mapping organizational complexity. As mentioned earlier, only a few VSM researchers have offered methodologies that explain in detail the way that the structure may be adjusted to implement a particular strategy. We explain below our methodological choices for this project.

We choose to use the Methodology to support organizational self-transformation, because we found that it was the best systemic methodology offering systemic guidance to conduct such a process of reorganization, and because we did have the expertise to use it. Such methodology had been tested in a different context (SMEs), so using it for the first time in a large multinational with a focus on investigating the ‘implementation gap’ demanded some adjustments. We needed new data collection and analysis tools to cope with the complexity of interacting with a large organization. More structured surveys and interviews were necessary to assess the effectiveness of current structure, as well as new tools for analyzing resulting large data sets.

We decided then to follow a mixed methods methodology (Gharajedaghi, 2007; Molina-Azorin, 2010; Onwuegbuzie, Daley, & Waytowich, 2008). From the outset, it was decided that our research would follow a typology-based, fixed design (Creswell & Clark, 2011), in which the overall methodology is predetermined early in the process. The model chosen was the convergent parallel design, whereby researchers carry out the quantitative and qualitative strands independently, and then bring together the results with the goal of obtaining “different but complementary data on the same topic” (Morse, 1991) to best understand the research problem, assessing convergence or divergence. This is the “most well-known” approach to mix methods (Creswell & Clark, 2011) and the first used in the mixed methods literature (Jick, 1979).

Data collection was carried out in a concurrent, but separate fashion. On the quantitative side, a broad-base online survey inspired by the VSM was launched, using the paid version of the Survey-Monkey software. The goal was to cast a wide net that would allow us to capture valuable, quantifiable data. The survey targeted 144 company personnel, assuring diversity on the functional, hierarchical and geographical dimensions. The survey sought to capture perceptions on a number of propositions using a 7 points Likert scale, where 1 meant total disagreement and 7 meant complete agreement.

For analytical purposes, the group was disaggregated in three levels of recursion: corporate headquarters, regional branches, and local projects. At the national level, 15 people were targeted with a response rate of 100%. At the regional level, 41 people received the survey with a response rate of 83% (34 respondents). At the local level, 120 people were targeted, of whom 91 (roughly 76%) actually took the survey. In total, 125 individuals were surveyed. On the qualitative side, semi-structured interviews were completed, targeting a smaller, yet diverse sample of 46 key informants from diverse functional areas, hierarchical levels and branches. In all, we interviewed 11 individuals from the national levels, 15 from regional branches, 16 from local projects, 2 customers, and 2 suppliers.

Data analysis was also carried out independently, and through analytic procedures firmly established on the quantitative and qualitative traditions. Survey results were aggregated and the resulting data was analyzed quantitatively for descriptive purposes. The results of the interviews were processed using content analysis (Hsieh & Shannon, 2005). Data was coded, divided into relevant phrases, and then clustered around themes using specialized software (Dedoose). To make our analysis more specific and nuanced, we looked into the frequency with which some codes appeared in the interviews. This technique, called quantitizing, is used in qualitative research “to facilitate pattern recognition or otherwise to extract meaning from qualitative data” (Sandelowski, Voils, & Knafl, 2009). At the same time, as Maxwell noted, “providing numerical data about the distribution of observations, or the number of instances of a particular type of event or statement, helps to (…) counter claims that you have simply cherry-picked your data” in order to support the authors’ interpretations (2010, p. 479).

Results were only compared and mixed in the final interpretation stage. During the workshops we used Tools used MindMaps and prototypes to facilitate strategic decisions with the participants. Although our methodology was mixed, the overall design gave priority to the qualitative method. Quantitative analysis was limited, and carried out only for descriptive purposes. Moreover, our study did not make any attempt to establish causal relations between variables but rather sought to understand the processes by which some events influence others, which is what really defines qualitative research (Maxwell, 2010) and more broadly, the “interpretive” approach to social sciences (Maxwell, 1996).

The reasons why the authors resorted to a mixed methodology have been summed up by Greene, Caracelli, and Graham (1989). First, the chosen methodology assured triangulation, seeking corroboration and convergence of the results from different methods. Second, combining the quantitative and qualitative offered complementarities, as the results from one strand of research were enhanced and clarified by the other method’s results. Finally, using the results from one method helped develop the results from the other. These synergies come across clearly when one considers the relative strengths of each of the analytical tools used.

In surveys, data-capture is done through standardized processes that measure how a given group stands vis-à-vis some closely formulated propositions, which allows the aggregation of results transparently and objectively. The downside with surveys is that “we don’t know what we don’t know”. That is, the researcher can only put to the test some propositions that appear relevant a priori – which will be confirmed or falsified. Thus, its transparency is coupled with rigidity.

Content analysis of semi-structured interviews, on the other hand, has diametrically opposed characteristics. Coding offers a highly flexible tool to organize large amounts of data and to extract meaning from it to the very last drop. While good methodological design using qualitative tools should enable the researcher to “deal with plausible validity threats” (Maxwell, 1996) the risk of subjective bias is always present. In other words, qualitative content analysis offers flexibility, coupled with higher subjectivity. In sum, combining both can leverage their highly complementary strengths.

Our Area of concern was defined according to our main objective: to facilitate second order learning (March (1991), Levinthal and March (1993), Nonaka and Takeuchi (1995), Argyris and Schon (1996), Gharajedaghi, (2007)), so as to enable them to redesign their structures, functions and roles in a way that will create a better context for strategy implementation. In the following paragraphs the methodology used is described in detail, arguing that by using this methodology it was possible to facilitate a process of self-constructed solutions and redesign parameters. This methodology was framed in the Viable System Model, hoping that VSM meta-questions led the participants to better understand the complexity of the organization and build contextualized solutions. Participants agreed on developing the project as an action research process, in which changes proposed were going to be constructed as a result of interaction between researchers and participants.

The main characteristic of the ‘Methodology to support self-transformation’ is that it uses the VSM as a meta-language, as a hermeneutical tool, to enable people to engage in a structured conversation about organizational viability and adaptability. In this way, it helps actors to create the required organizational arrangements to improve their own chances of long-term viability (i.e. by creating a better structural context for strategy implementation). Fig. 1
                      explains the stages of the methodology: (1) identify the System-in-Focus, (2) map the relevant recursions, (3) look for weaknesses in the system’s viability by reflecting on the meta-questions, (4) reflect on strategy vs. structure gaps, (5) agree and implement the required changes; and finally (6) monitor and review the situation.

At the 1st stage, we facilitate debates about the organizational identity (identity in use and espoused identity) and the boundaries of the system in focus. At the 2nd stage we elaborate with the participants representations of the levels of complexity inside their organization. Once the system in focus is agreed, we start the VSM Diagnosis: in a large company like Marval, this implied complex processes of data collection and analyses, to make sure we had a valid data sample. Next section explains in detail how we dealt with this challenge. After producing a structured VSM diagnosis based on data, we validated it with a sample of representatives from all organizational levels.

The next stage is to identify the critical areas for strategic development of the organization and to assess which of the core diagnostic issues would affect them. Based on this analysis, we filtered out the most strategic changes required for effective strategy implementation and design improvements for each of them. Again, such generic change projects needed to be validated with company representatives. Once agreement was secured, we suggested an implementation plan, which included a comprehensive review of (a) levels of organization and operational units, (b) meta-systemic management changes at each level, (c) changes in roles and structures, and (d) suggested technological innovations to support strategy implementation. The last stage is monitoring and assessment of changes.

In the following sections we explain in detail the innovations produced in this intervention, in order to cope with the complexity of the interactions with the representatives of a large multinational, at different levels.

We started the project in August 2012, and it finished in March 2013. The preliminary stage included developing the proposal, with a detailed account of the project’s objectives, organization, methodology, stages and expected outcomes. To facilitate collaborative decision-making, two interlocutors were created on the company side: an Executive Committee (hereafter, Exec-Comm) and a Technical Committee (Tech-Comm), which functioned as sounding boards to consultants’ proposals. The Exec-Comm validated all political decisions, such as workshops dates, agenda and attendees. On the other hand, the Tech-Comm provided constant feedback and detailed knowledge of company operations. What follows is a detailed account of how each stage of the project unfolded.

The initial meeting with the Exec-Comm took place through a videoconference, as participants were based in different cities. The academic consultants presented the project methodology, phases and goals, and took questions from participants. It was agreed that the company would organize the logistics and provide administrative support for the two workshops. The consultants, on the other hand, would design and run the surveys, interviews, videoconferences and workshops, working closely in tandem with a project’s manager from the company, who would facilitate access on a need-base to other authorities and staff inside the corporation.

The diagnostic stage unfolded during the months of August and September, and laid the ground for the 1st workshop, held in November 2013 (see Appendix C). We started off by carefully reviewing published data about the company and the industry from secondary sources, and holding semi-structured interviews with key informants – see details in the Methodology section. Concurrently, we designed and ran the electronic survey (see Appendix D).

The qualitative data was processed with specialized software, as explained in the Methodology section, and quantitized – counting the frequency of coding, and slicing it by level of recursion. The combination of quantitative data from surveys and processed qualitative data allowed us to triangulate (seeking corroboration and convergence of the results emerging from both methods), to capture complementarities (as the results from one strand of research were enhanced and clarified by the other) and to further develop our analysis and understanding (Greene et al., 1989). For example, the anonymous survey showed considerable levels of support behind the proposition “we do not have enough autonomy to plan and develop services from our office” (see Fig. 2
                        ).

At the same time, data from interviews confirmed and specified that point of diagnostic. However, as Fig. 3
                         shows, that problem was not felt equally at all levels of the organization. On the contrary, the perceived bottleneck was particularly painful at the level of regional branches, and almost invisible from national headquarters. The convergence between the quantitative and qualitative strands of analysis lent credence to that point of diagnostic, while the specificity that came from the disaggregation of interview data allowed us to pin point it with precision (see Fig. 3).

Similar complementarities between the quantitative and qualitative data emerged at every step of the analysis, giving the consulting team a robust diagnosis to share with company managers in the first workshop. We were left with the challenge of sharing our findings in a manner that (a) was clear and intuitive, allowing the consulting team to share great amounts of data in a friendly manner and (b) stimulated critical discussion, allowing participants to validate or falsify (or at least to question) each of the points of diagnostic.

To that end, we resorted to mind-maps, crafted with the assistance of specialized software (MindManager v. 9). Results were summarized, disaggregated by recursion level, and structured in a mind map following the five systems that the VSM is based upon (see Fig. 4
                         and Appendix E for an example). Those mind-maps were printed in giant sheets (33 by 46inches) and used as a heuristic device to have structured discussions in small groups, which gathered around those maps and considered point after point of our preliminary diagnosis. Under the guidance of a facilitator, each group constructed a shared vision of the most urgent problems facing the organization. They also expressed their opinions through the technique of “visual applause” attaching red or green dots to each diagnostic point, showing agreement or disagreement. Comments were also captured through post-it notes, attached to the maps (see Appendix F for illustrative photos).

The 1st workshop encompassed about 40 employees, assuring diversity from functional, geographical and operational perspectives. A consulting team of four facilitators also took part. The two senior members of the team facilitated group discussions during plenary sessions, while the remaining two joined in the facilitation of small group discussions, as explained above. Participants remained actively engaged throughout these intense two-days, validating the external diagnosis and in the process building a shared understanding of the problems at hand. Such a consensus among company managers proved highly valuable later on, to prioritise and detail the solutions outlined by the consulting team.

A few weeks after the workshop, we submitted the 1st report with the complete VSM diagnosis of the company, as collectively discussed, improved and validated by company members. Section 7 details the diagnostic tools and findings.

The design stage took place between November 2012 and February 2013, in the last 3months of the project. Instead of delivering a one-time report with proposals, the consulting team moved forward through successive iterations, where each step built on the previous one. At each step, a number of key redesign proposals were crafted – based on the agreed upon diagnosis – and then validated through dialog with the Tech-Comm, who commented on the relevance, desirability and feasibility of the proposed steps. The first videoconference was focused on organizational changes at the national and international levels; the second one dealt with changes at the regional level, and the last one with changes at the production level. At each videoconference, the suggested changes were clarified and detailed, in preparation for the final workshop.

Eventually, a clearer picture of the desired end-results emerged from this dialog. To decide on a rollout process, setting priorities and phases, we went back to the strategic planning exercise. We reviewed the organizational constraints that had emerged in the value chain analysis, and the goals and action plans established in the strategic map. Those elements were factored in, and as a result a change plan was crafted, with clear priorities. This plan was also discussed and validated with the Tech-Committee, making sure that we had secured agreements from middle management before the 2nd and final workshop was held.

At this point we had finished our detailed redesign proposal, with a number of suggested changes at various levels of the organization (see Section 7). We summarized them through Mind-Maps at each level of recursion, in order to share them with company management. The final workshop took place in early February 2013 (see Appendix C). During 2days, the suggested changes were discussed in detail, using the same tools that had worked so well in the initial workshop.

A short case study, focused on a real company project, was written as an additional tool to show and validate the diagnostic and proposed change plan. The purpose was to take a deep view into the way company activities flow, and to have participants see in a direct and practical way (a) the bottlenecks that existing structures created and (b) how those obstacles would be removed with the proposed change plan. Instead of delivering our prescriptions “top-down”, expecting managers to “trust” our judgement, we created an experience where the actors themselves built inductively a recommended solution, based on VSM criteria. Following standard case analysis practice (Gini, 1985; Greenhalgh, 2007; Herried, 2011), the consultants did not prescribe any a priori solution; on the contrary, they limited themselves to presenting the facts and challenged participants with questions.

Case preparation required ten additional interviews and the development of a detailed flowchart of the project under analysis (see Appendix G). The case was shared with the participants a few days before the 2nd workshop, to give them time to analyse it and prepare for discussion. They were asked to identify key roles, main problems, and main causes in each of the phases of a project development. Case discussion proved highly effective in building a shared understanding of the problems at hand and of the projected benefits of moving forward with change – including changes in roles, structures and processes. This discussion provided the bases for ensuing sessions, where we agreed on changes to the organizational chart, critical change projects, individual accountability in change implementation, a broad rollout plan, and KPIs. After the 2nd workshop a new project flowchart was built in order to support the change plan implementation (see Appendix G).

In the three weeks that followed, we worked on the final report, which included a summary of the whole learning process and the agreements on organizational changes, implementation plan, pilot projects and monitoring systems. There follows a detailed account of the key findings at each stage, followed by our reflections on the learning we got from this experience in using the methodology in the described action research context.

As explained before, the tasks of data collection and analyses were quite demanding because of the size of the organization, which required the team to handle a substantial amount of data. Despite the challenges, the tools and methodologies described earlier made possible a clear diagnosis based on the tenets of the VSM. What follows is a summary of its main points, structured according to the organization’s levels of recursion.

The corporation lacked a clear division of roles between corporate headquarters and regional branches. Thus, relations between these levels were not characterized by synergies and complementarities, but rather by duplicity and recurring frictions. The national level needed to clarify what exactly it does – in VSM parlance, to identify its system 1 – and how those operations related to the work being done at each branch. For example, the CEO was doing both general management of the company (recursion level 0) and of one branch (recursion level 1), ending up overwhelmed by the complexity of the branch’s operations and having not enough time for attending strategic issues at the national level.

In addition, the organization as a whole lacked any effective anti-oscillatory mechanisms to make possible the seamless coordination of its parts – what the VSM calls systems 2 functions (e.g. oscillations between purchasing and engineering roles). It also lacked an effective System 3 – its “internal eye” (e.g. clear resources negotiations against agreed upon goals with lower recursion levels, holding them accountable against those targets and leaving them to decide autonomously on how to reach those goals).

Because no such mechanism existed, the national level had to descend systematically to micro-manage operational details in regional branches. This, in turn, generated other dysfunctions. On the one hand, since senior managers in headquarters took up tasks that belonged elsewhere, they were systematically overwhelmed and failed to deliver on some of the functions only they could perform. On the other hand, regional managers were systematically bypassed in most significant decisions. Thus, a culture of strong centralization and rigidity was created, which tended to create bottlenecks and delays. Additionally, there was not much time left for the national or regional managers to keep a close eye on the changing business environment and to develop strategically – in VSM language, it lacked effective system 4 (the “external eye”) and system 5 (“policy and identity”) functions and roles, at national, regional and local levels, essential to develop organizational strategic capabilities.

The analysis of the regional level (each of the company branches), revealed important deficiencies in their basic and critical operations (system 1 functions), such as customer service – which was fractionalized among different areas, with an approach that was reactive, short-term and defensive in nature. Many of those operational tasks were carried out on an ad-hoc basis, with great variance from branch to branch, and even from project to project, (lack of effective system 2 mechanisms). No one had the responsibility for creating synergies and improving cost-quality ratios among branches – the essence of system 3. There was also a void when it came to picking up lessons, best practices and innovations from company operations, and disseminating them to other projects or branches. Externally, branches lacked a role formally entrusted with the responsibility of monitoring the regional environment, tracking changes in regulation, demand trends or long-term supply of land – this is the “Outside and Then” focus that define system 4’s role. Finally, branches also lacked a clear head with the legitimacy, power and means to set policy and deliver on operational goals agreed with national headquarters – a system 5’s duty.

At the project level, formally designed processes were so rigid that – in order to meet deadlines – personnel had resorted to the creation of ad-hoc “parallel practices” to gain flexibility in their operations (system 1). In particular, many critical processes were structured along vertical reporting lines, which went from the project all the way up to national directors. This created the conditions for recurrent deadlock in critical processes, as project managers lacked the resources to absorb discontinuities.

Let us consider a project with a value chain of 3 linear roles: A, B and C. An unforeseen event determines that A’s output is not in line with B expectations (say, the originally planned door is out of stock, and the engineer needs to authorize a different one affecting costs, but the comptrollers will not authorize it). Because there is not a strong authority with overall responsibility for the whole project, “parallel logics” will develop. The engineer will report the problem up to regional and national managers, and so will the comptroller. Eventually, a decision will be made at the top and then come back to the project. This is clearly a sub-optimal way of operating. As long as A and B do not see others as members of the same team, which succeeds or fails as a whole, and accountable to the project leader, coordination problems will recur.

Finally, projects lacked mechanisms to systematically identify and report innovations and best practices to be shared with other projects and branches.

This section offers a succinct account of the main redesign areas that resulted from the intervention at the national level, structured by the VSM systems. Due to space constraints, only a few ideas were selected for mention here to provide examples.

In the last decade, the company transitioned from mono to multi-business, but its structures had not evolved accordingly. Some of the industries to which it had diversified had value chains with little or nothing in common with its core building business – e.g. facility management. Experience had shown that mixing “apples and oranges” under the same organizational umbrella constrained growth; thus, the creation of some dedicated structures was in order.

Coordination problems between branches could be tackled by putting in place nationwide operating standards, which would bring uniformity to key roles and processes (system 2). In turn, coordination among branches would be enhanced by the creation of a collegiate decision-making body –the “Exec-Comm”–, which would bring together senior national management with regional managers (System 3). In this body, branch managers would negotiate resources with HQ against agreed upon goals. National leaders would refrain from intervening in the lower recursion as long as chosen essential variables (growth, sales, margins) remained within predefined acceptable limits. Under these conditions, branches would enjoy responsible autonomy, and would be free to decide on how best to reach their goals. Should things go wrong, however, regional managers would be accountable for failure; eventually, recurring underperformance would trigger intervention from HQ.

As national authorities had been embroiled in operational details, some forward-looking functions had been overlooked; chief among them was R&D and more broadly, innovation in general. A number of dedicated structures were proposed, to capture knowledge (both internal and external) that would help the organization deal with the future – a typical role of system 4. Among these were a sub-direction of innovation (charged with scanning relevant technological developments on a global basis), an “Observatory” of the PEST environment (which would report periodically on regulatory issues, macro-economic conditions, market trends) and an “alliance coordinator” (would seek to create strategic partnerships with universities and think-tanks to create proprietary technologies).

Other functions that had suffered historically were those related to policy and organizational identity (system 5). This void would be filled through the creation of the Executive Committee, which would monitor strategy implementation. Meetings would not deal with operational details; instead, discussions should analyse the evolution of essential variables (growth, sales, margins), both at the national and branch level, and if necessary analyse causes and remedies to deviations. Finally, it was proposed that the Board of Directors would be reinvigorated with external directors, in order to bring experience from the industry and beyond – from relevant domains, such as government or academia.

As was said earlier, our intention was to support second order learning from organizational members about their strategy and their perceived needs for organizational changes to progress effectively in the strategic direction agreed, we used different learning tools to assess, and/or enable second order learning: at the beginning of the project we used the surveys at each level of organization to see members’ perceptions and learning constraints for effective operations. The interviews allowed us to deepen our understanding of the main learning constraints identified through the statistical analysis of the surveys. Through the workshops (1st and 2nd), we collectively identified, prioritised and agreed the main directions for structural change.

After the first workshop, we assessed the participants’ perception of their on-going learning process, by asking each of the participants to fill in an evaluation questionnaire (see results in Appendix H). As shown in this diagram, a substantial majority the participants considered the topics discussed to be relevant (71%), valued very positively their learning about these topics (71%), considered that workshop design gave them ample opportunities to engage in meaningful debate (67%), and felt highly committed to the implementation of agreed upon changes (80%).

By the end of the final workshop we made a new assessment of the participants’ learning throughout the entire project. Appendix H summarizes the participants’ perceptions. Data shows that by the end of the intervention, participants where highly engaged in the learning process (64%), found it very inclusive (68%), discussed highly relevant topics (72%), and felt very committed to implementing the agreed changes in their structure and roles (84%).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Through this action research case study, we have contributed by presenting in detail a new application of a soft OR multi-methodology, aimed at facilitating second order learning in an organization seeking to redesign its structure, to make it more adaptive to the environment and aligned with its new strategic plan. The “Methodology to support self-transformation” was strengthened in this application by designing and using VSM-based surveys and interviews in the appreciative stage, as well as quantitative and qualitative analytical tools at the appreciation and assessment stages. This complements existing applied research in soft OR using multi-methodology and mixed methods approaches; and by further explaining the power of the VSM as a meta-language to encourage 2nd order learning in the context of an organizational change program.

We have shown that the VSM is a soft OR and a non-codified PSM approach that could be useful to support strategy development. Through our action research case study we showed an example of a VSM application based on the (improved) Methodology for self-transformation, aimed at supporting the alignment of strategy and structure in a large multinational.

This VSM methodology for supporting strategic organizational changes has a good potential to contribute to enhance Dyson’s identified ‘MS toolkit for strategic planning’ (2000), as it provides robust ‘models of the organisation’ – see Fig. 1.7. “The Strategic Development Process”; in Dyson et al. (2007, p. 12). More specifically, the VSM intervention facilitated agreement on collective mental models of the organization (VSM models), that were built using mixed methods for data collection and analyses. The VSM was used as a language for mapping and identifying learning constraints that were blocking effective strategy implementation.

Business policy textbooks usually consider the alignment of structure and strategy as implementation’s first logical step (Andrews, 1971; Galbraith & Nathanson, 1978), followed by the establishment of operating-level objectives, the design of operating structures and, finally, the creation of proper incentives and control mechanisms that support the implementation (Hrebiniak & Joyce, 1984; Lorange, 1982). Our (enhanced) Methodology for self-transformation has offered a pathway to tackle all of those issues in a holistic and integrated fashion, through bottom-up dynamics that assure buy-in and commitment from participants. By doing that, this paper has contributed to filling the so-called implementation gap.

The VSM intervention helped the organization to realize the main operational and managerial learning constraints that had to be overcome to create a proper context for strategy implementation. It offered an innovative self-mapping and self-reflection process, involving representatives from all areas. This process resulted in the identification of critical bottlenecks that had to be addressed – via the redesign of the organizational structure, key processes, and a few roles – to implement the agreed strategy. Both the diagnosis and the change plan were crafted through a VSM participatory self-transformation process. Identified issues were mapped and debated collectively by protagonists, facilitated by the consultants. The decisions that came out of this exercise were highly valued by the company’s senior management, as they prepared the organization to deal with is strategic challenges.

The case study action contributes to OR practice (as in Ormerod, 2013) by providing further understanding on ways on which PSMs can support the strategy development process in a systemic way. Further development and testing of the contributions of this methodology to fill the implementation gap in a systemic way should encompass organizations operating in various industries, in different cultural and geographic contexts.

The interest of the soft OR community in using multi-method approaches have been growing since the first advocates suggested the idea (Bennett, 1985, 1990; Busch, 2011; Flood & Zambuni, 1990; Mingers & Brocklesby, 1997; Mingers & Gill, 1997; Mingers & White, 2010; Mintzberg, 1994; Ormerod, 1995; Ormerod, 1996; Ormerod, 1997; Pauley & Ormerod, 1998). As Mingers and White (2010) demonstrate, the number of applications of multi-methods in soft OR has been increasing in the last decade. This research contributes to such developments, by presenting more in-depth descriptions of interventions using mixed methods in order to develop our understanding, as Howick and Ackermann (2011) recommended.

Specifically, the multi-method approach to action research presented here explains in more detail than similar publications had done before the nature of the data collection and data analysis required to manage the complexity of interactions with clients in a large VSM intervention. While using the VSM as a meta-language to frame the research questions and analyses, we simplified the technical aspects of the model by framing a survey (inspired in the conceptual framework but expressed in business terms) and then using combined methods for the analyses. We found that by combining the chosen quantitative and qualitative methods, the results from one strand of research were enhanced and clarified by the other method’s results: this provided increased robustness of the research process and results.

On the other side, combining “hard” numbers with qualitative data, serves to counter to some extent the criticisms levied on qualitative research, which traditionalists regard as unscientific, entirely personal and full of bias (Berkhout, Hertin, & Gann, 2006). Other soft OR critics have expressed concerns in general about subjectivity and lack of structure in some soft OR applications. This case study is an insightful example of a multi-method design of a systemic intervention to support a strategic development process at a large scale. Our research approach offers possible solutions and alternatives to provide more structured analysis and less subjective interpretations of clients’ perceptions, relevant when working at such a large scale. Moreover, our experience suggests advantages in the combination that go beyond methodology and “OR academic research”, and becomes relevant to “OR practice” (Ormerod, 2009). When it comes to sharing with management diagnostic points identified by the consultants, showing that different methodological lenses give convergent results can ease the socialization of research results, and facilitate internalizing the diagnosis in the organization. As Yearworth and White (in press) would put it, this case study contributes to visualizing the process of a PSM use and to our collective learning about PSM practice.

Previous research on the VSM and its application to support organizational transformations have criticized it by saying that the VSM language is difficult to grasp and generates cognitive barriers to users (Jackson, 2001; Ulrich, 1981). Aware that this may be the case with non-experts, and considering that large interventions grant fewer opportunities for one-on-one coaching – as was the case in Espinosa and Walker (2012) – we took a number of steps.
                           
                              •
                              First, we decided to create a survey and a questionnaire, which would give us the information we needed to do the VSM analyses, without expecting users to fully understand the VSM meta-language. This way we managed to collect a statistically significant sample of responses to core VSM questions across the organization.

Then, to prevent cognitive tensions during discussions with users, during the initial workshop we invested time in making sure that participants had a clear understanding of basic VSM principles. We kept theory to a minimum and sought to bring out managerial relevance through “down-to-earth” examples. As in Espinosa and Walker (2012), we aimed at making sure that participants understood the systemic aspects of their organization, so that they could challenge their existing structures. Absorbing VSM categories and concepts, would enable participants to engage in second order learning about their current structures and relational practices. This was enhanced by the iterative and participative aspects of the methodology (see Appendix B).

We used Mind-Maps to visually represent the final diagnostic points, grouping them into VSM categories (Systems 1–5 at each level of recursive organization). This heuristic device proved highly effective in bypassing the complexities of traditional VSM diagrams, while communicating all relevant concepts. Although workshop discussions were entirely based on VMS meta-language and concepts, participants did not have any problem communicating, as proved by their assessment of workshops quality, the level of participation and commitment shown in workshop evaluations.

To ease the appropriation of proposed changes, we refrained from “imposing” them top-down, and resorted to a case discussion, from which a clear direction for change emerged in a “bottom-up” fashion, through inductive reasoning. This exercise proved effective in helping the group “visualize” in concrete forms the promise of organizational change.

As said earlier, the purpose of this intervention was to enhance second order learning of the organization, by helping people to identify required changes in structures, functions and roles and to develop an implementation plan to carry out those changes. The initial encounters were smoothed by the experience of an earlier and successful intervention led by one of the co-authors. Client satisfaction with that experience built trust and credibility, which facilitated the initial decisions on process. Setting up the Exec-Comm and the Tech-Comm enabled the consultants to build a fluid dialog with management, at various levels. Questionnaires, interviews, sample and workshops’ design were discussed and validated with these Committees, assuring on-going commitment and political buy-in at different levels of the organization.

The highly participatory nature of the intervention, and the fact that management were constantly fed with highly structured appreciations of their organizational problems (resulting from our VSM analyses based on their responses to surveys and interviews) eliminated fears about us imposing any views. Managers soon began to offer creative solutions aligned with VSM criteria on their own, and felt all the way through that critical decisions ‘emerged’ from them, rather than being ‘handed’ to them. In summary, this intervention is another full example of using the VSM as a Problem Structuring Method, as in Franco and Montibeller (2010), but to the best of our knowledge this is the only example presenting a fully detailed VSM intervention aimed at structuring participant’s knowledge through facilitated modeling.


                        Mingers and Rosenhead (2004) reflect on the use and effectiveness of PSM approaches and express concerns on the generic difficulty practitioners face on how to assess the value of an intervention; they suggest that what a particular PSM approach offers is ‘a model of the situation’ that will enable participants to clarify their predicaments. In this intervention – as the aim was to help participants to question and redesign their organization – we can only assess how effective they felt the intervention was to help them appreciate their own learning and structural constraints, and how much it helped them to question current structures and co-design a new, more adaptive structure and roles. What seems clear from this case study was that the participants managed to develop a critical awareness about their organizational problems, through a facilitated environment for agreeing on major issues needing redesign, and main directions for change. Appendices G and H show that participants felt their perceptions did change as a result of the workshops, and that these sessions were instrumental in building consensus around the changes needed.

On reflection on the mixed method strategy used to produce the inputs for discussion at the workshops, we consider that the participants trusted the academic consultants’ proposals as they could see ‘their own inputs as the basis of our proposals’. The statistical reports on frequencies of diagnostic points at each level showed them summaries of a large sample of people’s views on organizational constraints. What emerged from them was ‘common sense’, with self-evident priorities. This is, in our view, a much better approach to facilitate organizational learning – and second order learning- than the traditional ‘expert mode’ of consultancy, as learning is happening all the way through the intervention and it is the result of this learning what remains in people’s attitudes and behaviors after the intervention. As change becomes embedded in participants through their interactions with the action research team, it is more permanent than in traditional consultancy engagements. At this level, this case study contributes to deepen our understanding of OR interventions (Yearwoth & White, 2014).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

The research project presented in this paper contributes to on-going research in soft OR by improving an existing soft OR methodology through the development of data collection and analyses tools to support a large intervention, and VSM redesign processes that structure even further the ways of engagement with the customers. This is particularly useful when the intervention happens in a large organization.

Our case study exemplifies the use of VSM as a “non-codified” use of PSM; that is, as a PSM that has been useful to structure collective knowledge on organizational structure, processes and roles, in a context of strategy development, and more specifically, strategy implementation. It also explains in detail, and in a completely different context from the ones published before, the way that the VSM can be used as a meta-language to facilitate second order learning in an organization going through a self-transformation process. As Gharajedaghi would say, in order to achieve second order learning “these systems need to go through an active process of unlearning and redesign” (2007). Here we have experienced the process of unlearning by collectively challenging existing roles and structures, rethinking them using VSM distinctions, and challenging underlying assumptions about power structures and possible new ways of relating between roles.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENT@&#

We would like to acknowledge the directives and all members of MARVAL, who contributed to the VSM project.


                     Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2014.06.014.


                     
                        
                           Supplementary data 1
                           
                        
                     .

@&#REFERENCES@&#

