@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Application of the Viable System Model to analyse communications structures: A case study of disaster response in Japan

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Recent reviews in EJOR (and JORS) have studied OR's contribution to disaster response.


                        
                        
                           
                           Each review finds little contribution from soft OR or modelling disaster information.


                        
                        
                           
                           Effective communication is vital to manage disaster response resources.


                        
                        
                           
                           The Viable System Model (VSM) can examine rapid disaster communication viability.


                        
                        
                           
                           Four disaster case studies use VSM to identify structural communication faults.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Viable system model

Soft OR

Systems thinking

Communication

Disasters

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Every year, natural and man-made disasters affect hundreds of thousands of people and cause extensive damage. OR has made substantial contributions to disaster response and these have been the subject of several recent literature reviews. However, these reviews have also identified research gaps for OR – two of which are (1) limited contribution from soft OR, and (2) a need to model communications during disasters where there are complex interactions between stakeholders. At the intersection of these gaps we apply the Viable System Model (VSM) to examine challenges of rapid communication viability during dynamic disasters. The data that informs this paper were collected in four case studies in Japan – three on its current capabilities (e.g. a local government disaster management office) and one on its response to a past disaster (the Great Hanshin-Awaji Earthquake in 1995). This paper shows how applying VSM identified generic gaps and opportunities for communication systems and shows how these case studies signal the utility of VSM structures to arranging communications for fast-paced and changing environments. This paper also contributes to VSM theory through developing two new concepts (1) environmental support mechanisms for viability; and (2) rapid implementation unit emergence.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Natural, technological, social and health hazards risk affecting hundreds of thousands of people globally (Proske, 2008). In 2011, 325 disasters occurred across the world, killing around 35,000 people and causing economic damage of over US$370 billion (Swiss Reinsurance Company Ltd., 2012). For disaster response, the United Nations Foundation (2011, p. 10) recognises that “good communication is essential to effective coordination” but “due to poorly adapted tools, training and strategies, responders are increasingly ill-prepared to produce useful knowledge from the flow of information and data”. For response agencies, individual responders and survivors, information is a critical resource necessary to facilitate life-saving operations (Comfort, 1996). However, disasters are dynamic and their constantly changing landscape makes effective communications between such stakeholders difficult.

Communication flow during disaster response can be a messy problem (Ackoff, 1981) as it requires the rapid search, exchange and absorption of information being transmitted through networks of organisations (Comfort & Kapucu, 2006) involving people from different organisations who may never have worked together (van de Walle & Turroff, 2008) working in dynamic situations with high levels of uncertainty and complexity (Argote, 1982). In these settings, information flow is the central nervous system (Knuth, 1999) but co-ordinating this in large-scale disasters involving multiple agencies is one of the least understood problems in public management (Comfort & Kapucu, 2006). While research has explored poor information sharing between organisations during response (e.g. Dawes, Creswell, & Cahan, 2004; McEntire, 2002), Bharosa, Lee, and Janssen (2010) claim
 there is still a scarcity of studies with little empirical data being available.

Applying OR techniques to analyse knowledge and information flow is well established (for an overview see Edwards, Ababneh, Hall, & Shaw, 2009), but applications to fast-paced disasters are limited. OR's potential for this application is advocated by Simpson and Hancock (2009) and Altay and Green (2006) – the same authors who observe the limited application of soft OR techniques to disasters (like Galindo & Batta, 2013). Here we locate the research opportunity and the objectives of this paper: the Viable System Model (VSM) (Beer, 1979, 1981,1985) is a soft OR method capable of modelling communication structures and diagnosing failures of system configuration that would compromise information flow (Flood & Jackson, 1991). The first objective is to explore and extend the VSM as an approach to analyse contexts of complex communication, where there are key uncertainties, multiple actors and conflicting views (Mingers & Rosenhead, 2004). The second objective is to develop understanding of VSM capacity to structure and analyse communication in fast-paced disasters. The third objective is to contribute to the collection of case studies of applying soft OR techniques (Ormerod, 1995, 1998,1999).

This paper first examines the literature to explore OR's fit for analysing disaster response communication. We then apply the VSM to analyse data collected from Japan regarding their current response capabilities and their response to a past disaster – the Great Hanshin-Awaji Earthquake in 1995. We conclude with discussions of both the utility of analysing disaster response using VSM and generic theoretical issues around communication during such events.

OR has made a substantial contribution to disaster research (Altay & Green, 2006; Galindo & Batta, 2013; Green & Kolesar, 2004; Simpson & Hancock, 2009) by applying a wide range of analytical techniques to bear on the myriad of complex challenges created by disasters. For example, systems dynamics has been used to analyse disaster relief supply chains (Peng, Peng, & Chen, 2014), multi-commodity network flow modelling has been applied to route emergency vehicles (Özdamar, Ekinci, & Küçükyazici, 2004), and agent based simulation was used to model the dissemination of a disaster warning message (Nagarajan, Shaw, & Albores, 2012). Other studies include, sample-path methods and stochastic dynamic programming being used to build a prioritisation model for mass-casualties (Jacobson, Argon, & Ziya, 2012), multiobjective optimisation models informing the development of disaster plans (Hu & Mehrotra, 2012), a multi-criteria approach for trade-offs between system robustness and recovery speed for multiple related disaster events (Zobel & Khansa, 2014) and multi-agent optimisation being applied to responding to earthquakes (Edrissi, Poorzahedy, Nassiri, & Nourinejad, 2013). The diversity of studies continues, for example: location algorithms aided analyses of pre-positioning disaster provisions (Campbell & Jones, 2011), dynamic decision tree application for developing city resilience (Ciumasu, 2013), boolean and stochastic programming applied to service levels for earthquake response (Lejeune, 2013), Monte-Carlo simulation modelling to understand behavioural response to landslides (Uchida, 2012) and a deterministic model built for resource scheduling following an H1N1 outbreak (Rachaniotis, Dasaklis, & Pappis, 2012). On OR applied to disaster communications, the literature is less prolific – one study by Eiselt and Marianov (2012) applies mixed integer programming to analyse mobile phone signal availability after disasters.

Common across these OR studies is the application of reductionist approaches that narrow on key variables at the expense of their wider interdependencies/context. Unless carefully applied, such approaches could overlook the need for holism in risk and communication analysis (Haimes, 2012, p. 1455). Comfort (1996, p. 4) reiterates the need for holism in modelling disaster environments, stating they need “modeling that can capture the continuously evolving relationships among the interdependent components of the system”. Such complex interrelationships arise from the dynamic environment of information rapidly flowing across responders’ organisational structures facilitated by individual/agency relationships and moderated by misinformation and misinterpretation. Systems thinking is ideally suited to exploring such complexities (see Mingers & White, 2010 for an overview).

Systems thinking posits that emergent properties exist in systems and these cannot be understood by examining only individual parts (von Bertalanffy, 1968). Rejecting reductionism, systems thinking advocates holism to analyse relationships between parts to uncover emergent properties (Jackson, 2000) – for example, to qualitatively appreciate system deficiencies and the efficacy of potential resolutions (Shaw & Blundell, 2010). In choosing a method to analyse features and diagnose deficiencies in disaster communication structures, several systems thinking approaches are available – whether they be interpretive, emancipatory, postmodern or functionalist (see Jackson, 2000). Of the two main types evident in the literature, interpretive methods build understanding by accommodating multiple perspectives (such as soft systems methodology (Checkland & Scholes, 1990)), and functionalist approaches allow analysts to objectify system characteristics (such as viable system modelling (Beer, 1979)).

Our context of a disaster response communication system includes all agencies/individuals that have responsibility to perform a function in responding to a disaster (e.g. search and rescue, command and control, multi-agency coordination). Each function generates situational knowledge which needs to be shared across functions for more effective response. By focussing on functions and their structural capability to communicate effectively, we require a method to analyse and diagnose communication faults across functions – a functionalist analytical method. VSM is a functionalist method to explore communication through analysing “information flows and communications links” (Flood & Jackson, 1991, p. 92). It was chosen as an analytical method in this research because it, unlike every other systems thinking approach, provides analysts with a structure for analysing explicit communication channels exploring detailed relationships between functions in the system and so it is ideally suited to this context. Also, as VSM takes a functionalist approach, it can explore the threats/consequences for response if functions do not communicate effectively as well as identify structural reasons for such failures.

This section introduces the concepts and analytical structures of VSM, providing a level of detail sufficient to understand the remainder of this paper. For more detailed accounts, see Beer (1979, 1981,1985), Yolles (2005), Schwaninger (2006) and Espejo and Gill (1997).

The VSM was developed by Beer (1979) and specifies that five functions are needed in a system to ensure its ‘viability’. Viability was defined by Beer (1979) to mean existence but later interpretations suggest that viability is more concerned with effectiveness (Yolles, 2005) which is more appropriate here. Underpinning the theory is that the effectiveness of a system is compromised if the VSM structure is not completely adhered to (Schwaninger, 2006). From Espejo and Gill (1997), the five functions making up the VSM structure are:

                        
                           1.
                           
                              Implementation (also known as ‘System 1’ (S1) in VSM) – performs the tasks to accomplish system goals e.g. urban search and rescue (USAR) teams who look for disaster victims.


                              Co-ordination (S2) – ensures synergy to perform implementations e.g. ensures USAR teams complement each other's work.


                              Control (S3) – monitors implementations and operations to maintain efficiency and allocate resources as well as audit performance e.g. operational command of particular implementation teams.


                              Intelligence (S4) – develops strategic options for the system to adapt to its environment e.g. analysing secondary threats from the disaster.


                              Policy (S5) – sets the overall direction of the system e.g. strategic command of the disaster response.

These functions (S1–S5) are represented in Fig. 1
                     , with lines depicting the communication channels between them/the environment. The dotted communication channel in Fig. 1 carries what is called the algedonic signal, which enables implementation to alert policy directly to issues requiring urgent attention (Beer, 1985). The two thick grey arrows in Fig. 1 show an important relationship between control and intelligence. Policy must ensure this relationship is balanced (through what VSM calls a homeostat) to ensure that control and intelligence are providing equal weight to the policy-making process. As discussed below, imbalances here can cause problems. Another feature of VSM is recursion, which stipulates that each system is “embedded in other more comprehensive systems” (Leonard, 2000, p. 711). For example, a team (e.g. a USAR team) may be embedded within a department (a local fire
station), which itself is embedded within a wider organisation (a national fire service). Modelling recursively enables issues to be analysed in their immediate and higher/lower-level contexts providing analysts with an integrated understanding of the system (Yolles, 1999) and an ability to identify system faults which compromise performance.

To operationalise VSM theory as an analytical tool, Viable System Diagnosis (VSD) was developed to formally model a system, its functions and channels to ensure they are performing optimally and in alignment with Fig. 1 (Flood & Jackson, 1991, pp. 94–95). VSD offers a process to rigorously build and analyse VSM models by posing a series of questions which, when answered, provide a detailed account of what and how activities are undertaken (Flood & Zambuni, 1990; Tepe & Haslett, 2002). Briefly, and see Flood and Jackson (1991, pp. 94–95) for a detailed version, the VSD process is: (1) Specify the system boundary, purpose and context. (2) For each function, identify: how it performs its duties and who performs them; its configuration, links to other functions and how these are facilitated; constraints imposed on it from other functions; accentuators and attenuators of conflict; performance indicators. (3) Model the functions using the VSM diagram, diagnosing whether communication channels, processes and controls are flawed/efficacious. Using VSD at different levels of recursion enables each embedded system to be modelled using the five functions and their links. VSD modelling identifies system faults that can compromise communication flow – and some of the most common faults (according to Flood & Jackson, 1991) include:

                        
                           1.
                           Different levels of recursion defined incorrectly in the system i.e. the system being unbalanced in how processes are handled at consistent levels within functions.

The system fails to see the importance of certain primary activities i.e. they are not treated as implementation units with their own localised management.

Irrelevant structures exist i.e. some functions/links do not contribute to viability.

Co-ordination, control, intelligence and policy try to become viable systems in their own right i.e. their purpose is self-sustaining rather than to support the implementation activities and achieve viability for the whole system.

Co-ordination is not fully established i.e. there is a lack of effective delivery by implementation functions.

Intelligence is too weak i.e. VSM's homeostat not ensuring balance between control and intelligence, with policy only listening to control and ignoring recommendations for change from the intelligence function.
                           

Control interferes in the day-to-day running of implementation units i.e. implementation is not managed by its managers, but by control's.

Policy does not create a strong enough identity i.e. the system is unsure of its purpose.

Communication channels do not correspond to those in the VSM diagram i.e. channels and processes for communication do not adhere to cybernetic principles.

Transmission of performance data is not fast enough i.e. functions are not able to correct performance as they do not receive feedback from the system quick enough.

Some of these faults were apparent in our case study and will be further discussed later.

Given the potential for VSM's systems thinking foundations to enable effective analysis of the complexity of disaster response communication, along with VSM's specific capability to identify faults in such systems, the following research question is posed:

                        
                           1.
                           How useful is VSM to analyse where communication faults occur in a multi-agency disaster response system?

We are also interested to examine why these faults occur. Thus, a second research question is posed:


                     
                        
                           2.
                           How useful is VSM to analyse why these communication faults arise for multi-agency, multi-level response?

@&#METHODOLOGY@&#

Theoretical sampling was used to identify a research setting that displayed the needed characteristics of potential communication faults in a multi-agency disaster management setting and from which we could collect appropriate data to identify communication faults using the VSM. This led to Japan being chosen as the site for data collection due to (1) it having the complexity of communications necessary to test the analytical techniques, and (2) its emergency services’ and public's experience in disaster response. Data were collected from four case studies to build understanding of the phenomena being investigated (Braa & Vidgen, 1999) and to enable holistic analysis (Miller & Brewer, 2003). These cases were arranged into two streams of data collection. Stream 1 focussed on how response agencies were organised and how response and communication occurred – giving data to explore the first research question of where communication faults occurred. Adding to Stream 1, Stream 2 collected data from actual victims to understand problems in communication and the impact these had – and together these gave data to explore the second research question of why communication faults arise.

The case studies in Stream 1 included two local fire and ambulance emergency service control rooms (Cases 1 and 2) which handle emergency telephone calls and despatch local responders. Data were collected through formal semi-structured interviews with seven staff members which focussed on information management issues. Data were also collected through observation of control room activities to identify what information they created and shared and how they did so, providing further insight to the context and enabling substantial informal discussions with staff (Yin, 2003). Relevant documents, such as policies and procedures, were also collected providing a depth and breadth to the available data. The third case study, of a local government disaster management office (Case 3), provided insight to how local information systems were organised and how government-level response was managed.

Stream 2 included the 1995 Great Hanshin-Awaji Earthquake (Case 4). A focus group was conducted with seven survivors of the earthquake and two tour guides from the earthquake's museum in Kobe. The focus group explored different perspectives (Morgan, 1997) of the response to the earthquake, specifically communication issues. Two detailed spoken accounts of victims’ experiences provided additional insight. A victim also provided a tour of their community to show the impact of the earthquake. Two visits to the Great Hanshin-Awaji Earthquake museum and one visit to the Kobe Port Memorial added contextual understanding through video, documentation and physical objects from the disaster.

Our qualitative data comprises audio-recordings of interviews and the focus group, and extensive researcher notes of observations and informal discussions. Table 1 summarises the data collected:

To ensure consistency, data collection and analysis was conducted by one researcher. The five functions of the VSM provided structure to initially code the data to allow evidence to emerge of where communication was occurring and system characteristics within the VSM frame. Three high-level communication themes emerged from the initial analysis: (1) actual processes of communication; (2) enablers/barriers of communication; and (3) consequences of communication occurring/not occurring. The data within these themes were coded to one (or more) of the VSM functions to which that aspect of communication was most suitable. For example, data stating “[the information] system [between fire and police] are independent” relates to a barrier to communication. Given communication from these two agencies provides information to support co-ordination of agency resources, this was coded under the co-ordination VSM function. If an instance of communication did not fit within the VSM frame, this item was coded as “other”.

Additionally, a theme also emerged on characteristics of the VSM that were not specifically related to communication. For example, victims of the Great Hanshin-Awaji Earthquake noted that “there was no water – the pipes all burst” and so firefighters “couldn't get water to put out the fires”. Whilst this was not a communication fault, it represents a resourcing issue (for which the control function in the VSM is responsible) impacting upon the implementation activity of the system. Therefore, that data was coded under both the control and implementation VSM functions during the analysis.

Following the initial coding, each of the steps of the VSD process was undertaken. Data coded under the particular VSM function(s) being analysed in each step was used to answer the questions posed by Flood and Jackson (1991, pp. 94–95) for that particular step. This was an iterative process, with data being recoded at points when it was identified that it also referred to topics being uncovered during other steps of the analysis. This process enabled a comprehensive picture of strengths and gaps in terms of the functions’ capability for effective communication to emerge from the data. The next section demonstrates this process.

This section presents the analysis undertaken using the VSD process and shows where findings were made on communications that may compromise viability. Participant quotes are in italics.

The first stage of VSD is to identify the purpose of the system being studied. Given our research was investigating disaster response, the purpose was set as: a system that responds to a disaster situation to support victims and reduces its impact on the affected area. VSD then requires the system to achieve this purpose (called the “system-in-focus”) to be determined. Our data showed several agencies may respond at the disaster scene, so our system-in-focus became a multi-agency response system. Given the data we had collected, we focussed this at the local government-level.

VSD then requires specification of the system-in-focus parts that conduct the tasks to achieve its purpose. Having determined several agencies may be tasked with responding, each of these agencies – police, fire and ambulance – were specified as implementation units in our VSM. Our data also showed that the Great Hanshin-Awaji Earthquake damaged the response capacity of official implementation units, e.g. “the police department was destroyed” and “the road was blocked by… collapsed buildings so firefighters and police cars couldn't reach the devastated area”. Official responders were supplemented by unofficial responders such as “neighbours” who were often “the first to help”. Consequently, these unofficial responders were also specified as implementation units in our VSM.

VSD then requires specification of the viable system of which the system-in-focus is part. Our data showed that Japan has a hierarchical approach to disaster response, with local governments nestled within regional governments, which are in turn nestled within the national government. These recursion levels are depicted in Fig. 2
                         and are discussed further in Section 5.8.

The second stage of VSD is studying the system-in-focus implementation units, detailing their environment, operations and localised management. For our system-in-focus implementation units, their environment included the zone they were responding to in a disaster. Their operations were the responders – e.g. policemen, firefighters – who would be on the ground supporting victims, etc. Their localised management were those in each agency that control these responders on the ground – for instance those in the fire and ambulance control room providing direction to their responders over radio. The process of detailing the above led us to identify one fault:


                        
                           Unofficial 
                           implementation
                        
                        
                           units
                           :
                         When detailing the localised management of the unofficial responders (e.g. neighbours), it was identified in the Great Hanshin-Awaji Earthquake that little prior importance had been attached to this implementation unit. It had not been provided with its own localised management, communications and resources. As one participant noted on unofficial responders “her mother was alive for many hours and she was calling for help but [they] couldn't get her out because they didn't have enough tools”. For VSM, this is a Fault 2 identified by Flood and Jackson (1991), mentioned in Section 3, as the system fails to see the importance of certain primary activities being performed and so does not treat them as implementation units with their own localised management, communications and resources.

The third stage of VSD is studying how implementation units are co-ordinated by the system-in-focus. This stage requires listing possible sources of implementation units getting in each other's way/conflict between them. The main possible source identified was a lack of information, preventing responders working harmoniously together. This led us to identify one fault:


                        
                           Information 
                           co
                           -ordination:
                         Staff in the fire and ambulance control room indicated that “[the information] system [between fire and police] are independent”. Consequently, members of one agency cannot access the information system of another agency and resort to sharing information through “cell phone calls”. Not only does this duplicate information that is already within an information system, but it also risks being misinterpreted. This is a Fault 5 for VSM (co-ordination is not fully established).

The fourth stage of VSD is studying how the control function exercises authority, allocates resources and audits performance. Our data showed the “control system [to] be in the city halls”, with control over the implementation units being exercised by a local
government
disaster
management team and the heads of each local
government
department (e.g. fire, ambulance and police). To enable them to do this, there were designated rooms where monitoring and control activities would take place within the local government offices. When examining how the control function exercises authority, we identified one fault:


                        
                           Information 
                           overload
                           :
                         Within the local
government
disaster
management case study offices there was a phone/radio to connect directly with each partner response agency. A range of other telephones enabled information to flow into the local government disaster management rooms. However, during an incident, phone lines can become overloaded with incoming calls meaning they cannot be used to make urgent calls out of the disaster management rooms. This may result in a Fault 10 – the transmission of performance data in the system not being fast enough. This fault is mitigated to an extent through having a telephone line for outgoing communication which no-one else knows the number for (keeping it free of incoming calls). However, only having limited telephone capacity that can be used for outgoing calls may not be enough if urgent messages need to be conveyed to different people at once.

The fifth stage of VSD is studying how the intelligence function develops strategic options for the system to adapt to its environment. At the local government-level, this was the responsibility of the heads of each local
government
department in conjunction with the mayor and vice mayors. When examining whether intelligence activities guarantee adaptation to the future, we identified one fault:


                        
                           Strategic 
                           foresight
                           :
                         Interviewees identified problems of not conducting adequate foresight planning for disasters. This arises because characteristics of disasters vary, are difficult to predict and are dynamic, so ways of responding to these changing events also vary. One consequence is that it makes it difficult to ensure that adequate resources and skills are available for likely situations. For example, victims of the Great Hanshin-Awaji Earthquake noted that “there was no water – the pipes all burst” and so firefighters “couldn't get water to put out the fires”. Consequently, alternative water had to be sourced, resulting in firefighters pumping “seawater” but they then encountered the problem of “the hose was not long enough” and when this was solved “they got cars tramping on” the hose.

Strategic foresight could have predicted such a chain of events. Viability may be jeopardised by inadequate intelligence (Fault 6) to identify potential challenges that may prevent implementation from functioning effectively.

The sixth stage of VSD is studying how the policy function sets the identity and overall direction of the system. Interviewees told how, for incidents managed at the local government-level, the mayor makes the final decision with support from vice
mayors and heads of each local
government
department. When possible, they work together from the local government disaster management rooms. At this level of recursion, the data did not show any faults in the policy function.

The seventh stage of VSD is checking all information channels and other relationships between functions are properly designed. When comparing our VSM model detailed above to the ideal model developed by Beer (1979) we identified two faults:


                        
                           Implementation 
                           unit
                        
                        
                           –
                        
                        
                           environment
                        
                        
                           communication
                           :
                         For VSM, communication channels should exist between each implementation unit and the external environment. In the Great Hanshin-Awaji Earthquake, communications channels between implementation units and victims in the external environment did not work effectively causing a “lack of information so [victims] don't know where to go, what to do”. In part, communication channels failed due to a loss of technical infrastructure “at the time of emergency… the telephones don't work, where could you get the information?”. Despite infrastructure losses, victims noted some successes in communicating information through the media. For TV this depended on the extent of damage to the electricity supply. Ham-radio was also a helpful channel “amateur wireless did a great job connecting one station to another giving out information”.

During the initial response, victims put stickers on the outside of their house to “mak[e]a note to their families” confirming their safety. Others wrote notes at evacuation shelters to tell others of their location. Stickers as a form of communication emerged as routes for (a) the public to communicate with responders, (b) responders to communicate with the public and (c) the public to communicate with each other.

Over time, as response efforts became more organised in the Great Hanshin-Awaji Earthquake, more effective communication channels between implementation units and the external environment emerged. For example, in evacuation centres in schools, organisational structures formed organically with school teachers becoming emergent leaders. They “became the organisers… the ones that did all the communications”. However, the teachers had “the burden… even though they knew nothing about all this work” and so communication faults recurred as “they had a big, big stress”. For victims not in shelters, response agencies communicated through elected community leaders/key community figures who “became the spokesman for the community”. They had to balance “taking charge” of the relief and welfare of victims with maintaining communication to/from responders.

For VSM, emergent communication channels were typically not from official implementation units to the public – suggesting the presence of Fault 9. However, in this most difficult situation and with compromised infrastructure, there emerged a source of communicators including media reporters, ham radio enthusiasts, stickers/notes, teachers, community leaders, etc. through which information was disseminated. These opened/maintained communication channels when official agencies were implementing critical operations.


                        
                           Inter-
                           implementation
                        
                        
                           unit
                        
                        
                           communication: In VSM, communication channels between each implementation unit facilitate information sharing. Analysis showed implementation units (i.e. fire and police) were largely “independent” and not always effective at sharing information between themselves – which challenged multi-agency working. This is an example of Fault 9, as each implementation unit should have effective local communications channels to multi-agency partners. Failure of these may create operational confusion or exhaust resources.

As highlighted in Section 3, analysing other recursion levels helps to get an integrated understanding of the system. Consequently, we carried out the VSD process for the recursion level below (individual response agency) and recursion levels above (regional/national government) our system-in-focus.

In the fire/ambulance control rooms, implementation units were identified to be the actual response assets on the ground, e.g. firefighters in fire engines, medical staff in ambulances, etc. The co-ordination and control functions were undertaken by a controller who was in radio contact with the implementation units. This controller made decisions and controlled where implementation units should be deployed. The intelligence function was undertaken by a call handler, who received information about incidents from the external environment through emergency telephone calls from the public. A control room supervisor undertook control, intelligence and policy activities by examining data on their computer and providing support/taking necessary action. These supervisors also made the final decisions in the control room.

The VSD process identified two faults in the intelligence function of this recursion level:


                           
                              Information 
                              overload
                              :
                            In the fire/ambulance control rooms, some extra telephones and staff were available to increase capacity if demand increased, but this was limited by the number of telephones available. Furthermore, each call generates information about the situation which the control room needs to process. When many different incidents are being reported simultaneously, this can generate a mass of information which could overload the ability of the control room to co-ordinate the response. This could result in a Fault 10 – transmission of performance data in the system not being fast enough.


                           
                              Dynamic 
                              feedback
                              :
                            The data highlighted feedback between the environment and intelligence is critical during disasters, with intelligence constantly scanning for relevant changes it needs to adapt to on a dynamic basis. For example, control room interviewees receive telephone calls from victims and radio contact from responders which together build a comprehensive picture of the disaster. In one control room, if their room is disabled by the disaster then personnel go to the top of the tall building that they are situated next to. From that elevated vantage point, controllers seek visual feedback by looking for fires. They also obtain feedback by sending firefighters to locations around the city to collect information with them returning to report back. To an extent this could be a Fault 10 – transmission of performance data in the system not being fast enough. If controllers do not receive sufficient feedback on the emerging situation then they seek alternative sources to continue their co-ordination function.

For larger incidents (requiring a response that exceeds local/city resources), laws exist to delineate final authority to the regional-level of recursion, “civil protection law [says] if something that [our] city cannot handle by themselves then usually the [region] will take over… the decision-making or the command”. For wide-scale incidents (exceeding regional resources), the Prime Minister of Japan has ultimate authority.

The regional-level VSM therefore has the local government multi-agency response as implementation units, with regional government officials undertaking co-ordination, control, intelligence and policy activities. The national-level VSM has the regional-level response as implementation units, with national government officials undertaking co-ordination, control, intelligence and policy activities.

The VSD process identified one fault in the co-ordination function of these recursion levels:


                           
                              Resource 
                              co
                              -ordination:
                            Victims of the Great Hanshin-Awaji Earthquake spoke of multiple regions providing implementation units (resources and personnel). However, co-ordination at this level of recursion was problematic. For example, regions provided firefighters to support firefighting and rescue activities but regions had different equipment meaning that the connectors on the water hoses “don't match” so they “couldn't connect” their non-local hoses to local standpipes. Instead responders had to “bucket relay” to fight fires. This highlights a failure in co-ordination to standardise implementation units from different regions. For VSM, this identifies a Fault 5 as co-ordination was not effective.

The VSD process also identified two faults in the information
channels of these recursion levels:


                           
                              Inter-
                              implementation
                           
                           
                              unit
                           
                           
                              communication
                              :
                            Typically, local responders had co-operation agreements with nearest neighbour cities. However, for a large-scale disaster these agreements were noted to be insufficient “when something big happens they need more help [from] support far away”. Consequently, there is need to strengthen links with other regions' response units from farther away to ensure their effective participation. This is an example of Fault 9, as each regional implementation unit should have effective communications channels to other regional partners.


                           
                              Hierarchy:
                            Decision-makers up the recursional chain become more removed from the disaster. Interviewees showed that communication structures between different levels of decision-maker were not efficient in the Great Hanshin-Awaji Earthquake. Here, the response from the Japanese Self Defense Forces was highlighted that it “didn't move fast enough, they need[ed] to get orders from the top… the request for the self defense forces was not until very much later” even though “big troops of the self defense force” were based near the affected area “but they couldn't dispatch” “because there were no orders from… the Prime Minister, the central government”. The reason for this was cited as being a communication fault in that “the top didn't get information enough to realise the seriousness of the earthquake”. This suggests a Fault 3 – irrelevant structures existing that do not contribute to viability and a Fault 10 – transmission of performance data not being fast enough. Fault 3 is evident in the layers of request and authorisation needed for the army to respond. Fault 10 occurred because the “top” did not receive sufficient feedback to indicate the seriousness and need for urgent help from the army.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The pace of technological development has been rapid since the Great Hanshin-Awaji Earthquake. Mobile internet technology, widespread global positioning system (GPS) usage and a range of other technologies used now in disaster responses were not available back in 1995. Consequently, this should be borne
 in mind when interpreting the findings derived from the Great Hanshin-Awaji Earthquake case study. Additionally, Japan is advanced in its preparedness for disasters and is perhaps not representative of less-advanced countries. Nonetheless, threats to the viability of its response system may highlight aspects that are particularly challenging. With these limitations in mind, we revisit the two research questions posed in Section 3.

The first research question asked: How useful is VSM to analyse where communication faults occur in a multi-agency disaster response system? Before this study, from research typically conducted with businesses, we knew of VSM's strength for diagnosing problems within “information flows and communication links” (Flood & Jackson, 1991, p. 92). This study is different in testing VSM in high hazard settings requiring urgent and dynamic responses and multi-agency collaboration. Through analysing such a different system type, three contributions to VSM theory were identified:

                           
                              •
                              Environmental support mechanisms for viability

Rapid implementation unit emergence

VSM utility to disaster response systems

The analyses discovered that environmental support mechanisms can work to enhance system viability. These mechanisms do not feature in current VSM thinking and are consequently ignored in traditional VSM analyses. To explain, as evidenced from our findings in Section 5.7, our research found that if the communication channel between the implementation
unit and its environment is not properly functioning, the environment may respond to help the communication system remain viable (e.g. victims putting stickers on buildings to send messages to responders). VSM literature sees the external environment as full of challenge and opportunity (Beer, 1979) with a viable system needing to be able to adapt itself, either incrementally (morphogenesis) or dramatically (metamorphosis), to manage the variety of the external environment (Yolles, 2000). Consequently, traditional VSM analyses focus on how the system adapts to the environment to remain viable. VSM literature also highlights that intelligence may try to manipulate the external environment (Jackson, 1988; Morgan, 1982). However, VSM literature does not currently focus on how the environment adapts to the system to help it remain viable (as happened in our case study). This may be because of the nature of the system – if a business is struggling to maintain viability those in the environment may not see a need to help that business maintain viability, especially if there are alternative suppliers of their product/services. However, for disaster response, there is no alternative system so those in the environment may need to pick up any slack from the system to enhance its performance.

Clearly, the point of modelling systems separately to their environment is to reduce the complexity of analysis. However, our research has shown that, by focussing only on the system itself, important environmental responses that could enhance viability (such as environmental support mechanisms) may be overlooked. This could be particularly important where no alternatives to the system exist e.g. the recent banking crisis when governments had to rescue failing banks to prevent the sector from collapse. Future research could examine how VSM thinking could be extended to ensure systematic analysis is done to identify these sorts of environmental support mechanisms.

Another finding, detailed in Section 5.2, is how implementation units can emerge almost instantaneously. Our research showed how the unofficial responders (e.g. neighbours) initially emerged as the biggest contributor to viability of the disaster response system without any pre-planning. The VSM literature does not currently highlight the rapid emergence of new implementation units probably due to the nature of the systems traditionally analysed e.g. it is unlikely a group of volunteers will suddenly arrive without notice to operate a new function for a business. However, our research showed that these sorts of emerging implementation units can quickly form within disaster response systems, and perhaps similar examples can be found elsewhere. Given the lack of literature on rapidly emerging implementation units in VSM, further research could explore the types of systems these may affect, and the impact this type of implementation unit can have.

With the above two exceptions, our VSM analysis did not show other particular differences between multi-agency disaster response compared to more traditional VSM applications. This is demonstrated by all of the communication faults identified in Section 5 being linked back to Flood and Jackson's (1991) common VSD faults, and through VSD not struggling to structure any particular part of our analysis. However, this case does provide new evidence of VSM's applicability to analysing fast-paced communications in disaster response systems, which helps address the gap identified in Section 1 of limited applications of soft OR in this domain. The generalisability of VSM (Jackson, 2000) signals its applicability to analysing any disaster response system regardless of the factors that differ between disasters. With the response system structured using VSM, the location of faults can be identified using the VSD process. When our data was modelled this way, nine common structural faults were identified and, through this process, the location of threats to viability for our cases were apparent (see summary in Table 2
                           ).

Previous sections of this paper highlighted that:

                              
                                 1.
                                 responders are increasingly struggling to use information effectively (United Nations Foundation, 2011)

there are a lack of empirical studies on information sharing in response (Bharosa et al., 2010)

modelling disaster environments requires an approach “that can capture the continuously evolving relationships among the interdependent components of the system” (Comfort, 1996, p. 4)

We have shown that the VSM framework can address each of these points. On Point 1, we have shown how VSM explores the threats/consequences for response if functions do not communicate effectively, as well as identifying structural reasons for such failures. On Point 2, we have applied VSM to empirical data and provided detailed insight on the communication between functions in a disaster response system. On Point 3, VSM's systems thinking foundation meets the challenge of modelling the relationships between interdependent components of systems. Further research that trials other OR techniques in this area could help us to understand their capability to also do so and clarify how VSM compares. This could focus on individual techniques but also mixing OR techniques both hard and soft.

Having identified the potential for VSM to identify communication faults and where they occur, we use these to address the second research question.

The second research question asked: How useful is VSM to analyse why these communication faults arise for multi-agency, multi-level response? Within the nine communication faults in Table 2, our analysis identified four generic reasons for why these arise:

                           
                              •
                              Vertical communication and information sharing

Horizontal communication and information sharing

Bandwidth of communication channels

Communicating to diverse responders

Through the concept of recursion levels, VSM identified that irrelevant structures and hierarchical relationships between and within recursions can prevent the right people from receiving necessary information or even being aware that it exists. This concurs with the research in the disaster communications literature (Comfort & Kapucu, 2006; Manoj & Baker, 2007). From the Great Hanshin-Awaji Earthquake, an example of failing to communicate up a level was the need for urgent support not being communicated to senior national officials – meaning the army was to deploy too late (see Section 5.8.2). An example of a failure to communicate down a level was that victims did not know where to go or what to do – bringing confusion and making the response even more challenging (see Section 5.7).

VSM views its five functions as equally important (Brocklesby, Cummings, & Davies, 1995) lowering the significance of hierarchical relationships (Espejo, Bowling, & Hoverstadt, 1999). Given VSM specifies the relationships between these five functions, hierarchies are replaced by a small number of relationships between functions. These relationships typically involve people who play multiple roles across different functions (Leonard, 1999), increasing the potential for information dissemination. Manoj and Baker (2007) argue that hierarchical structures in disaster situations create wide information gaps. A VSM structure can reduce this by concentrating on the relationships between the VSM functions rather than between the (sometimes confusing and inhibiting) hierarchical levels. The literature is unclear on optimal organisational structures for effective communication during disasters, but lessons from VSM may help. Whilst this paper used the VSM in a diagnostic mode (Mode I (Espejo, 1989)) it can also be used in a design capacity (Mode II (Espejo, 1989)), offering a template to build a viable system (Brocklesby et al., 1995).

Beyond the five functions, the VSM analysis demonstrated the importance of effective communication channels between implementation units and the external environment to facilitate information sharing. This reinforces Manoj and Baker (2007) who highlight that for victims a lack of information can increase distress so information updates are important. However, VSM models this communication channel as a two-way interaction suggesting that, for responders, gaining information from victims in the environment may be helpful.

The analysis of VSM co-ordination showed that difficulties can arise across a response system that involves multiple agencies with their own procedures and systems. For example, the local emergency services in our cases were perceived not to have strong communication structures with partners meaning they may act independently. Regarding computer systems sharing data, independent information systems across response agencies made it difficult to share and combine information meaning that data was duplicated and there was an overreliance on phone calls as a mode of communication (see Section 5.3). This mimics the problems of organisational silos and ineffective co-ordination identified by Lee, Bharosa, Yang, Janssen, and Rao (2011).

On this, a diversity of channels is needed to overcome heterogeneous systems which cannot easily share information due to incompatible hardware/software across agencies (Knuth, 1999). VSM highlights the importance of communication channels linking implementation units with the co-ordination function to centralise information to ensure it is quickly available for dissemination to all relevant agencies (Leonard, 1999, 2000). Information to be centralised may be that which is critical to response and which would reduce unnecessary duplication e.g. digital images of road conditions as was done during the 2010 Haitian earthquake response (Yates & Paquette, 2011). Future research could develop a common repository for information systems for implementation units – especially for established multi-agency partnerships e.g. police, fire and ambulance services.

Not all channels for communication can support the volume or complexity of information to be transmitted during a disaster. For example, in the intelligence function of VSM some channels may have insufficient speed e.g. too few telephones/not enough operators – the consequence of which is the transmission is too slow or partial. This concurs with the information overload problem (see Section 5.4) where sufficient bandwidth may allow incoming information to overwhelm the system's processing capacity, compromising response (Knuth, 1999). VSM responds to information overload through the concept of variety – the measure of complexity in a system defined as the number of possible states a system can take (Beer, 1974). To achieve optimal responses in VSM, the variety of the stimuli and the variety of the system should be balanced to achieve “requisite variety” (Ashby, 1956). To achieve requisite variety, systems need to absorb incoming variety by increasing their own ability to cope or reduce the incoming variety (Beer, 1974). As requisite variety is not a concept in disaster response, research could explore how it may reduce information overload in response situations.

Technical and human resources are essential to the delivery of a proportionate response. During times of high risk, the co-ordination and control of a workforce is critical to providing appropriate duty of care to responders and victims. The diversity of a responder workforce (e.g. local/regional/national/international, professional or voluntary, pre-prepared or convergent (i.e. those who offer support during an incident)) may present particular challenges for collaboration and communication. An example of challenging collaboration is responders attending the Great Hanshin-Awaji Earthquake with incompatible resources (hoses) (see Section 5.8.2). If VSM analysis of the co-ordination and control functions at this recursion level had taken place prior to the incident, it may have highlighted compatibility issues and identified necessary resources.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

Whilst OR has made substantial contributions to disaster response research, as yet there is little contribution from soft OR methods. Furthermore, there is limited literature on techniques to examine how communications are being (or should be) conducted in large-scale disasters when a multi-agency response is required. This paper addressed the intersection of these two gaps by exploring how a soft OR approach in VSM can analyse such communications for effective disaster response.

Through thinking holistically about the structural components of a disaster response system, we have demonstrated how VSM can be used to identify weaknesses that jeopardise communications. In doing so our analysis discovered nine functional locations for this, which signal where managers could look for potential challenges when developing a communications strategy.

This paper has opened two avenues for future studies on VSM. It has demonstrated that environmental support mechanisms for viability can exist, which means VSM analyses need to consider how the environment adapts to the system to help it remain viable, as well as the traditional focus on how the system adapts to the environment to remain viable. Through developing VSM to enable systematic analysis of environmental support mechanisms for viability, it may enable organisations to identify new processes to harness the power of this potential new source of viability. We consequently call for further research to be undertaken in this area.

Second, the research has also shown how implementation units can rapidly emerge within systems and support viability when the system is unprepared and failing. Whilst almost instantaneous implementation unit emergence could be specific to only disaster response systems, increasing our understanding of this phenomenon could assist in areas where implementation units are still added to systems at pace – e.g. in organisational mergers/acquisitions. Consequently, we call for further research to understand what types of systems this phenomenon may affect, and the impact this type of implementation unit can have on such systems.

Four other areas for future research studies have also been identified. Given this study only considered VSM, one is to look at other OR techniques to help us understand how VSM compares with those for studying communication in disaster response. Research could also explore using VSM in Mode II to design a multi-agency response system, to identify and test whether VSM design provides better practice compared to traditional hierarchical structures in this domain. Research could also develop the structure of a common co-ordination information system/repository for collaborating implementation units. Finally, research could explore how requisite variety in VSM can be used to reduce information overload during disaster response. In doing so, VSM could provide a stronger foundation through which to structure disaster response systems to maximise their effectiveness.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#


This research was funded by the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS). The authors thank them for supporting this research. We confirm that the funder played no role in study design; in the collection, analysis, and interpretation of data; in the writing of the report; and in the decision to submit the paper for publication.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

