@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Simulation modelling for contracting hospital emergency services at the regional level

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We model Polish regional hospital emergency system.


                        
                        
                           
                           We simulate the number and costs of acute services to be contracted by Health Fund.


                        
                        
                           
                           DES model predicts effects of the demand changes on the emergency unit workloads.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

OR in health services

Simulation

Hospitals

Emergency services

Contracting

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Hospital emergency services are closely connected to demographic issues and population changes. The methodology presented here helps to assess the effects of the forecasted demand changes on the next-year emergency unit workloads. The objective of the study is to estimate the expected volume of emergency hospital services, as measured by the number and costs of medical procedures provided to patients, to be contracted by the Polish National Health Fund (NFZ) branch at the regional level to cover the forecasted demand. A discrete-event simulation model was developed to elaborate the credible forecasts of the function components, the fundamental elements of the contract values granted by the NFZ for emergency departments for the following year. Emergency department-level data were drawn from the NFZ regional branch registry to perform a statistical analysis of emergency services provided to patients in 17 admission units and emergency wards in 2010. The model results indicate that the predicted increase in two age groups, i.e., the youngest children and the older population, will have different effects on the number and value of hospital emergency services to be considered in the contracting policy. There is potential for a discrete-event simulation to support strategic health policy decision making at the regional level. The value of this approach lies in providing estimates for the what-if scenarios related to the prognosis of changing acute demand.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

This paper describes the part of the project that aims to study the demand for emergency hospital care within the context of services provided by admission units (AUs) and emergency wards (EWs) located in the Lower Silesia region in Poland. The main objective is to assess the volume of services, which is measured by the number and costs of medical procedures, to be contracted by the National Health Fund (NFZ) in hospital AUs and EWs to satisfy the next-year demand for emergency medical treatment at the regional level.

The demand for service reflects the relationship between the price and the quantity demanded. Typically, if the price decreases, the demanded quantity increases. In Poland, as in other European countries, most healthcare is contracted by the NFZ, which is financed by obligatory health insurance contributions from every working citizen. This legal system excludes the possibility of the regulatory role of a price mechanism because healthcare is provided to patients free of charge at the point of delivery. In the case of elective hospital care, the supply and demand relationship is rationed by waiting lists and the distinctly defined measures are available. For example, Martin, Rice, Jacobs, and Smith (2007) use outpatient referrals and decisions to admit to measure the demand side, and outpatients seen and inpatients admissions to measure the supply side, respectively. The emergency medical services (EMS) are provided without limits for every patient who requires medical assistance and there is no possibility to separately estimate demand and supply sides. The numerous literature on predicting acute demand assumes that the emergency needs of the population are correctly modelled by the exogenous random arrival process. This process describes also the supply side, because the emergency demand is recognised only if it is registered in the system. The challenge is to forecast how this process changes over time and to measure the influence of the spatial and the demographic factors on the volume of emergency patients.

There are many obstacles that significantly hinder the process of acute healthcare demand–supply analysis. When studying emergency demand, information regarding the acute events arising process is unavailable because it is only possible to study events that are reported to the healthcare system. In fact, between the emergence of a need for service and notification of such an event to the public healthcare system, some information is dispersed. On the one hand, there are patients who decide to seek help in private health system or completely resign from applying for benefits. On the other hand, some patients consider hospital AUs as alternatives to general practitioners, which increases the number of non-emergency cases treated by the emergency system.

The demand for acute hospital services is more variable than is demand for other categories of health services and the precise mix of treatments to be delivered under an acute contract is difficult to predict. Variability is displayed in the seasonal variations of arrival rates, in the treatment requirements of individual patients and in the variety of treatment options for the same diagnosis. The observed variability occurs for many reasons, such as seasonal illness, summer/winter outdoor incidents, fluctuations depending on time of day, day of the week and season-specific periods. The patient’s free choice of a healthcare provider makes forecasting even more difficult. In the case of acute events, patients usually select the closest available emergency department (ED) that offers the required service; however, sometimes the patients’ preferences cause them to travel to a facility located in a neighbouring area. Additionally, EDs serve students, temporary workers, tourists, and visitors who live outside the region and who are not included in demographic statistics. Furthermore, demand for emergency services is strongly driven by a broad range of random factors. Uncertainty relates to the unpredictable nature of acute events, particularly in terms of time, place and type of emergency care needed.

The NFZ, when contracting ex ante AU/EW health services, specifies a lump sum payment based on the number of patients treated and the services provided in the previous settlement period. It means that the NFZ, the purchaser, has to assess in advance the expected volume of health services to be contracted with the service provider for the next year. This mechanism resembles the so-called naïve forecast, which assumes that recent periods are the best predictors of the future. The problem with this approach is that random fluctuations are tracked as faithfully as are other fundamental changes, seasonal trends are ignored and it is not possible to consider more complex relationships between demographic trends and the demand for emergency care.

There is a large number of approaches available that attempt to forecast EMS demand and estimate the volume of services needed to cover the population needs, namely, regression modelling, time-series analysis, queuing theory-based models and simulation modelling. From among these methods, simulation seems to be well suited to tackle the problems of emergency hospital care, which is a highly complex system and a valid analytical model would in itself be very complex. Brailsford (2007) suggests that there are three main reasons for the popularity of simulations among healthcare researchers: the uncertainty and variability of healthcare systems forces the use of stochastic approaches; it is difficult or even impossible to model the complexity of healthcare organisations with analytical methods; and the key role of human factors can easily be implemented using a simulation methodology. The advantage of simulation approach stems from its flexibility as well as its ability to handle the variability, uncertainty and complexity of dynamic systems. Simulation is particularly useful when problem exhibits significant uncertainties, which give rise to stochastic analysis. It is also an ideal tool for performing “what-if” analysis, e.g. what effect would forecasted demographic changes have on the expected volume of emergency health services?

The overall aim of the project is to use a simulation approach to assess the impact of the forecasted demographic changes on the expected volume and costs of treated emergency patients, to be subsequently considered by the NFZ when entering into the next year’s contract. The study includes an assessment of monthly dependent patterns of demand for emergency services. The general idea of the study was described by Mielczarek and Uziałko-Mydlikowska (2012b). The purpose of this paper is to present the first stage of the research. The challenge was to develop a simulation model that could be used to estimate the expected volume of emergency health services, as measured by the quantity of medical procedures and the overall costs of servicing the treated patients, to be contracted by the NFZ at the regional level, given the assumptions on forecasted demand. The next phase of the project will examine demographic trends across the population in the region and, using a Monte Carlo simulation and a regression model, explore the relationship between the changes in the population of the region and the number of acute services provided by the AUs and EWs. The valid forecasts might enable the Health Fund decision makers to accurately plan future supply and to improve the equity of access to emergency health services across the whole region.

There are many taxonomies of healthcare simulation models in the literature. Brailsford (2007) divides the models into human body, operational models of healthcare units and strategic, system-level models. Jun, Jacobson, and Swisher (1999) address the problems encountered by healthcare clinics and systems of clinics and survey the application of discrete-event simulation (DES) modelling in two areas: patient flow and allocation of resources. Some reviews classify models into epidemiology, health and care systems operation, health and care systems design, medical decision making (Lagergren, 1998) and extreme events planning groups (Mielczarek & Uziałko-Mydlikowska, 2012a). In this paper, healthcare simulation models are classified into three groups depending on the purpose for which the process of analysing and estimating the demand is to be carried out.

The first models, called Group 1 (improvements), are focused on the current work of service providers. These models are used for resource allocation, staff scheduling, admission planning, and managing patient flows in healthcare units. They are concerned with identifying bottlenecks and suggesting system improvements. They also help to formulate an overall diagnosis of system performance. To achieve these tactical and operational goals, it is necessary to obtain knowledge about the level, variability and uncertainty of demand. Arrival schedules are usually defined based on historical data or on-site empirical observations. The classical problem formulation is usually as follows: how to change the operation of the system to satisfy the output measures given certain levels and characteristics of the demand. The models concentrate on the units providing the healthcare services and try to identify improvements to the internal organisation of the unit assuming a certain level and structure of the demand. The layout of the conceptual model is consistent with the diagram presented in Fig. 1
                     .

Performance measures depend on the system under study. Emergency system models usually calculate response-time intervals or response-time threshold, although McLay and Mayorga (2010) proposed measures related to patient survival rates. Models of clinical settings usually concentrate on patient waiting time, cancellations and the utilisation of resources (i.e., time of utilisation of operating theatres, bed occupancy, exam room usage). Models from Group 1 may concern (a) different clinical settings, such as operating theatres, outpatient clinics, ambulatory care units or diagnostic departments, (b) complex centres such as multi-unit hospitals or multi-facility outpatient centres, or (c) treatment processes such as radiation therapies. Group 1 is extensively covered in the academic literature, and some illustrative examples are given below.

The simulation approach has been used to improve the efficiency of orthopaedic trauma theatres (Bowers & Mould, 2004) and operating rooms (Persson & Persson, 2009; Steins, Persson, & Holmer, 2010) given the stochastic patient arrival and surgical procedure times. There are also many examples that illustrate the application of simulation approaches to studying emergency departments (Duguay & Chetouane, 2007; Su & Shih, 2002) and outpatient clinics (Chand, Moskowitz, Norris, Shade, & Willis, 2009; Rohleder, Lewkonia, Bischak, Duffy, & Hendijani, 2011) to reduce patient waiting times, increase throughput, and improve internal operations. Multi-facility models are underrepresented in the literature, possibly because of the time and effort required to collect and examine the data. Cochran and Bharti (2006) used a simulation to balance the bed unit utilisation across a multi-unit obstetrics hospital given the level of time-dependent patterns of demand. Ashton, Hague, Brandreth, Worthington, and Cropper (2005) planned the operation of a NHS walk-in, multi-service centre after its relocation to new premises. Matta and Patterson (2007) analysed the patient flow through a multi-facility oncology centre. Simulation is an appropriate tool for analysing complex treatment processes. Models have helped to identify potential improvements in waiting times for radiation therapy treatments (Werker, Saure, French, & Shechter, 2009), evaluate the needs and prioritisation of waiting lists for cataract surgeries (Comas et al., 2008), and assess different service modifications in stroke care delivery for a local community (Bayer, Petsoulas, Cox, Honeyman, & Barlow, 2010).

Models from Group 2 (disease models) are built to study the cost-effectiveness or clinical effectiveness (in terms of mortality or morbidity changes) of medical procedures, medical treatments associated with clinical pathways, and prevention strategies or contemporary health trends. The simulation is run within a subgroup of the whole population, predefined according to the goals of the study. This subgroup could, for example, be the female population when studying the progression of breast cancer (Brailsford, Harper, & Sykes, 2012), the population between ages 35 and 84 with coronary heart disease when assessing the cost-effectiveness of secondary prevention drug prescriptions (Cooper, Davies, Raftery, & Roderick, 2008), or the male and female populations when calculating the profitability of thrombolysis in the treatment of stroke (Mar, Arrospide, & Comas, 2010). Demand is usually defined as the flow of patients classified by age, gender and medical history who are included in the simulation when they acquire the disease. First, the model has to be populated with the data of patients who already have the disease, which could be performed either by linking the model with an external database or by randomly sampling from the distributions estimated based on historical data. The new patients enter the model at a rate determined by the incidence rate of disease. The layout of the conceptual model is consistent with the diagram in Fig. 2
                     .

Several authors (Caro et al., 2006) proved the high usability of simulation models in representing the epidemiology of stroke at a population level. Policy-oriented simulation models to examine the effects of tobacco control policies were developed by many researchers (Ahmad, 2005; Levy, Hyland, Higbee, Remer, & Compton, 2007; Neovius, Rasmussen, Sundstrom, & Neovius, 2010). These models attempted to predict the changes in smoking prevalence explained by different policies, including price increases, clean air laws, mass media campaigns, and youth access laws.

Finally, Group 3 (strategic) models concentrate on population needs and help decision makers to carry out capacity planning at the regional or national level. Gupta et al. (2007) suggest that the capacity management process starts with estimates of target utilisation rates to cover the population needs. Then, the funding levels are determined and, next, decisions are made on the unit levels that affect the realised capacity. Models from this group are also used to study the influence of the changes in demand (expected or theoretically feasible) on the healthcare units’ standards of service. In these ‘what-if’ type models, the ‘if’ refers to the fluctuations in demand intensity and patterns and their impact on the system’s operation. The layout of the conceptual model is consistent with the diagram in Fig. 3
                     .

Models from Group 3 are not very common among simulation healthcare models, which may be because the problem complexity does not lend itself to straightforward solutions. Gupta et al. (2007) studied the capacity planning process for cardiac catheterisation in a regional cardiac centre. The authors identified the capacity needed to achieve waiting time targets by testing different what-if scenarios. A simulation model to determine the primary care needs in the state of Oklahoma, developed by Pulat, Kasap, and Splinter (2001), generated the best-case scenario by defining the minimum but sufficient number of primary care service areas and estimating the number of needed beds. Desai, Penn, Brailsford, and Chipulu (2008) used simulation to forecast the demand for older people’s services and explored the impact this forecast would have on service provision. Two scenarios for reducing the numbers of patients receiving care were tested, and the possible effects of these hypothetical scenarios were explored. Vissers, Adan, and Dellaert (2007) developed a strategic-level model to examine and evaluate different admission planning concepts to help policy makers identify the right balance between the level of services offered to patients and the use of hospital resources. Yi, George, Paul, and Lin (2010) applied a simulation methodology to project hospital capacity in a disaster situation. All available hospitals in a given area were modelled, and various patient arrival rates were used based on the rates of two recent documented earthquakes. A simulation-based approach model by Harper, Shahani, Gallagher, and Bowie (2005) helped to plan the provision of health services considering the geographical locations of services and patients.

The model presented in this paper belongs to Group 3. The aim was to investigate the relationship between the changes in demand and the volume of acute services contracted by the NFZ at the regional level. There are many factors that influence the demand for health services, such as the economic situation of the population, the free demographic movement between EU countries, easy and unlimited access to medical knowledge, demography trends and many others. According to the literature and a number of empirical studies, hospital emergency services are closely connected to demographic issues and population changes. The model introduced in this paper can be used at the regional policy level to investigate ‘cause and effect’ relationships, such as the effects of demographic changes on the number and type of services provided in AUs and EWs in one region.

Hospital services in Poland are offered to elective and emergency patients. Before being admitted to a hospital, patients have to be served in an AU or an EW, where the patient is qualified for hospital care and, if necessary, receives some medical treatment. AUs and EWs are obliged to serve every patient who expresses a need for service (Fig. 4
                     ). The incoming patients are categorised into three groups: emergency patients without referral, emergency patients with referral and elective patients. The EW performs an initial diagnosis and offers the medical treatment necessary to stabilise vital functions. The AU provides consultation and basic medical intervention. Both the AU and the EW qualify the need for further hospital care and may, after a consultation, refer the patient to the hospital ward.

The process of purchasing health services is based on contracts between the payer (NFZ) and healthcare providers. The NFZ contracts broad categories of service: primary and ambulatory care, specialised ambulatory care and inpatient care, emergency care, rehabilitation and intermediate care, long-term care, hospice and palliative care, mental healthcare and others. The regional branches of the NFZ grant the contract volume of emergency services in AUs and EWs for the following year based, partially, on the prior-year demand volume. The daily lump sum (R) intended to finance the services provided by particular AUs or EWs considers two components: the structure component (RS
                     ) defined by the NFZ regional authority and the function component (Rf
                     ) calculated based on the number of patient visits registered during the previously reported period: R
                     =
                     RS
                     
                     +
                     Rf
                     . The RS
                      is determined based on the degree at which the standard levels of technical, organisational and personnel requirements are satisfied. The Rf
                      value is a product of the average daily number of patients treated and the cost (measured in point weights) of the activities performed for the patient’s benefit. Point weights that describe AU and EW activities are published by the NFZ in special attachments (Table 1
                     ). For example, a medical examination equals 1 point, whereas an image diagnosis with CT/NMR equals 5 points. The higher the number of points assigned, the more costly is the service. The total cost of all services delivered to the patient determines the patient’s category. NFZ defines 5 categories (Table 2
                     ) according to the cost (measured in point weights) of the performed services. The Rf
                      is calculated based on the number of patients qualified to each of the 5 categories, and it is calculated according to the following formula:
                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    R
                                 
                                 
                                    f
                                 
                              
                              =
                              
                                 
                                    a
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          l
                                       
                                       
                                          d
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                              *
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       ∑
                                    
                                    
                                       i
                                       =
                                       1
                                    
                                    
                                       5
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 
                                    P
                                 
                                 
                                    i
                                 
                              
                              *
                              
                                 
                                    W
                                 
                                 
                                    i
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     where a is the point rate; currently 1 point=30zł (≈7€), ld
                      the number of days in the calculation period, Pi
                      the number of patients qualified for one of the 5 categories listed in Table 2, Wi
                      the weight of the category from Table 2, and i is the category’s number (i
                     =1…5).

According to Chalkley and McVicar (2008), this payment mechanism is a variation of a sophisticated block contract because all patients are treated and the monitored cost influences the value of next year’s contract. The credible assessment of future demand in terms of not only the number of treated patients but also the number and type of activities performed estimates the overall costs of acute services. Therefore, it may help the NFZ branch authority decision makers to divide the next-year budget between various types of services at the regional level.

Lower Silesia is the southernmost region in Poland. It is the 7th largest region in terms of size and the 5th largest in terms of population density. It is divided into 5 subregions, 29 districts, and 169 communes. The capital of the region is Wrocław. In 2010, there were 91 hospitals of different types in the area with 39 admission units and 13 hospital emergency wards. Inhabitants are free to choose the hospital, but they usually select the unit in their neighbourhoods.

In this study, the volume of services offered in 2010 by AUs and EWs located in 2 (of a total of 5) subregions of Lower Silesia is explored. These 2 subregions are treated in this paper as one area called the Wrocław Region (WR). The remaining 3 subregions are located around three other large Lower Silesian cities and are excluded from this phase of the project. The WR encompasses 9 districts: the capital of Lower Silesia and 8 other districts that are close to the capital. In 2010, there were 12 admission units (AU) and 5 emergency hospital wards (EW) operating in the WR. All AUs and EWs located in the WR serve the inhabitants of the region as well as patients from the 3 other Lower Silesia subregions and citizens from other Polish provinces. At the same time, people living in the WR receive medical treatments from both the AUs and the EWs situated in the WR and the AUs and EWs located in other Polish subregions (Fig. 5
                     ). Because the patient can freely select the hospital, indicators describing access to hospital services for emergency patients calculated based only on geographical location are misleading.


                     Table 3
                      presents the data, expressed in absolute numbers and percentages, showing the changes in the number of people inhabiting the WR, the number of acute services delivered to WR residents in Lower Silesia units, and the number of emergency patients registered in WR units. The WR population increases annually, but the forecasts formulated by the Central Statistical Office (CSO) predict this growth to be less intense in the coming years. The number of children and the older population exhibit a continuous and stable increase. This growth rate will, however, weaken in the coming years, particularly within the youngest group. The number of WR residents who receive emergency care increases annually, but the partial data provided by the NFZ for 6months of 2012 show a substantial decrease in patients serviced (−3.7%). The population of the WR makes up approximately 40% of the Lower Silesian population.

@&#METHOD@&#

According to many surveys (see, for example, Brailsford, Harper, Patel, & Pitt, 2009; Jun et al., 1999; Mielczarek & Uziałko-Mydlikowska, 2012a), the discrete-event simulation has been the most used technique in the healthcare management field. The DES approach was selected over other approaches to model the regional hospital emergency system because of the need to capture individual choices made by patients. In DES, individuals can be given attributes sampled from empirical distributions. The attributes such as age, place of residence, type of injury, requested services influence patients’ decisions and consequently determine the use of healthcare resources. Another advantage is that DES may effectively address the dynamic complexity of emergency hospital admissions. The final volume of demand is set up by a number of input arrival processes that are strongly related to temporal and spatial factors, and population demographics. The model keeps track of individual patient movements but it also attempts to incorporate uncertain information included in demography. Finally, the simulation is an ideal tool for performing ‘what-if’ analysis. It is possible to model the potential effects from the changes in demand on the expected volume and costs of treated emergency patients.

In a DES model, individual patients are followed as they pass through a system, and their progress depends on uncertainties associated with admission and the length of delays in internal processes. Typically, DES models are built to study the dynamics of internal queues and patient waiting times. In contrast to the majority of healthcare discrete-event models, this study focuses on patient service in a rather different setting. The goal was to investigate the amount and type of emergency activities performed in AUs and EWs located in the region and to examine how the demand fluctuations affect the overall volume and costs of acute services provided by hospital units to emergency patients.

A simulation replication starts from an empty and idle state and lasts 365days. The system under study appears to be non-terminating; however, considering the goal of the study and the simulation output measures for estimating the annual volume of arriving patients and the specificity of their treatment, there is clearly no need to warm up the model. The volume and the categories of emergency services performed in AUs and EWs are registered on a daily basis according to the patient’s arrival time, and therefore the simulation model does not have to investigate the internal queues. The output measures to be observed do not depend on the system’s prior performance. Each day (Fig. 6
                        ), batches of emergency patients are generated according to the month-dependent arrival patterns. The daily arrivals are spaced out throughout the whole day. The DES model captures 3 geographically related sources of emergency patients for direct admission to one of the 17 AUs or EWs located in the WR: arrivals from the WR, arrivals from other subregions of Lower Silesia and arrivals from other Polish provinces. The discrete-event model simulates the patients’ progress through the system. Upon arrival in the system, the patient selects the AU or EW in the WR where she/he is registered, assessed and treated. A certain number of activities (at least one) is performed for every admitted patient. After at least one day in the AU or EW, the patient is discharged or admitted to a hospital as an inpatient.

All input parameters are based on an anonymous data sample from the Lower Silesian NFZ branch registry. The statistics describe the acute services registered in 2010 in Lower Silesia. In particular, two data sets were analysed. The first one describes 183,517 patients living in the WR (the selection was based on the residence administrative code) who were registered in any AU or EW located in Lower Silesia during 2010. The second data set encompasses 201,636 patients (the residence code is not important) who were registered in an AU or EW located only in the WR in 2010.

Three main volumes of demand were isolated:
                           
                              1.
                              Input flow 1: Needs-for-hospital-emergency-services expressed by the population inhabiting the WR and satisfied by AUs and EWs located in the WR, measured by the number of patients registered in AUs or EWs and the number of medical activities performed to treat these patients. Nine rate functions λ(t), where λ changed according to the month, were estimated separately for the 9 districts.

Input flow 2: Needs-for-hospital-emergency-services expressed by the population living in Lower Silesia but outside the WR and satisfied by AUs and EWs located in the WR, measured by the number of patients living outside the WR who registered in AUs or EWs and the number of medical activities performed to treat these patients. One rate function λ(t), where λ changed according to the month, was estimated.

Input flow no 3: Needs-for-hospital-emergency-services expressed by the population living outside Lower Silesia and satisfied by AUs and EWs located in the WR, measured by the number of patients living outside Lower Silesia who registered in AUs or EWs in the WR and the number of medical activities performed to treat these patients. One rate function λ(t), where λ changed according to the month, was estimated.

The first input flow (no 1) generates, on an hourly basis, the volume of patients living in the WR who need hospital emergency care. A patient may choose the AU or EW in her/his place of residence or may select a hospital outside the WR. At the same time, AUs and EWs located in the WR admit patients inhabiting the other three regions of Lower Silesia (flow no 2) and patients who reside in other parts of Poland (flow no 3). All 3 of these volumes constitute the final volume of patients registered in the 12 AUs and 5 EWs located in the WR.

We implemented an exponential probability distribution for inter-arrival times and a discrete distribution for the number of patients arriving in a fixed time interval. The non-stationary Poisson process was used to represent time-varying arrival rates. We assumed that events occurred one at a time and were independent of each other and that the number of arriving patients during the particular time interval was described by a Poisson random variable. Analysis of the historical data suggests that the observed variability is related to the calendar month and the district. Table 4
                         presents the λ parameters for every district and every calendar month. More arrivals are observed in the summer, whereas fewer patients register in the winter. There are also substantial differences in the number of patients coming from the particular districts. The highest volume is observed for district No 9, the capital of the region. The residents of district No 1 constitute the least numerous group of emergency patients.

All admitted patients are defined by 3 descriptive characteristics: district, age group and hospital choice (see Table 5
                        ). There are 11 districts: 9 WR districts, 1 district for the patients residing in Lower Silesia outside the WR, and 1 district gathering patients from the other parts of Poland. Our previous studies suggest that children age 0–4 and people age 60 and over create the strongest dynamics of the emergency demand. Three age groups were therefore defined separately for the 11 districts: 0–4, 5–59 and 60+. The data analysis shows that hospital choice is strongly correlated with the place of residence and the age parameter. This relationship is clearly observable for the two extreme age groups (0–4 and 60+); thus, this attribute was sampled from the discrete probability distributions dependent on a district number and an age group. One additional parameter was defined for the WR patients who decided to receive treatment outside the WR region: the outside WR attribute is dependent on the district and the age group.

The next modelling phase describes the service in a particular AU or EW. Every admitted patient receives an individual treatment described by a number of services (a small sample of basic services being performed at AUs and EWs is presented in Table 1) with the associated weights. The sum of the weight points determines the patient’s category (Table 2). We defined the discrete distributions separately for every AU and EW and for every age group to generate the patient’s category based on the treatments received. There are high differences in the categories structure between AUs/EWs (see Fig. 7
                        ). Across all AUs and EWs, Ctg1 is the most often observed classification, and in some units this category is evidently the dominant one (U6, U14 and U15). There are, however, emergency departments where Ctg1 is not the category with the most patients (U3, U5, U12, and U17). In two units, U13 and U17, the most expensive categories, Ctg4 and Ctg5, are dominant. Note that the departments with a high percentage of Ctg4 and Ctg5 are usually emergency wards.

After treatment is provided at an AU or EW, the decision of whether to send the patient home or start treatment at a hospital ward is usually made within a few hours; thus, the parameter LOS at AU (length of stay) is always equal to 1day. An EW may, however, start the treatment immediately and keep the patient for one to several days. The parameter LOS at EW usually equals 1 or 2days, but sometimes the patient stays longer. This attribute is sampled from discrete distributions separately for each EW. After a consultation and/or medical treatment, the patient is sent home or is referred to a hospital ward.

The model was validated using face validation, hypothesis testing and historical validation (Law & Kelton, 2000). The conceptual model and the final results were discussed with healthcare professionals. To validate the accuracy of the arrival process-fitting procedure, which required the information to be linked to the NFZ registries, a comparative analysis between the model output and the performance of the actual system was conducted. Fig. 8
                         compares the historical daily number of patients registering in AUs and EWs located in the WR in 2010 with the arrival flow when running the simulation model according to the arrival parameters described in three input flows. The additional line “historical averages” illustrates the monthly average values of historical arrival rates used as input parameters.

To determine whether the model was an accurate representation of the actual system, we compared model output to the performance of the system. Two output measures were calculated for each AU and EW separately at the end of the simulation run (Table 6
                        ): number of patients classified into 5 categories and function component. Additionally, two overall output measures were calculated for the WR emergency system to estimate the total number of patients classified into the 5 categories in all AUs and EWs and the total cost of hospital emergency activities performed daily in all WR units. The simulation values are generally consistent with the historical data, though there are some noticeable differences. Simulation, in most cases, slightly underestimated the results. The percentage differences in the function component varied from −3.45% in U6 to 4.77% in U8. The underestimation of the model is most likely because approximately 1.03% of the records describing patient visits to WR emergency system were rejected during the initial analysis because of a missing residence code. The number of patients classified into Ctg1 and Ctg2 in particular units was properly forecasted. The differences varied from −4.1% to 3.9% within Ctg1 and from −6.7% to 5.8 within Ctg2. The high differences observable within categories 3 and 5 are attributable to the small number of observations. For example, according to the NFZ data, there were 2 patients who were classified into Ctg3 in U14 in 2010, whereas the simulation forecasted 1.5 patients as an average from 10 replications. The total number of patients classified into the 5 categories is very close to the actual data, but again, a slight underestimation in the simulation results was observed. The total cost of emergency services forecasted by simulation for the whole WR was lower by 1.32% than the value calculated based on the historical records.

The goal of the simulation study was to estimate the expected volume of emergency health services to be delivered at the regional level to the WR population considering forecasted demographic changes. The output measures were the total number of patients classified into each category in every AU and EW and the overall daily costs of servicing these patients. The calculated daily costs for each AU and EW approximated the function component, which determines (together with the structure component) the contract value granted by the NFZ individually for every emergency department. Each experiment was simulated for one calendar year and replicated 10 times without a warm-up period. Seven what-if scenarios (Table 7
                        ) were tested with the purpose of trying to understand what would happen to output measures if different levels of demand, following directly from the demographic trends, were observed.

The external forecasts formulated by the CSO and presented in Table 3 predict that in the following years the WR population will exhibit stable growth and that the number of children and older individuals will significantly increase. The aim of the first scenario was to study the effects of the changes in the age structure of the WR population on the distribution of patients between categories, with the assumption that the total number of emergency visits was kept unchanged. Four experiments were run, and the percentage shares of the two age groups gradually and simultaneously increased from 1% to 8%. To keep the total demand at a constant level, the percentage share of the 5–59 age group had to be decreased accordingly. The simulated demographic changes were equally applicable to every WR district.

According to NFZ records, the total demand registered by WR residents will increase by 2.71% and then decrease by −3.70%. Scenario 2 simulated the growth of the total demand, and scenario 3 assumed that the number of emergency calls from the WR residents would decrease. Additionally, both scenarios simulated the increase in the percentage shares of the youngest and the oldest populations. The percentage share of the 5–59 age group changed accordingly to keep the total number of emergency calls at the assumed level. In these scenarios, the demographic changes were equally applicable to every district.

It has been observed that the structure of the population inhabiting the WR districts changes irregularly. There are districts that register population growth (e.g., the suburbs of the capital), but their internal demographic structures change differently. The goal of scenarios 4 and 5 was to test to what extent the changes in the volume of demand and in the age structure in particular districts would significantly affect the operation of all AUs and EWs. In scenario 4, three districts registered 20% growth in the number of emergency patients and an increase in the percentage share of the youngest population. In scenario 5, the total number of acute patients in the three other districts increased by 10%, and it is assumed that the population of these districts is ageing. The choice of the districts to be tested in scenarios 4 and 5 and the simulated changes were not accidental; they reflect the actual demographic trends.

It has been observed that the number of emergency calls in the capital of the region is decreasing. The aim of these scenarios was to test the impact of a 1% demand decrease in the capital on the services delivered in the 17 AUs/EWs situated in the region. The demographic changes in two age groups were also assumed according to the actual demographic trends.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

The results of scenario 1 are presented in Fig. 9
                        . The simulated trends differently affect number of patients in all 5 categories and the overall cost of the WR emergency care. The increased number of patients from the 0–4 and 60+ age groups raises the demand classified into Ctg1 and Ctg5. Ctg2 and Ctg3 are not sensitive to the slight increase in demand of the two age groups, but the significant changes in the percentage shares of these groups (up to 8%, Sc1d) caused an observable decrease in patients in Ctg2 and Ctg3. As a consequence, a weaker increase in total function component compared with baseline (Table 8
                        ) was observed. The overall cost of emergency services was higher in all 4 experiments compared with the baseline run. Ctg4 was not correlated with the patients’ ages, and the changes in the input variables irregularly affected the number of patients classified into this category.

The increase (scenario 2) in the total demand will proportionally increase the number of patients in all categories. The simultaneous growth of the percentage share of children 0–4 and the population 60+ among the total number of patients (Fig. 10
                        ) caused a more intense increase in patients in Ctg1 and Ctg5. Patients’ growth in Ctg2 and Ctg3 weakened as a consequence of the reduction of calls from the 5–59 age group. The lower level of the total demand (scenario 3) did not change this behaviour (Fig. 11
                        ). The lower values of total demand led to lower numbers in each category, but the increase in the number of children and the older population caused a weaker decrease in Ctg1 and Ctg5 and a stronger decrease in Ctg2 and Ctg3. The increase and the decrease in total demand led to adequate changes in the function components (Table 8).

When the demographic trends are diversified across the region, differences in demand level and in the structure of the categories appear between particular AUs and EWs. Scenario 4 simulated a 20% increase in the total number of patients and growth in the number of the youngest population in 3 districts. The units situated in these districts (U1, U7 and U9, Fig. 12
                        ) will have to face a rapid increase in the level of demand, but in the other units statistically significant changes were also observed. For example, according to Table 9
                        , U10 and U16 will experience modest growth in the level of function component, up to 2% compared with the baseline run, and U12 can expect slightly lower costs of services. The increased number of children among emergency patients will weaken the increase in total treatment cost caused by the more intense level of demand. In most cases, the increase in the function component is higher when the child population grows by 1% than in the case of 2% growth.


                        Scenario 5 simulated a 10% increase in the total number of patients and growth in the oldest population in the other 3 districts (Fig. 13
                        ). According to Table 9, the units situated in these districts (U8, U16 and U17) can expect an increase in the function components, and U16 will experience higher than 10% growth in the costs of emergency care. In most cases, the higher number of patients 60+ will strengthen the effect of the demand increase.

The population of the capital has been gradually decreasing and scenarios 6 and 7 studied the impact of a 1% demand decline in the central district on the services delivered in the 17 AUs and EWs. Additionally, we tested the effect of a 1% increase or decrease in two of the age groups. The graphs presented in Figs. 14 and 15
                        
                         show the similarity in the behaviour of function components in particular units. The decrease in the total demand in the central district lowered the daily cost of the services in these units, which in most cases treat the patients who are the capital’s residents. Units that mostly serve patients from the other districts (i.e., U8, U9 and U15) were not sensitive to this factor. A negative correlation is observable between the number of the youngest patients and the value of the function component. The same level of demand and the higher number of children aged 0–4 lowered the number of patients aged 5–59 and consequently reduced the total daily costs of emergency care. The trend observed for U6 (Fig. 14) results from the fact that two factors overlap: the majority of the admitted patients are residents of the capital (61.12%) and almost half of the patients (39.89%) are children aged 0–4. Consequently, the function component decreased in Sc6a, it increased in Sc6b, and it decreased again in Sc6c. Scenario 7 shows that the correlation between the number of the oldest patients and the value of the function component is positive: the more costly procedures are applied when the treatment is delivered to patients aged 60 and over. The highest drops in the function component were observed in Units U2, U12, U13 and U14. These units serve in most cases the residents of the capital, and, additionally, the percentage of the oldest patients among all admitted persons is significant.

Our analysis yields some important insights for NFZ planners:
                           
                              •
                              The changes in the demographic structure of the population do not necessarily initiate proportionally related changes in the services delivered to the population. The demand from some districts and from some age groups has a greater impact on the emergency services and affects some AUs and EWs more intensively than others.

Ctg2 and Ctg5 are more sensitive to the number of patients from the 0–4 and 60+ age groups. On the other hand, Ctg2 and Ctg3 are more dependent on the patients aged 5–59, and Ctg4 seems to be equally dependent on patients from all age groups.

The local increases and decreases in population and structure affected the units located in those districts the most, but some observable changes were noticed in other units as well.

If the assumption of the constant total demand is valid, the ageing of the population accelerates the growth rate of the cost of emergency care, but the increase in the youngest population weakens this trend.

The patients who are residents of the capital of the region make up 54.45% of the WR emergency patients, and even slight changes in the demography in the main city of the region are perceptible in the majority of AUs and EWs.

When two variable factors are overlapping, i.e., the percentage of patients who reside in the capital and the percentage the youngest or the oldest population, this significantly influences the values of the function components in particular units.

This paper presents the use of a DES model to simulate the number and costs of hospital emergency services delivered to the population in one Polish region. The DES model dynamically simulates three flows of emergency patients to be served at 17 AUs and EWs located in the WR from the moment the patient arrives at the emergency system until discharge from the emergency department. The performance measures were the number of patients classified into each of the five categories and the incurred average daily costs for the services provided by the AUs and EWs to treat emergency patients. In contrast to most DES healthcare model applications, this DES model did not focus on a specific AU or EW. The aim of the study was to estimate the theoretical level of emergency services that should be contracted by the NFZ branch for the WR for the following year to cover the forecasted demand. In particular, the number and the types of services provided to patients were assessed. Subsequently, based on this information, and separately for each AU and EW, the number and costs of five patient categories were determined. Finally, the next-year daily lump sum (more precisely, the function component) intended to finance the services provided by a particular AU/EW was calculated. In 7 what-if scenarios, each run as a series of 10 simulations using the available data and the assumptions as described, the potential effects from the changes in demand were modelled.

There are, however, certain limitations that we have to be aware of. First, the list of AUs and EWs that apply for NFZ contracts may change annually; thus, comparisons between consecutive years may be difficult and misleading. Second, the monitoring and recording systems imposed by the NFZ have changed in the past; thus, the lower demand for emergency services, observable in the registries in one of the previous years, may not be the same as the actual number of acute patients. The part of the information relating to emergency events could simply have been recorded in other databases. Third, the methodology of calculating the lump sums, and in particular the function component, has been modified in the regulations issued by the NFZ president in the past; thus, there is a risk in conducting direct comparisons.

This paper is just a first step in the direction of more comprehensive studies and several research topics seem to be warranted. The variability of inter-arrival processes shall be studied in more detail. Obviously, both the calendar month and the day of the week strongly influence the intensity of the emergency demand. An analysis of the historical data shows that some days are characterised by high volumes of patients (Mondays), whereas on other days, the demand is rather low (Fridays). The demand is also higher in the periods close to public holidays. Because the dates of these holidays often change, there are differences in the results over longer periods of simulation runs. Next, analysis of the relationship between changing health needs in different age groups in particular districts is also necessary. The youngest children and the older population are obviously not the only groups of patients who significantly influence the cost of regional emergency care, and more reliable estimates of the age and gender influence on emergency services are required. For instance, according to some papers (Kvalseth & Deems, 1979), women generate a higher emergency demand than do men and single men generate higher demand than do married men. Further work is also necessary to analyse disease patterns on the small-area level because some of the diseases and the patients with specific health problems (e.g., cardiac patients) are strong predictors of emergency attendance. The next challenge is to differentiate between population demand and supply. Currently, the model runs based on the registered patients who were treated in the WR emergency system. It is obvious however that some of the acute patients did not present to emergency departments at all and that, on the other hand, some patients consider hospital AUs as alternatives to general practitioners, which increases the number of non-emergency cases treated by the emergency system. This may make difficult the correct assessment of the emergency needs of the population under study.

Despite the limitations mentioned above it has been proved that discrete-event simulation offers a credible methodology to study demand–supply issues in relation to hospital emergency care. The main contributions of this approach are threefold. First, DES enables comprehensive analysis of the problem taking into account the heterogeneous needs of the population under study and highlighting how changes in demography impact on the provision of emergency services. In particular, it allows to consider the differences in the demand level that are observed between small geographical areas and between age groups. Second, DES successfully addresses the dynamic complexity of emergency admissions which are driven by a broad range of random factors. By simulating the seasonality resulting from calendar months, geographical distribution of caseload and human behaviour that influences the choice of the hospital it is possible to more accurately reflect the volume and cost of emergency services to be delivered to the patients. Third, the proposed approach links three decision platforms. It offers the possibility to model the individual patient’s characteristics and to capture individual choices made by patients (patient level); it forecasts the expected volume and structure of services to be delivered by particular ED (unit level); it studies the issue of covering the demand for hospital emergency services in an entire region (regional level).

The model described in the paper, unlike most discrete-event simulation applications, is not focused on specific unit. Our approach may be defined as upper-level strategic modelling because it concerns the broader issue of covering the demand for hospital emergency services in an entire region. In the next stage of the study, we would like to build a Monte Carlo simulation model and, based on external forecasts of demographic trends, formulate the input demand parameters needed by the discrete-event model described in this paper.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This project was financed by a Grant from the National Science Centre based on decision DEC-2011/01/B/HS4/ “Simulation methods and computer simulation models in healthcare management”. The author would like to express her gratitude to Dr. Justyna Uziałko-Mydlikowska for her valuable input into the model development and two of the anonymous referees for their insightful comments on an earlier version of this paper. The views expressed in this paper are solely those of the author.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

