@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#The delayed effect of treadmill desk usage on recall and attention

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Walking while working with the use of a treadmill desk has a beneficial delayed effect on attention and memory.


                        
                        
                           
                           Participants who walked perceived themselves to be more attentive.


                        
                        
                           
                           Neurophysiological measures demonstrated increased attention and memory after walking.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Treadmill desk

Cognition

HCI

EEG

Neurophysiology

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The treadmill desk is a new human–computer interaction (HCI) setup intended to reduce the time workers spend sitting. As most workers will not choose to spend their entire workday walking, this study investigated the short-term delayed effect of treadmill desk usage. An experiment was conducted in which participants either sat or walked while they read a text and received emails. Afterward, all participants performed a task to evaluate their attention and memory. Behavioral, neurophysiological, and perceptual evidence showed that participants who walked had a short-term increase in memory and attention, indicating that the use of a treadmill desk has a delayed effect. These findings suggest that the treadmill desk, in addition to having health benefits for workers, can also be beneficial for businesses by enhancing workforce performance.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

“Sitting is the new smoking” (Merchant, 2013). Research shows that some fundamentally negative effects stem from sitting for long periods of time (Levine, 2010; Van der Ploeg, Chey, Korda, Banks, & Bauman, 2012), such as increased risk of heart disease, diabetes, and musculoskeletal pain (Duvivier et al., 2013; Hill & Peters, 1998; Højbjerre et al., 2010). It has also been shown that sitting is a risk factor for death. Compared to more active people, the all-cause mortality is increased by 15% for people who sit over 8h per day and by 40% for people who sit over 11h per day (van der Ploeg et al., 2012).

Thus, researchers and manufacturers are trying to design new forms of human–computer interaction (HCI) devices that will help workers to sit less and remain healthy while still being productive. One proposed HCI device is the treadmill desk, invented in 1988 (Edelson & Danoff, 1989) but only manufactured commercially since 2007 (Levine & Miller, 2007). As Fig. 1
                      shows, a treadmill is positioned underneath an elevated desk. A computer is placed upon this desk with its mouse and keyboard. Users walk at low speed with their arms resting on the armrests to stabilize themselves, enabling them to interact with the computer in a normal way. The ideal speed has been identified as 2.25km/h (Funk et al., 2012).

While the health benefits of the treadmill desk are well established (Levine & Miller, 2007), other types of impact relating to this model of HCI remain unknown. Proponents of the device claim that it is a much healthier alternative to the traditional form of HCI (i.e., a regular computer desk) and can improve users’ health and well-being (Duvivier et al., 2013; Højbjerre et al., 2010; Koepp et al., 2013; Levine & Miller, 2007). Skeptics feel that, while it is a healthy alternative to the traditional desk, the downside is that it may create a context in which employees are not in optimal conditions to perform their work (John, Bassett, Thompson, Fairbrother, & Baldwin, 2009).

To date, three studies have used psychometric tests to investigate cognitive processes during the use of a treadmill desk, including processing speed, attention, working memory, inhibition and spatial memory (Alderman, Olson, Mattina, Studies, & Brunswick, 2014; Commissaris et al., 2014; Kline, Poggensee, & Ferris, 2014). All of these studies found that walking while working had no impact on these cognitive processes, confirming the authors’ hypothesis that the treadmill desk has no deleterious effects. This does not, however, demonstrate the absence of possible benefits. Any benefits could simply be canceled out by the cognitive demands of the dual tasks of walking and cognitive evaluation tests. Oppezzo and Schwartz (2014) found that creativity was improved while walking, but that performance was diminished on a convergent thinking task that required more cognitive workload. According to Oppezzo, creativity is generally considered not to engage cognitive workload, and thus the related benefits might have been immune from being canceled out by dual-task demands.

Interestingly, Oppezzo and Schwartz (2014) is the only study whose results suggest a residual effect of walking on creativity after the treadmill usage. This result calls for further investigation of the treadmill desk’s post-usage effect on subsequent tasks. Such research appears crucial, as more and more people will use this type of desk for short periods of time during a workday. Understanding the delayed effect might be even more important than understanding the concurrent effects. So far, no other studies have looked at the delayed effects of the use of a treadmill desk on key cognitive processes.

In the present study, we investigate the presence of a short-term delayed effect after the use of a treadmill desk on two cognitive abilities that are important for work performance: Memory and attention. As so few studies have looked at the effects of slow-speed walking on cognition, we chose to investigate two cognitive abilities that have been shown to receive a delayed benefit from exercise (McMorris, Tomporowski, & Audiffren, 2009). We used behavioral, neurophysiological, and perceptual measures to develop a rich understanding of those effects. We hypothesized that the use of a treadmill desk would have a beneficial delayed effect on attention and memory.

The research questions were addressed using a laboratory-based empirical study. Study participants engaged in a reading task while receiving emails. One group did this while walking at a treadmill desk, while the control group was in a traditional HCI setup and sat at a regular desk. After the reading assignment, both groups had to perform a memory and attentional task while seated. Fig. 2
                      illustrates the experimental procedure.

Participants’ memory performance on the reading task (i.e., task recall) was evaluated with a validated objective questionnaire (Leger et al., 2014). Self-report task attention scores were obtained using validated measurement scales (Kanfer & Ackerman, 1989). Electroencephalography (EEG) recordings were made during the recall task and questionnaire administration.

Participants were students at local universities. There were 18 in total: 9 who performed the reading task while seated and 9 who performed it while walking at the treadmill desk. Seated participants who matched the walking participants for age (M
                        =23, SD=3.97), gender (5 women, 4 men) and level of education (7 undergraduate students, 2 masters students) were chosen from a larger group of participants from a parallel study using the method advocated by Jafari, Hearne, and Churilov (2013). Participants had to be over 18 and have no known health issues. They received a $20 gift card after participating.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

After obtaining permission for experimental procedures from the review board of our institution, participants were recruited through a specialized online platform. After providing their informed consent, they were outfitted with EEG equipment in order to begin recording as soon as possible after they stopped walking. Participants in the walking group had a five-minute period to get used to walking on the treadmill. Then all participants performed the reading task while walking or sitting, followed by the recall task and questionnaires. EEG was recorded during the recall task and questionnaire administration to measure the delayed effect.

The reading task was taken from Leger et al. (2014) and involves reading a lengthy text while periodically receiving emails. Participants were told to picture themselves in a scenario where they would have to report to their superior in 40min on the content of the text and some of the emails. Some emails were pertinent to the topic at hand while others were irrelevant (e.g., co-worker’s birthday party, cafeteria lunch menu, etc.). Participants had to optimize their use of time and decide whether or not to open and read each email depending on its subject line. The task ended after 40min. Participants on the treadmill desk walked at 2.25km/h, which is considered the least intrusive speed for this type of desk (Funk et al., 2012). Participants rested their forearms on the desk’s armrests and used the mouse to open and close the emails (see Fig. 1). When the time was up, participants stepped off the treadmill and sat at the traditional desk to complete the rest of the experiment and measure the delayed effect. At this time, the EEG equipment was adjusted to ensure data recording quality and hence participants were given a 10-min break while the adjustment was made.

In the recall task, participants were asked 33 true or false questions about the text and the relevant emails they had read (Leger et al., 2014). Performance was considered as the percentage of correctly answered questions.

Self-perceived on-task attention measuring focus was evaluated using a questionnaire adapted from Kanfer and Ackerman (1989). The questionnaire includes 6 items answered with a 7-point Likert scale. The items were modified to apply to the task at hand and were translated in French by two bilingual researcher.

EEG was recorded throughout except during walking. This data was acquired with a 32-channel geodesic system (EGI, Eugene, OR, USA) and analyzed with Vision Analyzer software (Brain Products, Munich, Germany). The recordings were filtered offline with a 0.5–100Hz band pass filter and a 60Hz notch filter; ocular corrections were performed with an independent component analysis, epochs with amplitude exceeding ±75μV were rejected, and recordings were rereferenced to the common average reference. Epochs of one second were used for a Fast Fourier Transform. The first five minutes of the recall task and of the measurement scales were analyzed separately, minute by minute, and all epochs of each minute were averaged. The power (μV2) of each band of frequency was obtained (Theta 4–7.5Hz, Alpha 8–13Hz, Beta 14–30Hz, Gamma 30–80Hz), and relative power ratios of the different frequencies were calculated as the band power divided by the total power of all four bands.

The recall scores were compared between groups with a logistic regression to estimate the probability of correctly answering a recall question. The measurement scale scores and the ratio of each EEG frequency band for each electrode and for each minute were compared between groups using Mann–Whitney non-parametric tests. Statistical analysis was performed using the Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS, version 17.2; Chicago, IL, USA, 2009).

@&#RESULTS@&#

This study found evidence of a delayed increase in cognitive performance for users of the treadmill desk. This can be seen behaviorally, subjectively, and neurophysiologically.

For the recall task performance, we found that the odds of answering a question correctly were 34.9% higher in the walking group (p
                     =0.05). Their self-perceived on-task attention was also significantly higher (p
                     =0.007). Table 1
                      lists the medians and standard deviations for these dependent variables.

For the EEG, significant results were found for the recall task, specifically in the first half of the task. Significant results can be seen in Table 2
                      and Fig. 3
                     . The group differences appear mostly in the right temporo-parietal region. We observed significantly more theta activity in the seated group (p
                     =0.02–0.05) and more alpha activity in the walking group (p
                     =0.05). Previous studies had shown that good memory performance is correlated with a decrease in theta power and an increase in alpha power (Klimesch, 1999). Past work also showed that an increase in gamma power in the parietal region is correlated with attentional processes (Müller, Gruber, & Keil, 2000) and memory (Lisman, 2010). Our results are therefore in accordance with improved performance by the walking group on a task that requires memory and attention.

The purpose of this study was to investigate the impact of the use of a newer form of HCI, namely a treadmill desk, on cognitive abilities that are necessary for work. We found delayed benefits for attention and memory after walking, once a person has sat down. Our findings are supported by behavioral, neurophysiological, and perceptual data.

These findings are important, as most users of a treadmill desk will not spend their entire workday walking. Workers might use their treadmill desks for some specific tasks and sit down for other specific tasks, which require more attention and memory, as suggested in this study. Many different types of office work can be performed at this type of desk. As attention, memory and reading are the building blocks of a variety of more complex office tasks, these too could benefit in a similar manner. However, as other studies have found neutral or deleterious effects of the treadmill desk on other cognitive and work abilities (Alderman et al., 2014; Commissaris et al., 2014; Kline et al., 2014), each type of task should be studied independently. Future research should study a variety of HCI tasks to see whether the effect of walking while working is specific to memory and attention or if it can be transferred to more complex tasks requiring higher-level executive functions, such as complex problem-solving. In addition, other types of active workstations, such as a standing desk, could be included in these studies.

While the health benefits of this new practice are indisputable, it will only be adopted if users feel they can accomplish their work as well as or better than with the use of a traditional desk. Our results suggest that workers not only perform better on a recall task, but they also perceive themselves to be more attentive to the task at hand. This is at odds with the findings of Commissaris et al. and Straker et al. that participants perceived their performance to be diminished while walking (Commissaris et al., 2014; Straker, Levine, & Campbell, 2009). This is probably because the tasks performed in these two studies were of short duration, and because the perceptions were measured using only one question. This emphasizes the importance of measuring the user’s perceptions in authentic contexts. There is probably an adaptation period to the use of a treadmill desk and users may feel their performance diminish in the beginning and improve later on. Various durations and the use over multiple days should be studied to investigate if the improved perceptions remain. A positive perception of a new habit is a strong determinant of its future adoption by an individual (Bandura, 1977).

Finally, our results showed a significant difference in the EEG of people who walked versus people who sat. We found an effect of the treadmill desk on brain activity that is associated with increased memory and attentional abilities (Klimesch, 1999; Müller et al., 2000). This is, however, limited to the first part of the following task. Because our equipment required a 10-min adjustment period between the walking and the evaluation period, we do not know whether the difference between groups was also present during that time. The use of EEG allows us to identify that the brain is directly affected by the walking, but the causes of this effect remain unknown. Future studies should use brain oxygenation as a comparative measure to investigate the similarities and differences between the effects of walking at a treadmill desk and various intensities of exercise.

Another limitation of our study is that the sample was small, but samples of this size are not uncommon for EEG studies and the presence of an effect with such small groups is a testament to the strength of the effect. As well, control subjects were matched with walking subjects for age, gender and level of education. Future studies should be performed with larger and more diverse groups and must also observe the impact of the treadmill desk during and immediately after its use in order to determine the specific duration of the effect.

In conclusion, our results suggest that the use of a treadmill desk can improve attention and memory after the user has stopped walking. It can also improve self-perceived attention, which could lead to increased adherence to this new habit. Improvements in work performance should be convincing for organizations that may be inclined to subsidize the use of treadmill desks. These findings also contribute to the conversation on the use of alternate kinds of desks in the popular media. While some have referred to sitting as the new smoking (Merchant, 2013) and praise the treadmill desk as a better alternative, the scientific evidence to support these claims is limited so far. This study is a step in bridging the gap between the strong incentive of the health benefits and the fear of lost productivity.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This research was partially funded by a grant from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada (SSHRC) to Sylvain Sénecal, Pierre-Majorique Léger and Marc Fredette, and by a grant from Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) to Pierre-Majorique Léger.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

