@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#How social is Twitter use? Affiliative tendency and communication competence as predictors

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Affiliative tendency and communication competence jointly affect Twitter motivations.


                        
                        
                           
                           Those high on both are more likely to use Twitter for network expansion.


                        
                        
                           
                           Communication competence has no influence on relationship maintenance motivation.


                        
                        
                           
                           Network expansion motivation positively predicts the number of tweets and retweets.


                        
                        
                           
                           Surveillance motivation is positively associated with Twitter network size.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Affiliative tendency

Communication competence

Social enhancement

Twitter

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  An online survey (N
                     =461) investigated how individuals’ interpersonal need and ability affect their motivations of Twitter use and how different motivations predict specific usage behavior. Based on the two competing views concerning the antecedents and consequences of online communication (social enhancement vs. social compensation), the joint effect of affiliative tendency and communication competence was hypothesized. For those high on affiliative tendency, communication competence positively predicted Twitter use for network expansion and negatively predicted more self-focused, intrapersonal Twitter use, but no such effect was found for less affiliative individuals. Those using Twitter for surveillance spent more time on Twitter and maintained a larger Twitter network, while those using Twitter for network expansion posted tweets and retweeted others’ posts more frequently.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

As has been the case with every ‘new’ medium, communication researchers have examined who uses various forms of social media, for what specific purposes, and with what consequences (e.g., Ellison, Steinfield, & Lampe, 2007; Hargittai, 2008; Liu, Cheung, & Lee, 2010; Pollet, Roberts, & Dunbar, 2011; Wilson, Fornasier, & White, 2010). Given that the primary function of social network services (SNSs) is to enable individuals to create personal profiles and social connections and share them with others within their network (boyd & Ellison, 2007), it seems only natural that the lion’s share of research has been devoted to exploring how users’ dispositional characteristics that are typically associated with social interaction, such as extraversion, shyness, loneliness, communication anxiety, and self-esteem, might affect social media use and yield different outcomes (e.g., Correa, Hinsley, & de Zuniga, 2010; Orr et al., 2009; Ryan & Xenos, 2011).

Such scholarly attempts to understand how individuals’ interpersonal orientations and psychological traits shape their SNS use have been grounded in one of the two competing perspectives concerning the relationship between online and offline communication, which well predate SNSs. On the one hand, the social enhancement model, or the rich-get-richer model, suggests that more socially active and competent individuals are more inclined to utilize SNSs to corroborate and expand their interpersonal network. Consistent with this view, studies have shown that extraversion positively predicts SNS use and SNS addictive tendencies (Correa et al., 2010; Wilson et al., 2010) and Facebook users tend to be more extraverted than nonusers (Ryan & Xenos, 2011). On the other hand, the social compensation model, also known as the poor-get-richer model, posits that those more socially inept and less satisfied with their current relationships are more strongly motivated to compensate for their deficiency by turning to online communication venues as a functional alternative to face-to-face interaction. In line with this reasoning, shyness was positively associated with the time spent on Facebook and favorability of attitudes toward Facebook (Orr et al., 2009), and those with lower self-esteem reported spending more time on Facebook than their high self-esteem counterparts (Kalpidou, Costin, & Morris, 2011).

Although these contradictory findings seem puzzling at first glance, a closer inspection points to substantial differences between the two perspectives. First, the social enhancement model highlights the individual’s need (i.e., who is more or less eager to engage in social interactions) as a major determinant of SNS use, whereas the social compensation model underscores the individual’s ability (i.e., who is better or worse at performing social interactions smoothly). Second, the social enhancement model remains silent about the very nature of online interactions, assuming that it somehow contributes to building and strengthening one’s social network, whereas the social compensation model emphasizes the unique characteristics of computer-mediated communication (CMC), as compared to face-to-face interaction. Specifically, the social compensation model is predicated on the notion that CMC is less anxiety-provoking and less risky than face-to-face interaction due largely to anonymity and reduced social context cues, and thus, those who normally shy away from social interactions and struggle to make connections can develop close relationships with greater ease via CMC (Caplan, 2003; McKenna, Green, & Gleason, 2002).

However, both models seem to portray an incomplete picture by focusing on either the user’s need or ability regarding social interactions. For example, shy people are more likely to struggle when making friends via face-to-face encounters (lack of ability), but they will not turn to SNSs to build social connections, unless they desire such connections (lack of motivation). Nonetheless, even when both the individual’s need and ability were considered as predictors of SNS use, their independent influences were assessed and compared against each other, thereby leading to the failure to uncover their joint effect. For example, in their attempts to evaluate the social enhancement hypothesis and the social compensation hypothesis in the context of Facebook use, Zywica and Danowski (2008) examined how sociability (extraversion) and self-esteem, each representing one’s desire for social contact and general confidence, account for online and offline popularity, but did not investigate their interaction systematically.

To address this limitation, the current research set out to probe the combined effect of interpersonal need and ability on the motivations of social media use. In so doing, we focused on Twitter, the most popular microblogging service worldwide, and compared the socio-relational motivation that centers on building and maintaining interpersonal networks with less social motivations gravitated toward other purposes, such as acquisition of information, self-documentation, and entertainment. Although some researchers characterized Twitter as an informational medium, rather than a social network (Kwak, Lee, Park, & Moon, 2010), considering that users turn to Twitter for a variety of social purposes similar to the ones documented for other social media (e.g., Liu et al., 2010; Zhao & Rosson, 2009), it seems worthwhile to investigate how users’ interpersonal orientation and communication skills shape the specific goals they pursue on this fastest-growing social platform. By examining how such motivations predict different usage patterns, we aimed to elucidate how Twitter is integrated into people’s everyday communication experiences.

Although feeling connected to other people is considered a “fundamental human motivation” (Baumeister & Leary, 1995, p. 497), that does not mean that all people are equally motivated to engage in social interactions. Defined as “generalized positive expectations in social relationships,” (Mehrabian, 1994, p. 98) affiliative tendency is positively associated with preference for attachments (vs. independence) and group activities (vs. individual activities). As such, more affiliative individuals make greater efforts to affiliate with others and are more willing to talk to strangers (Miller, Rossbach, & Munson, 1981). In the sense that people would not use Twitter, or any other communication platforms for that matter, to build and sustain interpersonal networks unless they so desire, it seems reasonable to consider affiliative tendency as a motivational prerequisite for socio-relational Twitter use.

Although it was conceptualized as gratifications obtained, rather than gratifications sought, Chen (2011) reported that Twitter use positively predicted the extent to which individuals gratify their intrinsic need to form relationships with other people via various communicative features, suggesting that Twitter use is driven by the need for social contact. Similarly, Chiu and Huang (2014) argued that “people may use an SNS to gratify their desire to affiliate with others” (p. 16) and recommended that future research should divide the need for affiliation into four sub-constructs (positive stimulation, attention, emotional support, and social comparison) and examine how each motivation is associated with SNS use. In addition, the findings that (a) students with higher levels of loneliness had more Facebook friends, presumably to compensate for their lack of offline relationships (Skues, Williams, & Wise, 2012), and that (b) those with stronger interdependent self-construal, characterized by greater concern about their relationships with others and their surroundings, reported stronger social motivations of Facebook use as well as greater satisfaction with the service (Kim, Kim, & Nam, 2010) seem to support this notion of need-driven SNS use.

However, need alone is not likely to trigger Twitter-mediated social interaction. In earlier CMC research, by virtue of (perceived) anonymity and greater control over self-presentation, those with higher communication apprehension and social anxiety were considered to find online communication to be easier, safer, and more appealing than face-to-face interaction (Caplan, 2003) and become more willing to reveal their true self to their online friends (McKenna et al., 2002). By contrast, most Twitter users choose to reveal their identity and share a large amount of personal information in this public space. Moreover, if the primary reason for SNS use is to maintain existing ties, rather than to create new ones (Chen & Marcus, 2012; Kujath, 2011; see Brandtzaeg & Heim, 2009 for a different view), the notion of anonymity seems rather irrelevant in explaining Twitter use. Considering that Twitter messages (i.e., tweets) are often broadcast to a much larger audience than the communicator originally intended, even without his or her knowing it, it seems more appropriate to think of tweets as public announcements, rather than private conversations.

If enhanced comfort and intimacy of CMC stems mostly from anonymity and a reduced sense of the public nature of interaction (i.e., dyadic boundary; McKenna et al., 2002), SNSs do not seem to have the advantages provided by earlier CMC systems, challenging the key assumption of the social compensation model. Rather, socially inept individuals may still find it difficult to build connections and expand their personal network on Twitter, and thus be less prone to use Twitter for relational purposes, compared to those confident about their communication skills. In line with this reasoning, Ledbetter et al. (2011) have found that individuals’ attitudes toward online self-disclosure, measured by the extent to which they feel more comfortable with online than offline self-disclosure (e.g., “I feel less shy when I am communicating online,” p. 37), inversely predicted the frequency of Facebook communication, suggesting that SNSs do not offer a low-risk communication environment. Similarly, in their investigation of how sociability and self-esteem affect popularity on Facebook, Zywica and Danowski (2008) acknowledge that “communication skills are particularly important in this pursuit” (p. 23) of enhanced self-image and popularity.

If the ability to carry out face-to-face interactions smoothly transfers to SNS-based communication, with more competent individuals being more prone to use SNSs for relational purposes than less competent ones, such a difference will be more evident among those higher in affiliative tendency, because people will try to make friends, online or otherwise, only if they are so inclined. Alternatively, even if an individual has a strong affiliative tendency, he or she will turn to SNSs for interpersonal connections, only when confident about his or her ability to perform such actions. In fact, those with more positive attitudes toward online social connections were more likely to use Facebook communication, but such a relationship disappeared among those who feel more comfortable about online than offline self-disclosure (Ledbetter et al., 2011). Although the authors interpreted the findings on account of impression management, given that greater comfort with online than offline self-disclosure reflects social anxiety in face-to-face interaction, an alternative interpretation would be that high social anxiety suppresses the effect of the desire for social affiliation on socio-relational SNS use.

If the lack of communication competence hinders Twitter use for interpersonal purposes, however, such inhibitory effect is more likely in the interactions with previously unacquainted others, as opposed to those with close friends and family members the person already feels comfortable with. In fact, although they focused on gratifications obtained, rather than gratifications sought, Zhang, Tang, and Leung (2011) reported network maintenance and network extension as distinct gratifications from Facebook use. What is more, those with higher levels of “anxiety about social situations and fear of negative peer evaluation and embarrassment” (p. 291) were more likely than their low-anxiety counterparts to engage in Facebook-mediated interaction with their friends, but they did not show the corresponding tendency with their acquaintances (Courtois, All, & Vanwynsberghe, 2012), suggesting that social anxiety does not hinder SNS interaction with close others.

H1: Affiliative tendency positively predicts socio-relational Twitter use, but such relationship is more likely to be found among those high (vs. low) on communication competence.

H2: The joint effect of affiliative tendency and communication competence (H1) is more pronounced for the network expansion motivation, rather than the relationship maintenance motivation.

Although the current study is primarily concerned with the socio-relational use of Twitter, a recent study has also found that sociability, a tendency to enjoy social interactions and being the center of attention, not only positively predicted social use of Twitter, but was also negatively associated with informational Twitter use (Hughes, Rowe, Batey, & Lee, 2012). Given that sociability and affiliative tendency have conceptual overlap and that information-seeking is one of the commonly found motivations of SNS use (Hunt, Atkin, & Krishnan, 2012; Kim, Sohn, & Choi, 2011; Liu et al., 2010), it seems important to expand the scope of inquiry to include the surveillance motivation for a more comprehensive understanding of how users’ interpersonal orientations and communication skills shape their Twitter use. Consistent with this view, Wang and Zhu (2012) dichotomized the motives of Sina Weibo – a Chinese microblog – use into social (e.g., to keep in touch with others, to make friends, to share life experiences) and media (e.g., to get news fast, to follow one’s favorite celebrity, to collect information) motives, and found that only media satisfaction was positively associated with the usage amount, highlighting the divergent roles of each motivation.

Although the previous research tends to contrast relational SNS use with an informational one, more internally oriented and self-focused Twitter use, such as self-documentation and diversion (Shim & Hwang, 2010), can also be positioned at the opposite end on the intrapersonal–interpersonal continuum. In their investigation on what prompts voluntary self-disclosure on Facebook, Waters and Ackerman (2011) found that relational development is only one of the goals people pursue through self-disclosure on Facebook and identified more self-focused motivations, including information storage. Similarly, Good (2013) argues that social media serve two primary functions, social and archival, and suggests that we need to “update our understanding of sites like Facebook as not only arenas of social activity, but also as expanding archives of personal artifacts” (p. 560). In keeping with media system dependency theory, Chiu and Huang (2014) classified individuals’ motivations of SNS use à la three different goals – understanding, orientation, play – and further divided each into personal and social dimensions, which roughly correspond to the intrapersonal and interpersonal division as employed in the current research. Yet, with the vast majority of SNS research emphasizing interpersonal motivations of SNS use, little is known about more inward-oriented, self-focused SNS use, such as what user characteristics prompt such a motivation and how it shapes the ways in which people use the service. By including the intrapersonal motive of Twitter use, along with informational and interpersonal motivations, this study aimed to fill this gap in the literature.

RQ1: How do individuals’ affiliative tendency and communication competence predict Twitter use for surveillance and intrapersonal purposes?

Lastly, the present study examined the links between motivations and specific usage patterns. Whether they are grounded in the social enhancement model or the social compensation model, previous studies have focused mostly on the relationships between personality traits or other dispositional variables and the intensity of SNS use (e.g., Correa et al., 2010; Kalpidou et al., 2011; Orr et al., 2009; Wilson et al., 2010). When the researchers examined the motivations of SNS use, their primary goals were either to create an exhaustive list of reasons why people use SNSs (e.g., Brandtzaeg & Heim, 2009; Kim et al., 2011; Liu et al., 2010; Shim & Hwang, 2010) or to predict motivations of SNS use from different user characteristics (e.g., Hughes et al., 2012). A notable exception is Smock, Ellison, Lampe, and Wohn (2011) study, which differentiated between general use (i.e., the time spent on Facebook) and feature use (e.g., status updates, comments, Wall posts, groups) and showed that motivations of Facebook use predict each in a divergent manner. For example, the motive of habitual pastime was positively associated with the frequency of writing Wall posts, but was not significantly related to the time spent on Facebook. Moreover, the motive of expressive information sharing positively predicted the frequency of status updates and groups, but was negatively associated with general use. Likewise, Chen (2011) also reported that the number of tweets and the frequency of @replies (i.e., sending a message to another user in a way visible to other users) significantly predicted the extent to which Twitter users experienced gratifications of the need to connect with others, whereas the hours per week on Twitter did not. Therefore, on top of the overall amount of Twitter use, more specific usage behaviors, such as the number of posts (tweets) and the frequency of relaying others’ posts (retweets), were also measured, and their relationships with the motivations of Twitter use were examined.

RQ2: How do people use Twitter differently depending on their motivations of use?

@&#METHOD@&#

A web-based survey was conducted through an online survey company in South Korea (http://www.embrain.com/eng/home/home.asp), which boasts the largest panel size in Asia. Email invitations were sent out to the members of its national panel and among those who voluntarily accessed the study website, only current Twitter users were allowed to participate in the study. A total of 461 respondents (292 men, 169 women) completed the questionnaire. 165 respondents (35.8%) were in their 20s, 162 (35.1%) in their 30s, and 134 (29.1%) in their 40s (M
                        =33.22, SD
                        =7.75). As for the highest level of education, 117 respondents (25.4%) indicated high school, 292 (63.3%) college degree, and 52 (11.3%) post-graduate school. Monthly household income ranged from “less than $999” (1) to “more than $7000” (8) in increments of $1000 (M
                        =4.73, SD
                        =1.72). They also indicated how long they had been using Twitter (M
                        =11.82months, SD
                        =10.34months). These variables were used as control variables in the analyses.

To measure affiliative tendency, five items from a revised version of Mehrabian’s (1994) original scale adapted for Korean respondents (Cha & Cheong, 1990) were employed. Participants were presented with statements (e.g., “I would like to make as many friends as possible,” “I would rather read an interesting book or watch a movie than spend time with a friend”) and indicated how well each statement represented themselves (1 – Represents me very poorly; 7 – Represents me very well). After appropriate recoding, the scores were averaged to create the affiliative tendency index (α
                        =.61, M
                        =4.30, SD
                        =.84).

Communication competence was measured by using the items from Rubin and Martin’s (1994) Interpersonal Communication Competence scale, focusing on self-disclosure and social relaxation: “I feel relaxed in small group gatherings,” “I reveal how I feel to others,” “I am comfortable in social situations,” “I allow friends to see who I really am,” “I feel insecure in groups of strangers (reverse-coded),” “Other people know what I’m thinking” (1 – Represents me very poorly; 7 – Represents me very well). Scores were averaged (α
                        =.69, M
                        =4.39, SD
                        =.81).

Although this study was primarily concerned with interpersonal and intrapersonal motivations of Twitter use, information sharing, which was found to be a primary motivation of social media use (Brandtzaeg & Heim, 2009; Liu et al., 2010; Shim & Hwang, 2010), was also included as part of the motivation repertoire. As such, a total of 16 statements tapping the four primary motivations, namely network expansion, relationship maintenance, surveillance and intrapersonal motive, were presented (1=
                        Strongly disagree, 7=
                        Strongly agree). A factor analysis with varimax rotation yielded a four-factor solution (see Table 1
                        ). The first factor consisted of the five items concerning surveillance, including “To discover the pressing issues of our society” and “To obtain various interpretations and explanations on current affairs” (Eigenvalue=5.22, % of variance accounted for=32.60%, M
                        =4.34, SD
                        =1.03, α
                        =.82). The second factor was comprised of the three items tapping network expansion, such as “To provide information about my interests to others” and “To befriend people I cannot meet elsewhere” (Eigenvalue=2.17, % of variance accounted for=13.55%, M
                        =4.69, SD
                        =1.04, α
                        =.73). The third factor represented rather self-focused, intrapersonal motives, such as “To forget the complications of everyday life” and “To remember what I did,” (Eigenvalue=1.27, % of variance accounted for=7.93%, M
                        =3.85, SD
                        =1.07, α
                        =.73). The fourth factor was related to relationship maintenance: “To contact friends and family,” “To offer updates on my life to friends and acquaintances” (Eigenvalue=1.06, % of variance accounted for=6.64%, M
                        =4.31, SD
                        =1.21, α
                        =.63). Two items, “To communicate with people who share my values” (.548 on surveillance and .528 on network expansion) and “To have fun” (<.366 on all factors), were removed due to cross-loading and low factor loading, respectively.

As for Twitter use variables, respondents were asked (1) how much time they spent on Twitter on an average day (M
                        =78.92min, SD
                        =82.78), (2) how long they had been using Twitter (M
                        =11.82months, SD
                        =10.34), (3) approximately how many tweets they posted in a given week (M
                        =13.33, SD
                        =18.98), (4) how many times they retweeted others’ messages in a given week (M
                        =15.45, SD
                        =28.03), (5) how many followers (M
                        =53.14, SD
                        =100.43) and followings (M
                        =59.18, SD
                        =98.50) they maintain in their Twitter network. Because the number of followers and that of followings were highly correlated, r
                        =.84, p
                        <.001, they were averaged to compute the respondent’s Twitter network size. Due to high skewness (>2), all these variables were square root transformed (see Table 2
                         for intercorrelations among key variables).

@&#RESULTS@&#

To examine how communication competence and affiliative tendency shape individuals’ socio-relational Twitter use (H1) and if they have divergent effects on network expansion and relationship maintenance motivations (H2), a series of moderated hierarchical regression analyses (West, Aiken, & Krull, 1996) was run, using SPSS version 20. First, demographic variables (sex, age, education, income, duration of Twitter use) were entered in the control block. Second, the two main effect terms, affiliative tendency and communication competence, were added to the equation. Lastly, the interaction term, created by multiplying mean-centered affiliative tendency and communication anxiety, was entered. This procedure was repeated for each of the four motivations. To control for individual differences in response anchoring and to better understand the relative importance of each motivation, motivation scores were centered within each respondent by subtracting the mean of his or her total motivation score from the raw motivation score.

First, a significant interaction between affiliative tendency and communication competence emerged for the network expansion motivation, ΔR
                     2
                     =.02, ΔF
                     =8.84, β
                     =.14, t
                     =2.97, p
                     =.003 (see Table 3
                     ). Simple slope tests showed that for those with higher communication competence, affiliative tendency positively predicted their intention to use Twitter to make interpersonal connections through self-expressions. By contrast, for those less competent in interpersonal interactions, affiliative tendency had no significant effect on the network expansion motivation (see Fig. 1
                     , left panel). Alternatively, communication competence was positively associated with the use of Twitter for interpersonal connections among those with a stronger need for affiliation, with no corresponding effect among those less interested in social activities (see Fig. 1, right panel). Therefore, H1 was supported.

Second, for the relationship maintenance motivation, the second block accounted for a significant increase in the variance explained, ΔR
                     2
                     =.02, ΔF
                     =3.71, p
                     =.03. A closer inspection, however, revealed that the effect was driven by affiliative tendency. Specifically, the stronger the affiliative tendency, the more inclined were Twitter users to use Twitter to stay in touch with their friends and family members, β
                     =.13, t
                     =2.43, p
                     =.02 (see Table 3). Communication competence, on the other hand, had virtually no effect on the relationship maintenance motivation, β
                     =−.00, t
                     =−.07, p
                     =.94. Taken together, individuals’ affiliative tendency and communication competence had divergent effects on the network expansion and relationship maintenance motivations, lending support to H2.

Although no specific hypothesis was derived, to compare and contrast with socio-relational Twitter use, surveillance and intrapersonal motives were also examined (RQ1). As for the surveillance motivation, affiliative tendency and communication competence had no significant effect, both independently and jointly, all |β|s<.80, |t|s<1.53, ps>1.20 (see Table 3). Men were more strongly motivated to use Twitter for surveillance than were women, β
                     =−.14, t
                     =−2.97, p
                     =.003, but no other predictors were statistically significant.

However, a significant interaction between affiliative tendency and communication competence emerged for the intrapersonal motivation, whose pattern was the exact opposite of what was observed for the network expansion motivation, ΔR
                     2
                     =.02, ΔF
                     =6.99, β
                     =−.12, t
                     =−2.64, p
                     =.008 (see Table 3). Specifically, for those with higher communication competence, affiliative tendency negatively predicted the intrapersonal motivation. By contrast, for those with lower communication competence, affiliative tendency had no significant effect on intrapersonal Twitter use (see Fig. 2
                     , left panel). When the interaction was decomposed for more and less competent individuals, for those with a stronger affiliative tendency, the lower the self-assessed communication competence, the more likely they were to use Twitter for self-documentation and diversion. Contrarily, communication competence did not significantly affect the intrapersonal motivation for less affiliative individuals (see Fig. 2, right panel).

To address RQ2, which concerns how various motivations of Twitter use shape the ways in which people use the service, a series of hierarchical multiple regression analyses was run. First, demographic variables as well as the duration of Twitter use were entered (Step 1), followed by affiliative tendency and communication competence (Step 2). Lastly, all four motivations of Twitter use were entered as predictors (Step 3) (see Table 4
                     ).

For the time spent daily on Twitter, women (vs. men) and more veteran users (vs. novice users) reported using the service more heavily on a daily basis (see Table 4). After controlling for the effects of demographic factors, users’ dispositions accounted for an additional variance, ΔR
                     2
                     =.02, ΔF
                     =4.47, p
                     =.01. However, it was affiliative tendency that significantly predicted the time spent on Twitter, β
                     =.12, t
                     =2.48, p
                     =.01, while communication competence did not, β
                     =−.03, t
                     =−.65, p
                     =.52. Lastly, Twitter use motivations, as a group, significantly increased the variance accounted for in the time spent on Twitter daily, ΔR
                     2
                     =.06, ΔF
                     =7.78, p
                     <.001. Among the four motivations, both surveillance motivation, β
                     =.18, t
                     =3.75, p
                     <.001, and intrapersonal motive, β
                     =.11, t
                     =2.15, p
                     =.03, positively predicted how much time people spent on Twitter.

As Table 4 shows, Twitter use motivations accounted for a significant variance in the number of tweets posted, ΔR
                     2
                     =.03, ΔF
                     =3.13, p
                     =.02, even after controlling for the effects of demographic variables and Twitter use duration, ΔR
                     2
                     =.03, ΔF
                     =3.12, p
                     =.009. Specifically, the stronger the network expansion motivation, the more frequently people posted a tweet, β
                     =.12, t
                     =2.13, p
                     =.03. Likewise, the number of retweets per week varied significantly depending on the Twitter use motivations, ΔR
                     2
                     =.04, ΔF
                     =4.24, p
                     =.002, particularly as a function of the network expansion motivation; that is, those using Twitter to enlarge their social network were more likely to relay others’ posts as well, β
                     =.15, t
                     =2.59, p
                     =.01.

Lastly, those who were younger, richer, and more experienced with Twitter boasted a larger Twitter network than their older, less affluent, and less experienced counterparts, ΔR
                     2
                     =.05, ΔF
                     =4.75, p
                     <.001. Still, the motivations to use Twitter accounted for an additional variance in the number of followers and followings the respondents had, ΔR
                     2
                     =.04, ΔF
                     =4.61, p
                     =.001. Whereas the surveillance motivation positively predicted the respondent’s Twitter network size, β
                     =.14, t
                     =2.66, p
                     =.008, the relationship maintenance motivation predicted it negatively, β
                     =−.12, t
                     =−2.39, p
                     =.02 (see Table 4).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The current research investigated how individuals’ interpersonal orientation and communication skills shape the specific goals they pursue when using Twitter, and how varying motivations affect their specific usage patterns. To account for the contradictory findings in the extant literature, which emphasize either the supplementary or compensatory role of social media, we first highlighted implicit theoretical assumptions underlying each view. Then we discussed how Twitter diverges from preceding forms of online communication, based on which the joint effect of affiliative tendency and communication competence was hypothesized. Overall, the results confirmed that those with a stronger affiliative tendency are more likely to take advantage of the relationship-building capacity of Twitter, but only when they are confident about their communicative ability. In addition, specific gratifications Twitter users pursue appeared to influence the way they utilize the service, including how often they post a message and relay others’ posts, how many followers and followings they maintain, and the like.

Extending the existing literature on individual differences in SNS use, we investigated how individuals’ interpersonal need and communication skills jointly shape their motivations of Twitter use. Results showed that neither affiliative tendency nor communication competence, by itself, prompts users to expand their social horizon via Twitter beyond their offline friends and acquaintances. Higher affiliative tendency induced Twitter use for network expansion, but only among those who were confident about their communication skills. Likewise, stronger communication competence increased the willingness to use Twitter to make new connections, but only when the users desired social connection. On one level, such findings indicate that when examined independently, the effects of affiliative tendency and communication competence might go unnoticed, yielding a misleading conclusion. On another level, the fact that affiliative tendency heightened the network expansion motivation only in conjunction with communication competence suggests that Twitter does not offer a safe haven for those less competent in social transactions. Contrary to the social compensation model, the anxiety and discomfort socially inept individuals experience in face-to-face situations still seems to operate as a hindrance to building interpersonal networks on Twitter.

By contrast, affiliative tendency turned out to be the only significant predictor of the relationship maintenance motivation; that is, the lack of communication competence does not discourage users from utilizing Twitter to sustain and enrich their existing relationships. Taken together with the finding that communication competence served as a prerequisite for the affiliative need to foster Twitter use for network expansion, this finding underscores the qualitative difference between the two social functions, network expansion and relationship maintenance. In fact, Courtois et al. (2012) found that more socially anxious adolescents were more likely than their less anxious counterparts to monitor their friends’ Facebook activities and engage in Facebook-mediated interaction, but no corresponding difference was found for acquaintances. Although our results do not exactly replicate their findings, both studies confirm that the lack of competence does not impede SNS use to sustain strong ties and highlight the need for more refined sub-categories of socio-relational SNS use.

At the same time, the null effect of communication competence on relationship maintenance diverges from Hunt et al.’s (2012) findings that computer-mediated communication apprehension (CMCA) negatively predicted not only interpersonal motive, but also self-expression, entertainment and passing time motives of Facebook use. One possible explanation for the discrepancy concerns the way motivations were operationalized in each study. In order to capture the relative weight users attach to each motivation, we centered the motivation scores within each respondent. In Hunt et al.’s (2012) study, however, raw motivation scores were used without controlling for the baseline motivation score. By definition, those with high CMCA, characterized by higher levels of anxiety and discomfort in CMC, would have reported lower levels of interest in Facebook use in general, regardless of specific motives, thereby contributing to the overall negative associations between CMCA and Facebook use motivations across the board.

Another finding that merits note is that for those with a strong affiliative need, communication competence was inversely associated with intrapersonal Twitter use. That is, those who prefer social activities but lack communication competence were more likely to use Twitter in a more inward-oriented manner that does not actively engage other social beings than were their socially competent counterparts. Thus far, some researchers have contrasted interpersonal SNS use (i.e., communication) with more ego-centric SNS use (i.e., broadcasting) (Underwood, Kerlin, & Farrington-Flint, 2011), each of which is driven by social interaction and impression management motivations, respectively. Such conceptual distinction is also echoed in the dual-factor model of Facebook use, which proposes the need for self-presentation and the need to belong as the two “basic social needs” prompting Facebook use (Nadkarni & Hofmann, 2012, p. 245). Unlike the self-presentation motivation, which presupposes the audience to whom individuals purport to convey an idealized self-image, however, the intrapersonal motivation in the current study is more or less self-contained, and turns out to be the primary purpose of Twitter use among those who crave, yet struggle with social activities.

The intention to expand one’s social boundary via Twitter, however, does not necessarily result in a larger Twitter network. Instead, it appears to prompt users to write more often and redistribute others’ posts, suggesting that people utilize retweeting as a means by which they can fulfill their desire to share their opinions and connect with other Twitterians. What predicted the size of the Twitter network were the surveillance motivation (positive) and the relationship maintenance motivation (negative). In order to stay informed of the current issues and talks surrounding them, Twitter users seem to maintain a large follower/following network, whereas those using the service mainly to keep in touch with their friends and family keep their Twitter network tight. These results challenge Hunt et al.’s (2012) conclusion that SNS use motivations have little utility in predicting Facebook usage patterns, because all the motives – interpersonal communication, self-expression, and entertainment – significantly predicted the use of interactive Facebook features. Although more research is needed to probe how users’ motivations shape the actual patterns and the consequences of SNS use, the way they measured interactive Facebook use needs to be taken into account to fully understand their findings. Specifically, they combined a wide array of Facebook features, including status updates, top news, and audio/video features, under the label of “interactive Facebook features,” but such a holistic approach might have masked the subtle differences in the usage patterns that vary as a function of specific motivations.

Although studies have shown that demographic characteristics of users significantly influence the adoption of SNSs (e.g., Hargittai, 2008), demographic variables, as a whole, exerted significant influence only on the surveillance motivation and the amount of daily Twitter use in the present study. On the one hand, it may indicate that user demographics have greater effects on informational than social Twitter use, but it may well be due to the fact that only individual traits related to social interaction were included as predictors of motivations. Had other variables relevant to environmental monitoring, like need for orientation (Matthes, 2006), been included, the effects of demographic variables might have dissipated even for the surveillance motivation.

The current research is not without limitations. First, in examining the effects of communication competence on socio-relational Twitter use, we focused on self-disclosure and social relaxation, but a more refined measure of communication competence may help to uncover the relationships between individuals’ dispositions and their SNS use. For example, Buhrmester, Furman, Wittenberg, and Reis (1988) Interpersonal Competence Scale consists of five constructs, such as Initiation, Disclosure, Negative Assertion, Emotional Support and Conflict Management. Albeit related, these dimensions tap conceptually distinct facets of communication competence, which may or may not predict SNS use, or predict SNS use in different ways. For example, those lacking the ability to initiate relationships with strangers may still struggle with making friends on Twitter, but those who feel awkward when providing emotional support to close others face-to-face may find it easier to express their feelings over the Internet. In fact, although they conceptualized ‘intensity of Facebook use’ as a predictor, rather than the outcome of interpersonal competency, Facebook use was negatively associated with Initiation but had no relationship with Emotional Support (Jenkins-Guarnieri, Wright, & Hudiburgh, 2012). By incorporating subtle differences among various sub-dimensions of interpersonal competence, rather than treating it as a monolithic construct, future research should disentangle the complex relationships between communication competence and SNS use.

Another potentially fruitful venue for future research concerns the actual changes in Twitter users’ personal networks, both in quantity and quality, beyond the sheer number of following/followers on Twitter. For example, Pollet et al. (2011) found that the time spent using SNSs was positively associated with the number of online contacts, but not with the size of the offline personal network or emotional closeness to its members. Moreover, Stefanone, Kwon, and Lackaff (2012) showed that (a) most of Facebook users’ requests for instrumental help to their Facebook friends failed to garner any responses and (b) those with higher social status were more likely to obtain help from their friends, suggesting limited and uneven instrumental benefits of SNS networks. Therefore, future research should explore if SNS use yields any tangible benefits beyond collective illusion, and more important, what factors may facilitate or hinder such effects.

Lastly, the generalizability of the current findings needs to be carefully assessed in future investigations. For one thing, among those who received the email invitations, only those who voluntarily opted in were included in the study. Given that the present study was primarily concerned with elucidating the relationships among the key variables (i.e., how affiliative tendency and communication competence jointly affect Twitter use motivations, how various Twitter use motivations are associated with usage behavior), rather than portraying the baseline tendency of the Twitter user population (i.e., for what purposes people use Twitter, how many tweets Twitter users post everyday), it is not very likely that the sampling bias, if any, would have substantially altered the findings. Still, the use of a convenience sample, composed only of less than 500 Twitter users, casts doubt on the external validity of the current results, demanding replication with a more representative sample. Second, we focused exclusively on Twitter, among various social media platforms. Consistent with the uses and gratifications tradition, which capitalizes on the individuals’ active appropriation of a single program, genre, or medium, the current research highlighted the within-medium variability in terms of gratifications sought and associated usage patterns. Notwithstanding, just as the type of information obtained from Twitter and that from Facebook are different (Hughes et al., 2012), social interactions via Twitter might be of a different nature than that on Facebook, facilitated by different psycho-social characteristics of users and fulfilling different kinds of needs. That is, the finding that self-reported social connectedness was significantly related only to Facebook use, but not to Twitter use (Alloway & Alloway, 2012) might indeed reflect the functional division between the two platforms, with people relying more heavily on Facebook than Twitter for socio-relational purposes. Alternatively, it may suggest that Twitter-mediated interaction is not on a par with Facebook-mediated interpersonal contact in fostering social connection, which makes a replication study with Facebook users (or users of other social media) all the more interesting.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

Although the need for affiliation is often considered to be one of the built-in traits of the human race, there has never been a time in human history when our species’ social instinct drew as much attention as it does today. With virtually omnipresent communication technologies that connect people anywhere at any time, it may seem that people are now better equipped than ever to fulfill their desire for interpersonal contact. The current study, however, showed that SNSs serve as an extension of, rather than an alternative to, face-to-face interaction, such that those with stronger affiliative need, yet lacking communication skills, are less likely to utilize Twitter to expand their social boundaries than those both able and willing to engage in social interaction. Just as the increased infusion of mass media information widens the knowledge gap between more and less resourceful individuals (Tichenor, Donohue, & Olien, 1970), the added capacity of building interpersonal networks beyond one’s everyday encounters afforded by SNSs may create another layer of divide between more and less communicative individuals, which is not fully captured by the sheer size of one’s Twitter network.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENT@&#

This research was supported by CPRC Program funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

