@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Using decision tree to hybrid morphology generation of Persian verb for English–Persian translation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Analyzing the output of English to Persian machine translation systems.


                        
                        
                           
                           Presenting hybrid morphology generation using a parallel corpus.


                        
                        
                           
                           Using a set of linguistically motivated features.


                        
                        
                           
                           Making a model to predict six morphological features of the verb.


                        
                        
                           
                           Applying our model to the output of two MTs and improving the results.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Persian verb morphology

Morphological analysis

Machine translation

SMT

Rule-based MT

Decision tree

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Languages such as English need to be morphologically analyzed in translation into morphologically rich languages such as Persian. Analyzing the output of English to Persian machine translation systems illustrates that Persian morphology comes with many challenges especially in the verb conjugation. In this paper, we investigate three ways to deal with the morphology of Persian verb in machine translation (MT): no morphology generation in statistical MT, rule-based morphology generation in rule-based MT and a hybrid-model-independent morphology generation. By model-independent we mean that it is not based on statistical or rule-based MT and could be applied to any English to Persian MT as a post-processor. We select Google translator (translate.google.com) to show the performance of a statistical MT without any morphology generation component for the verb conjugation. Rule-based morphology generation is implemented as a part of a rule-based MT. Finally, we enrich the rule-based approach by statistical methods and information to present a hybrid model. A set of linguistically motivated features are defined using both English and Persian linguistic knowledge obtained from a parallel corpus. Then we make a model to predict six morphological features of the verb in Persian using decision tree classifier and generate an inflected verb form. In a real translation process, by applying our model to the output of Google translator and a rule-based MT as a post-processor, we achieve an improvement of about 0.7% absolute BLEU score in the best case. When we are given the gold lemma in our reference experiments, using the most common feature values as a baseline shows an improvement of almost 2.8% absolute BLEU score on a test set containing 15K sentences.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Translating morphologically rich languages is a challenge in machine translation. One of the main issues in statistical model is the lack of suitable data to see and learn all possible conditions. In fact, since a word stem appears in many completely different surface forms, available data is sparse. Therefore, statistical machine translation (SMT) is faced a serious difficulty because it uses word-based or phrased-based model (Koehn et al., 2003). In morphologically complex languages like Persian, this problem becomes severe in translation of verbs. Persian verbs depend on some of the sentence parts such as the subject of the verb. In the rule-based model this problem is dominated using a large number of manually designed rules. However, considering all possible cases is not easily feasible and makes the number of these rules to grow rapidly. Hence, the complexity of translation could be related directly to the morphologically richness of the language  (Somers, 1999). Both two approaches have advantages that could not be ignored. The idea of hybrid approach is presenting a new model combining these advantages and the best properties of different machine translation (MT) paradigms. Two architectures are used in this approach. In the main architecture a statistical core translation is used to be modified by linguistic information, or a rule-based core is selected to be enriched by statistical techniques. The latter architecture refers to the combination of two or more existing systems to produce improved MT output. Our goal is to modify a rule-based machine translation (RBMT) architecture to include statistical knowledge. Hence, in this paper we enrich the rule-based morphology generation component of a RBMT by statistical information and present a hybrid morphology generation of Persian verb for English–Persian translation.

In our previous work (Mahmoudi et al., 2013b), we have analyzed the output of a RBMT to categorize the errors appearing in the system output. But here, we investigate the distribution of such errors in Google translate as a SMT to compare the results. Based on our error analysis, verb conjugation is found as one of the most problematic phenomenons in the context of English-to-Persian MT and this is why we focus on the morphology generation of the verb. Later, in Section 3 we review challenges in translating of English to Persian and Persian verb conjugation followed by the result of our error analysis. In this paper, we investigate three ways to deal with morphology for Persian verb in MT: no morphology generation in SMT, rule-based morphology generation in RBMT and a hybrid-model-independent morphology generation. By model-independent we mean that it is not based on statistical or rule-based MT and could be applied to any English to Persian MT as a post-processor. We use Google translator to show the performance of a statistical English–Persian MT without any morphology generation component. Then, a rule-based morphology generation is implemented as a part of an English–Persian RBMT. Finally, we present a hybrid model to rich morphology generation for Persian verbs incorporating decision tree classifier (DTC)  (Quinlan, 1986) to predict morphological features (MF) of the verb, and compare this technique with two different ways of dealing with morphology in the real translation process. We use an English–Persian parallel corpus to train DTC. English side is used to produce linguistic information such as syntactic parse tree and dependency relations. Persian side is used to extract linguistic information to generate an appropriate inflected Persian verb as well. Section 4 presents a rule-based morphology generation and our proposed hybrid model. To compare our model with the output of RBMT and SMT, we apply our model to the output of these systems and the results are presented in Section 5; and finally, Section 6 covers our conclusions and proposes future works.

@&#RELATED WORK@&#

Before researchers try to improve SMT morphologically, SMT systems focus on phrases (Koehn et al., 2003) instead of words and this is known as a limitation for these systems. Koehn and Hoang (2007) introduced factored translation model, an extension of phrase-based SMT. From the perspective of morphology, the words with their MFs are the most important component in this model. Morphology generation in this model is done by learning and translating MFs on source side into the target side. In fact, morphological tags on morphologically rich side are added to each word and the model is trained how to translate and generate morphology from the tags. Other researchers such as  Avramidis and Koehn (2008) and  Yeniterzi and Oflazer (2010) used this model and improved their SMT. Another method proposed by  Subotin (2011), which is based on hierarchical phrase-based translation, extending factored translation model. They incorporate their new method to generate complex morphology using a discriminative model for Czech as the target language. This method incoporates gold morphological annotations on the target-side. However another similar method is proposed by Green and DeNero (2012) in which no annotated translation is required. In this method gender, number and definiteness are modeled using a segmenter to convert raw surface forms to morphemes. Then each segment is tagged with a fine-grained morpho-syntactic class using a standard conditional random field (CRF) package.

As mentioned earlier SMT model is sensitive to data sparseness.  Goldwater and McClosky (2005), Luong et al. (2010), and Oflazer (2008) introduced another approach called segmentation reducing the data sparseness of translation model. Segmentation increases the similarity between two sides and enhances SMT to generate an appropriate output. Actually, the morphologically rich side is analyzed and inflected word forms are decomposed into simpler parts such as lemma plus different affixes. This method is used by Goldwater and McClosky (2005), Oflazer (2008), Luong et al. (2010) and  Sadat and Mohamed (2013) to improve their SMT. Cap et al. (2014) present an approach for compounding languages in which compounds are splited into simple words. Then the model is trained and the simple translated words are merged in translation output. A similar method is used by Salameh et al. (2013) for English–Arabic SMT.

Those works were investigated, change the model or reform the input into a new form as a pre-processor which morphologically improve MT. There are several researches that for a given MT output propose a post-processor method improving MT by generating morphologically correct word forms. These approaches propose a model of morphology prediction as an independent process of the SMT system. A post-processing probabilistic framework is proposed by  Minkov et al. (2007) for morphology generation in English–Arabic and English–Russian MT. Their method is based on maximum entropy model and utilizes a rich set of morphological knowledge sources. Some similar efforts are done for Arabic and Russian as the target languages by Toutanova et al. (2008), and for English–Finnish SMT by Clifton and Sarkar (2011). A statistical post-processing tool is introduced in  Rosa et al. (2013) to improve English–Czech SMT. This tool corrects verb–noun valency errors, using two simple probabilistic valency models.

Morphology generation using a given sequence of lemmas and any subset of MFs are proposed by  El Kholy and Habash (2012a) to generate inflected Arabic tokens. They also modeled rich morphology in SMT using their approach (El Kholy and Habash, 2012a, 2012b). de Gispert and Marino (2008), Formiga Fanals et al. (2012) and Rios Gonzales and Göhring (2013) incorporated a machine learning methods to predict MFs of the verb. They have defined a collection of context dependent linguistic features (CDLFs) and trained a classifier to produce correct inflected verb form. Actually, our work is conceptually similar to these works; however, we use a different set of CDLFs and incorporate DTC to predict the MFs of the Persian verbs. Also, we use linguistic information and combine rule-based and statistical methods to present a hybrid model for Persian verb morphology generation on both SMT and RBMT. Hence, the main contributions of our work can be summarized as follows:
                        
                           •
                           Analyzing the output of English to Persian machine translation systems (RBMT and SMT).

Proposing a model independent Persian verb morphological analyzer and generator for both RBMT and SMT.

Presenting hybrid morphology generation using a parallel corpus (which is enriching rule-based approach by statistical methods and information)

Using a set of linguistically motivated features for Persian (language dependent).

Making a model to predict six morphological features of Persian verb.

Applying our model to the output of two MTs and improving the results.

In this section we present some challenges of Persian in the context of MT. These challenges include Persian verb morphology and the errors appearing in the output of English–Persian MTs. Persian language is known as a morphologically rich language, in which, translating from a morphologically poor language such as English faces many challenges. These challenges directly affect the quality of MT output. Mahmoudi et al. (2013b) investigated the errors and importance of each type in the output of an English–Persian RBMT.
                        2
                     
                     
                        2
                        www.faraazin.ir
                      In addition, here, the errors of Google translate are analyzed to compare the distribution of the errors and validate the results. The MT errors are classified into five types (as Vilar et al. (2006) suggested): Missing words, Word order, Incorrect words, Unknown words and Punctuations. The MT error analysis and results are presented in detail in Table 1
                      to show the most prominent source of errors.

As they shown, about 21% of all errors are dedicated to the use of incorrect form which is known as the widest category of error. This result is validated by analyzing the output of Google such that 31% of all errors are related to the incorrect form. Another important point is that the number of missing words in Google is about two times greater than RBMT. Note that in Persian, noun and adjective could be inflected with affixes too; however we classify the errors related to the inflection of the noun and adjective in the style category. Therefore, according to the results, if a MT can produce a correct inflected verb form using correct person, tense, number, voice, aspect and negation the translation quality is enhanced significantly.

Persian Verb Morphology is another issue. Verbs in Persian have a complicated inflectional system  (Megerdoomian, 2004) in which the following aspects appears: different verb forms, different verb stems, affixes marking inflections, auxiliaries used in certain tenses.


                     Table 2
                      shows two instances and their corresponding differences, in which two verbs with the same infinitive form of 
                        
                      /frvxtn
                        3
                     
                     
                        3
                        The short vowels such as o, a, e are not generally transcribed in Persian.
                      /forukhtan (sell) are presented.

To show that inflected verb form can improve MT quality we present two examples in Table 3
                     . In these two examples an English sentence with corresponding Persian translation of Google and a RBMT system are shown. In addition, the reference translation with correct inflected verb form for each sentence is presented. For each verb in the English sentence, corresponding translation is indicated. In the first case Google misses ‘Have you had’ and in the second case RBMT considers ‘does not grow’ as two different verbs, hence, 
                        
                      /anjam mydhd /anjam midahad (does) is considered as an extra word. In both cases the verbs are translated incorrectly and as the verb has a significant effect on the meaning of the sentence, if we can translate and generate the inflected verb form correctly, we will improve the quality of the sentence.

The verbs in Persian can be completely inflected by six different MFs namely voice (VOC), aspect (ASP), number (NUM), tense (TEN), negation (NEG) and person (PER). As stated earlier, we predict and use these MFs of the verb to generate inflected form. Table 4
                      reports the domain of each feature value with the most common feature value that is bolded. Also, an English example for each feature and value is presented.

In this section, we discuss rule-based technique implemented in a RBMT. Then, we introduce a hybrid model to rich morphology generation, which is the main propose of this paper. As mentioned earlier word-based or phrase-based SMTs such as Google translator are not dealing with morphology. We apply our hybrid model to the output of Google translator and the results are presented, investigated and compared in the last section of the paper.

In this technique, we extracted English linguistic rules manually. These rules specify the six MFs of the verb using syntactic parse tree and dependency relationships. Stanford Parser  (Klein and Manning, 2003) is used to produce syntactic parse tree of the sentence, dependency relationships and part of speech tag (POS) of each word within the sentence. In Table 5
                         syntactic parse tree and dependency relationships of the sentence “The window will be broken” are presented.


                        Table 6
                         shows three rules
                           4
                        
                        
                           4
                           Due to space constraints and a large number of the rules, the set of rules is omitted.
                         determining TEN and NEG of “broken” in this sentence. In some situations in which no rules can be found to detect a feature value for a specific MF, we assign the most common feature value presented in Table 4 to each MF. We can generate a verb form using a finite state automaton (FSA)  Megerdoomian (2004), after detecting six MFs of a given verb. To generate an inflected verb form, in addition to corresponding lemma, the FSA with more than 500 states uses the values of VOC, ASP, TEN, NEG, NUM and PER (Mahmoudi et al., 2013b). For example if we are given VOC:subjunctive, ASP:passive, TEN:simplepast, NEG:negative, NUM:plural and PER:p3 a verb could be generated using this FSA for infinitive form of 
                           
                         /xrydn /kharidan (buy). The peresent stem of this verb is 
                           
                         /xr /khar and the past stem is 
                           
                         /xryd /kharid. Fig. 1
                         shows an FSA producing the final inflected verb form of 
                           
                         /xrydh nŝdh baŝnd /kharide nashode bashand (they would have not been sold) in our example. In the next section we investigate another paradigm trying to enhance this method.

Morphology generation problem could be modeled as a classification problem. In other words, the solution of this problem is to predict the value of six MFs of verb. In our previous works (Mahmoudi et al., 2013a, 2013b) we present a method to rich morphology generation of the verb using DTC. This method is broken into two main steps: DTC training and Morphology prediction, which are described briefly bellow. At the end of this section we explain the main difference of this work in comparison with our previously mentioned works.

An English–Persian parallel corpus  (Mansouri and Faili, 2012) containing 399K sentences (367K to train, 17K as a development set and 15K as a test set) is used to produce training and test data. The Statistics about this corpus are presented in Table 7
                        . We use Giza++ (Och and Ney, 2003) to align words. All alignments were pruned such that only those with a high probability to align both from English to Persian and Persian to English were selected. This heuristic helps us to produce a high quality data set. In the next step we predict six MFs of the verb like that of presented by  El Kholy and Habash (2012a, 2012b). There are two similar works in which  Toutanova et al. (2008) predict fully inflected word form and  Clifton and Sarkar (2011) predict morphemes. We build six language specific classifiers to predict each of the MFs. A set of CDLFs on English side is defined as learning features. These features consist of several language-specific features such as POS of verb, dependency relationships of verb and POS of subject of verb. In our previous works, each classifier employs a subset of our CDLF set and predicts corresponding morphology feature independently. The list of important CDLFs are presented in Table 8
                        .

To investigate which machine learning algorithm is well-suited to solve this problem, we trained four different classifiers and select the best one based on its accuracy. The results of this experiment is indicated in Table 9
                        . Based on these results the best machine learning algorithm is decision tree, because of the ability of handling both numerical and categorical data, and due to the nature of our task which is containing both numerical and categorical data. In this situation, algorithms such as RBF and Naive Bayes are not well-suited. As another point, because pruning is easy to be performed by DT, this algorithm outperforms other classification algorithms. Also, there are some dependencies among our features, therefore, algorithms such as Naive Bayes are not well-suited. To study the performance of decision tree in more detail other metrics such as recall, F1-measure and RoC area are used. Table 10
                         shows the result of this experiment. Based on recall and accuracy the worst classifier is related to TEN in which seven classes are defined. Other classifiers have at most three classes, hence, we expected that TEN will be challenging. However the results are satisfying. To see how the model is robust and to study the sensitivity to the size of training data we set up another experiment. We use 5%, 50% and 95% of training data respectively to train the classifiers and evaluate them on the test set based on their accuracy. As indicated in Fig. 2
                         the most sensitive classifier is related to TEN again. Due to the number of classes used in this classifier the more training data could improve the quality of prediction. Other classifiers are robust enough and the changes in performance are significant.

Since each MF is not actually independent of the others, we propose a new model in which a DTC is informed of the decision of other classifiers. More precisely, the learning process is done in two steps. In the first one, six DTCs are learned to predict six MFs as before. In the second step, the output of other DTCs is considered as new learning features for a classifier and DTCs are learned again to predict six MFs using their new learning features. Table 11
                         shows the number of rules and the statistics of each DTCs including the size of trees and the number of leaves they have in two different cases (one-step and two-step) for each MF. It is indicated that after learning in two-step the size and the number of leaves is decreased. As shown in the results, accordingly the accuracy is increased. An example in which two-step approach works but independent DTC does not, is presented in Table 12
                        . In this example the predicted MFs in one-step and two-step approach are shown. The verb ‘go’ in our example has an imperative form for ASP, hence PER should be set as p2. But our one-step model finds it as a p1 incorrectly. If the model be informed about ASP, then p1 has not any chance to be predicted as a value for PER for this verb. This situation occurs for other cases and two-step approach could be handled it. At the end of this two-step learning process, we use an FSA to generate an inflected verb form using six predicted MFs. Fig. 3
                         shows the general schema of this two-step classification process.

Each DTC are trained on our training data containing 178,782 entries and evaluated on a test set containing more than 20K verbs. Table 13
                         shows accuracy (ACC) of each DTC. The most common feature value is used as a baseline for rule-based and our hybrid method, for each classifier. The results of hybrid method are indicated in two ways: one-step and two-step. The first one refers to the result reported by Mahmoudi et al. (2013b) and the second one is our result. In comparison with the rule-based morphology generation our hybrid model performs better, and ACCs in Table 13 show improvements in all cases. To show that the improvements acquired using the two-step are reliable, we have performed a paired-t test. In this experiment for the significance level α
                        =0.05 the p-value=0.02 is obtained, hence the results of accuracy are statistically significant.

In this section, we present two different experiments: on reference sentence (reference experiment) and on real translation. Our results will be reported on an artificial
                        5
                     
                     
                        5
                        By ‘artificial’ we mean that sentences are selected from a corpus and there is not any reference translation. Further, these sentences are not the output of MT and all words and their lemmas are given in the translation.
                      test set containing 15K sentences selected from an English–Persian parallel corpus. These 15K sentences are part of our training set and there is not any additional reference set for Persian side. Therefore, it could not be used as a real test set to evaluate a MT using BLEU metric, otherwise the scores are not reliable considering one reference sentence. The experiments are similar to that of  El Kholy and Habash (2012a) since we use lemma with the most common feature values as a baseline. However, our baseline is more stringent, because they use only lemma with no prediction as their baseline but we use lemma with prediction of MF.

To evaluate their model  Minkov et al. (2007) and  El Kholy and Habash (2012a) use reference experiment. It means that aligned sentence pair of reference translations instead of the output of an MT system are used to evaluate. We also perform reference experiment because it has three nice properties: word order, lemma choice and MFs are given (gold lemma and MFs). In this experiment, each verb is replaced with a verb generated by a rule-based paradigm and hybrid model in two different cases: 1. using gold lemma plus the gold feature values, 2. using gold lemma plus the predicted feature values. To investigate the effect of each feature in the quality of translation we examine the features one by one and incrementally. The results of this experiment are reported in Fig. 4
                        . The detailed result for reference experiment is presented in Tables 14
                         and 15
                         for gold and predicted features respectively.

We performed another significance test to show that the results of reference experiment with predicted features are statistically significant. We compare the results of reference experiments presented in (Mahmoudi et al., 2013b) with this paper. Using significance level α
                        =0.01 the p-value=0.7×10−4 is obtained, hence the results are significant. According to the results, our approach outperforms the first baseline in all configurations. The best configuration uses all predicted features and shows an improvement of about 2.8% absolute BLEU score against the baseline. Also, in comparison with rule-based (RB) paradigm, hybrid model is better in four configurations. We achieve improvements of about 2.11% absolute BLEU score in these configurations. These results indicate that morphology generation using hybrid model outperforms rule-based model. Even, when we use only TEN (which is the most important MF in Persian) for morphology generation, hybrid model performs better in comparison with rule-based. Because, there are some cases that it is possible to generate different but correct verb forms with the same MFs even if we are given the gold features, the maximum BLEU score is hard to be reached in the first case. We emphasis that, these results are obtained from our reference experiments in which a reference is duplicated and one of them is modified by our approach and is evaluated by another one using automatic evaluation metric. In fact, there is not real translation process here and a reference is evaluated by its modified version.

In order to investigate three paradigms of morphology generation in a real translation process, we have used our model as a post-processor to improve the output of RBMT system and the output of Google translator as an English–Persian SMT. In this experiment the outputs of these MTs are evaluated using BLEU in two different cases: (1) verbs have been generated using rule-based and statistical MT, (2) verbs have been generated using hybrid model by one-step and two-step learning process. In the latter case, we apply our model to the outputs of these MTs and verbs have been replaced with the verbs produced by our model. A new verb is generated using the lemma of previous verb that we want to replace it. It means that lemma is not golden here unlike our reference experiments hence, salient improvement will not be achieved. We have evaluated the outputs of these MTs using two test sets which are used by  Mansouri and Faili (2012) as evaluation sets. The first one is extracted from the book “English Grammar In Use” (EGIU) and contains about 2500 sentences. This test set also has two reference sets. The latter test set is extracted from a parallel corpus (PCTS) and contains about 400 sentences. This test set also has four reference sets. In addition, a test set extracted from a news corpus containing about 800 sentences with four reference sets is used. The results of this experiment are presented in Tables 16
                         and 17
                        , for RBMT and Google translator respectively. According to Tables 16 and 17, our proposed model improves the outputs of two baselines in all cases. As we had expected, the most improvement is achieved for PCTS, because it has been selected from the parallel corpus that we used to make training data.

To show that the improvements acquired using our model when applying to RBMT and Google translator are reliable, we have set up another two experiments. In these experiments we have performed a significance test to compare the output of RBMT and Google translator before and after applying our model. The results of this experiment are presented in Fig. 5
                        . As shown in Fig. 5, all t-statistics are above of 1.7 and since a paired t-statistic of 1.7 or above is 95% significant, thus, the improvements acquired are statistically significant and accordingly reliable.

Based on an analysis of Cap et al. (2014), we have used a human-based qualitative analysis which is comparing the outputs of a RBMT, when we use one-step and two-step morphology prediction. We select one-step to compare, because it is the best baseline and the result of this model is nearest to the two-step approach. In this analysis, we hire two native Persian persons to investigate the outputs in these two cases. To prevent raters from being biased towards morphology generation, we asked them to select sentences based on their native intuition, without revealing our focus on morphology generation processing. We have selected 100 sentences randomly and asked them to mark the better output. To approximate fluency, the sentences were rated without being given the reference sentence. To approximate adequacy, the sentences were rated with the reference sentence. The results of this analysis are presented in Tables 18
                         and 19
                         for fluency and adequacy respectively. As indicated in these two tables both raters marked more sentences of two-step morphology generation and a moderate strength of agreement exists between them.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

This paper reviewed some challenges which exist in the context of English–Persian MT. Since Persian is known as a morphologically rich language it requires further efforts to enhance the quality of MT systems in this language. Analyzing the output of English–Persian MT revealed that verbs have an important role in the translation quality. Hence, we have focused on the verb inflections as a highly inflecting class of words in Persian. In this paper, we investigated three ways to deal with the morphology of Persian verb in machine translation (MT): no morphology generation in statistical MT, rule-based morphology generation in rule-based MT and a hybrid-model-independent morphology generation.

As the main contribution of this work, we have implemented a rule-based morphology generation component for a RBMT and presented a hybrid morphology prediction and generation method to improve RBMT. The rule-based paradigm uses manually extracted linguistic rules and generates inflected verb form. The hybrid model uses DTC as a machine learning technique and predicts MFs of the verb. Then, we used a FSA to generate inflected verb form using predicted MFs. We have evaluated our approach on a test set containing 15K sentences and obtain better BLEU scores compared with our baseline, morphology generation with lemma plus the most common feature values and rule-based morphology generation.

As our proposed method is model-independent, it could be applied to any English to Persian MT as a post-processor and improves its output, if it is given an English sentence and the corresponding output, and an alignment for English verbs. Fig. 6
                      shows the general schema of this process. Therefore, we applied our model to the output of a RBMT and Google translator as a SMT and significant improvements acquired, according to the results of the experiments.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

