@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Does the signal-to-noise ratio of an interlocutor influence a speaker's vocal intensity?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We measured vocal intensity as a function of signal-to-noise ratio of the interlocutor.


                        
                        
                           
                           A live conversation was simulated using pre-recorded vocal prompts.


                        
                        
                           
                           Vocal intensity increased with background noise level.


                        
                        
                           
                           The signal-to-noise ratio of the interlocutor had no effect on the vocal intensity.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Vocal effort

Signal-to-noise ratio

Conversation

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This study investigated whether the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of the interlocutor (speech partner) influences a speaker's vocal intensity in conversational speech. Twenty participants took part in artificial conversations with controlled levels of interlocutor speech and background noise. Three different levels of background noise were presented over headphones and the participant engaged in a “live interaction” with the experimenter. The experimenter's vocal intensity was manipulated in order to modify the SNR. The participants’ vocal intensity was measured. As observed previously, vocal intensity increased as background noise level increased. However, the SNR of the interlocutor did not have a significant effect on participants’ vocal intensity. These results suggest that increasing the signal level of the other party at the earpiece would not reduce the tendency of telephone users to talk loudly
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

A common annoyance in public places, for example on public transport, is the inclination of other people to talk loudly into mobile phones. This experiment investigated whether this effect is due to compensations made in response to the received speech-to-noise ratio and thus to the sound level of the other party at the ear. In other words, do people shout due to difficulty hearing their interlocutor's voice relative to the level of background noise?

In a noisy environment, individuals are known to adjust their speech in order to be heard. The modifications include speaking more slowly, enunciating more clearly and increasing vocal intensity. The present investigation focussed on the increase of vocal intensity, for which two effects are already established in the literature: individuals increase their intensity when the background noise level increases (The Lombard Effect, Lombard, 1911, as cited in Lane and Tranel, 1971) and when the perceived intensity of their own voice decreases (sidetone compensation). However, the effect of the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of the interlocutor appears not to have been examined. The present experiment employed a novel method of controlling the sound level of the interlocutor in a live conversation, so that its possible effect on vocal intensity could be measured.


                        Lombard (1911) reported that an increase in ambient noise level resulted in an increase in a speaker's voice level; a phenomenon now known as the Lombard effect. This effect is intuitively appealing; we all have experience of the need to raise our voice in order to be heard over loud noise in a bustling restaurant or bar.


                        Lane et al. (1970) reviewed 10 studies that have established the Lombard effect quantitatively. These studies measured the rate at which vocal intensity increases as background noise level increases, known as the noise compensation function. If the slope of the noise compensation function is 0dB/dB, there is no increase in vocal intensity as a function of noise, while 1dB/dB indicates an increase in vocal intensity that matches the increase in noise. They noted that variations in the function's slope appeared to be determined by the importance of effective communication in the experimental task. The studies that have reported flat noise compensation functions have typically employed tasks that do not demand audible communication. For instance, Dreher and O’Neill (1958) instructed participants to simply read a list of words into a tape recorder. Increase in background noise produced only a small effect on vocal intensity; the slope of the noise compensation function was 0.10 for sentences and 0.11 for words. Korn (1954) reported a noise compensation function of 0.3 by adopting a more interactive method: participants were engaged in conversation and then instructed to read test sentences to their interlocutor. There was however, no requirement for correct transmission of material. Webster and Klumpp's (1962) design demanded effective communication by requiring listeners to repeat what they had heard. They reported a larger noise compensation function of 0.50. If the effect were purely automatic, it would occur to the same degree whether an individual reads sentences alone or is engaged in a conversation with another individual. These findings suggest that the need for intelligible communication with another individual is an important factor influencing the Lombard effect.

This conclusion has been consistently supported in the literature. For instance, Garnier et al. (2010) manipulated both auditory and communicative aspects of their experimental paradigm in which subjects participated in a game. Speech modifications were greatest when cocktail-party noise was played into headphones rather than over loudspeakers and in the interactive condition than in the non-interactive condition. These results suggest that the Lombard effect is a combination of both a communicative adaptation and automatic regulation of voice level. All of the findings discussed above suggest that although the Lombard effect is partly automatic its magnitude is dependent on communicative factors. The effect is greater when an individual is required to transmit speech signals effectively in communication with others.

A second effect on vocal intensity has been reported in the literature; a speaker modifies their vocal intensity in response to the level at which they hear their own voice. This effect is known as sidetone compensation or the Fletcher effect (Fletcher et al., 1918, as cited in Lane et al., 1970) A related phenomenon has been reported to occur in individuals who have hearing problems; they perceive their own voice to be quiet and compensate for this by speaking loudly (Radley, 1948). Similarly, when a speaker is presenting in a room with low reverberation, their apparent speech level is quiet and they raise their voice in order to be heard effectively by their audience (Pelegrin-Garcia et al., 2011a).


                        Lane et al. (1970) also evaluated 10 experiments on sidetone compensation. Sidetone compensation showed a similar function to the Lombard effect, but with the inverse slope. Fletcher et al. (1918, as cited in Lane et al., 1970) instructed participants to read monosyllables into a telephone microphone and obtained a sidetone compensation function of −0.25. Noll (1964) used conditions where telephone talkers read prepared passages (and obtained a slightly larger compensation function of −0.33). These two designs did not use tasks that involved interactive communication. McKown and Emling (1933, as cited in Lane et al., 1970), however, monitored live business calls made by telephone company employees and modified sidetone. Increases in sidetone produced decrements approximately half as great in speech level; the slope of the compensation function was −0.49.

The findings above, taken together, suggest that noise and sidetone compensation have the same fundamental purpose: to compensate for reductions in an individual's SNR for their listener and therefore facilitate intelligible communication (Radley, 1948).

The findings considered thus far are consistent with the “public loop” theory (Lane and Tranel, 1971), which stresses the importance of adjusting vocal intensity in order to accommodate the needs of the listener. If, instead, these effects were solely an automatic mechanism, they would occur to the same degree regardless of whether or not the situation demands the need for effective communication and there would be no variation in the slope of the noise compensation function.

Aspects of the interlocutor's environment have been shown to influence a speaker's vocal intensity, consistent with public loop theory. Lau (2008) reported that speakers raised their voices when they were made aware that their interlocutor was immersed in a noisy environment. Speakers therefore adjusted their vocal production, not because they themselves were surrounded by noise, but due to the knowledge that their listener was in a noisy environment and would therefore find it more difficult to hear what they are saying. In addition, Pelegrin-Garcia et al. (2011b) found that speakers adjusted their vocal intensity when they were aware that their listener was at a distance. Speakers therefore appreciate that their speech level will be quieter to the listener when they are further away from them. Speakers are thus constantly judging the ambient conditions that their interlocutor is experiencing and modifying their vocal intensity accordingly so that their speech is transmitted effectively. Again, this suggests that the effect is not solely the result of an automatic response to noise exposure and auditory feedback; conscious elements also play a role in producing the effect.

It would seem consistent with the public loop theory to predict that the incoming SNR that one receives should act as an indicator of how loudly one needs to speak. A conversation is a mutual experience; speech partners work together in order to achieve intelligible communication. A perceived reduction in incoming signal from the interlocutor might indicate a threat to the intelligibility of the conversation, which could cause the speaker to raise their voice so their interlocutor is able to hear them. To investigate how the effect of SNR of the interlocutor occurs in real life, it is necessary to adopt a design that demands intelligible communication just as would occur for example in real life phone calls.

The intensity of the interlocutor would be difficult to control in real life conversations; even when speakers are instructed to hold their speech level constant, fatigue or simply forgetting can cause the level to drop (Solomon et al., 2003). Therefore, this experiment adopted a novel paradigm in which a conversation was maintained by presenting pre-recorded sound clips containing questions and a range of conversational prompts, serving to mimic a spontaneous “live” interaction without creating unintended speech-level variations. The sound clips were under the control of the experimenter through the use of a graphical user interface (GUI). This allowed the vocal level of the interlocutor to be accurately manipulated, whilst still maintaining a semi-natural conversation and thus generating the need for audible communication. Participants were not made aware that their interlocutor's speech was pre-recorded.

@&#METHOD@&#

Twenty psychology undergraduates of both genders were recruited through the Cardiff University experimental management system in exchange for course credit for a single session lasting about 45min. All participants reported normal hearing.

Three levels of pink noise in 3-dB steps were generated using CoolEdit™. MATLAB™ was used to make voice recordings of a set of questions on different themes (nine for each theme) and also a standard set of conversational prompts. For instance, one theme was “music” which included questions such as “What's your favourite type of music?” “Do you like any bands in particular?” and “Have you been to any gigs?” There were 19 conversational prompts which included items such as “Wow”, “That sounds good”, “Really?” “Yes” and “Can you expand on that?” Recordings were made using a Sennheiser K6 microphone with the M62 omnidirectional capsule in a single-walled IAC audiometric booth. These files were then trimmed to remove silence and equalised within ±0.1dB to the same rms level.

Participants were seated in the same IAC audiometric booth. A Sennheiser PC36 USB headset was used to present the speech and noise to participants and to record vocal responses. There was an in-line volume control on this headset, which was taped up in order to avoid accidental adjustments being made to the overall sound level by the participant during the procedure. In order to maintain a conversation with the experimenter, the participant's speech was relayed from the listening booth via the K6 microphone to the experimenter's headphones. Participant responses were recorded using CoolEdit.

A pilot was carried out with five participants in order to establish the SNRs at which workable interaction could be sustained. In the light of those tests, the sound levels for the main experiments were set at 65, 62, and 59dB (A)
                           1
                        
                        
                           1
                           Sound level was measured using the A-weighted standard, which is equivalent to dB SPL at 1kHz (20μPa=0dB), but weights other frequencies according to their absolute threshold.
                         for the noise. The signal-to-noise ratios of the speech were, in each case, 4, 6 and 8dB. The pilot was also useful for the experimenter to gain experience with the GUI, thus ensuring successful conversations with participants when data collection began.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

The experimenter verbally explained the procedure followed by production of a set of written instructions. Participants were encouraged to speak as clearly as possible so that the experimenter would be able to hear them.

The participant was seated in the sound booth and put on the headphones. A background noise was loaded into CoolEdit™ and then played out in “Loop” mode (continuously). A playback GUI with buttons for each of the themed questions and the conversational prompts was then generated for each condition using MATLAB. Each condition represented one conversational topic and included 9 theme-specific questions. As well as buttons to play back different audio clips, the GUI included the volume setting for the speech in 2-dB steps.

Background noise and speech were played simultaneously through the headphones using two independent applications; CoolEdit for background noise and MATLAB for speech. Mixing was thus performed by the Windows XP operating system. The experimenter set a second CoolEdit window to record and used the GUI to click on the sound clip they wished to play to start the conversation. The experimenter listened to the response through their headphones and replied accordingly, trying to maintain a good, flowing conversation. Nine different sound files were collected per participant; one for each condition. The aim was to collect at least 90seconds worth of the participant's speech per condition. Conditions were presented in a random order.

The level distribution of the participants’ speech was calculated. Firstly, each sound file was divided into segments of either 200ms or 500ms and the rms power (dB) in each segment calculated. Analysis of 200-ms segments produced results that were largely indistinguishable from those for 500-ms segments, so only data for the 500-ms segments are presented below. Frequency distributions were computed, which calculated the number of segments with levels falling within 11 3-dB-wide bins. These 180 frequency distributions (20 participants×9 conditions) were reviewed before the strategy for further analysis was developed. The lowest intensity bin invariably contained the largest number of segments, presumably due to pauses in the participants’ speech. This bin was discarded from further analysis. In all but three cases, a peak in the distribution occurred, usually between bins 3 and 7. This peak was taken to represent typical vocal intensity during sonorant speech sounds and a method for estimating its centre-of-gravity was implemented. It was noted that at high levels of vocal output, the second bin also contained a large number of segments, because the increase in overall speech level moved the entire distribution rightwards. Since these bins might serve to depress the measured level of high-intensity speech they were also eliminated from consideration on those occasions in which the second bin contained more segments than the third. From the remaining bins, the mean level was calculated and this served as an estimate of average vocal intensity for that condition.

@&#RESULTS@&#


                     Fig. 1
                      displays example frequency distributions of the vocal intensities produced by participant 1, for the three different noise levels at the lowest of the experimenter-controlled speech levels. Arrows indicate the calculated centres of gravity for each of the three distributions. The mean centres of gravity, derived from such frequency distributions and averaged across participants, are plotted in Fig. 2
                     . As expected, the Lombard effect was found; an increase in background noise level caused an increase in vocal intensity. The mean slope of the noise compensation function was 0.41. A two-way (3 SNR levels×3 noise levels) within-subjects ANOVA was computed, which confirmed a significant effect of background noise level (F(2, 38)=43, p
                     <0.001).


                     Fig. 2 shows that the data were very similar for each interlocutor SNR. The ANOVA confirmed that there was no significant effect of the SNR of the interlocutor (F(2, 38)=2.6, p
                     =0.09). It is noteworthy that a non-significant trend was in the expected direction; participants’ voices tended to be more intense when the interlocutor's voice was less intense. However, the slope associated with this compensation function was only 0.1. There was also no significant interaction between background noise level and interlocutor SNR (F(4, 76)=0.3, p
                     =0.88).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

A significant Lombard effect was observed; as background noise level increased, participants’ vocal intensity increased. This is consistent with previous findings. The experiment was specifically designed to mimic natural conversation as effectively as possible and therefore demanded effective communication where speakers adjusted their vocal production so that their speech partners were able to hear them. The compensation function had a slope of 0.41dB/dB. This slope was greater than from studies that lacked any interaction with a partner, (e.g. Dreher and O’Neill, 1958), comparable with that obtained with sentences read out within the context of a conversation (Korn, 1954), but less than obtained in free conversation (Webster and Klumpp, 1962). This slope suggests, therefore, that the effort to simulate a live conversation was only partially successful. The methodological limitations below concerning the communicative aspect of the experiment could explain this outcome.

The SNR of the interlocutor did not produce a significant effect on the speaker's intensity. Although there was a non-significant trend in the hypothesised direction (increased intensity in response to reduced SNR), the implied compensation function had a shallow slope of 0.1dB/dB. This suggests that speakers make very little adjustment to their vocal intensity in response to the received SNR from the interlocutor, but that vocal intensity is principally determined by the well-known effects of noise level and of sidetone (auditory feedback from one's own voice). These findings seem inconsistent with the public loop theory, which emphasises audience control of speech.

The public loop theory is not discounted by these findings, however. It could be that conflicting processes are at work. There are several possibilities.

Listeners may treat an increase in the level of the interlocutor as evidence of a comfortable listening environment, perhaps a nearby interlocutor, leading them to reduce vocal intensity. Alternatively, they might infer a Lombard effect in the interlocutor's voice, wherein greater intensity in the interlocutor's voice signals that the interlocutor is suffering from a high level of background noise. The listener may then increase vocal intensity, because individuals increase their vocal intensity in response to knowledge that the interlocutor is in a noisy environment (Lau, 2008). Different mechanisms could thus work in different directions, even under the same theory. It is not possible to ascertain from our data whether different compensations may have been made by different participants or by the same participants at different times.

In addition, it has been reported that listeners passively acquire the linguistic characteristics of their interlocutors (Pardo, 2006). This phenomenon of communicative accommodation suggests that individuals alter their vocal production in order to match that of the interlocutor. Natale (1975) found that increasing or decreasing intensity of the interviewer's voice caused a converging effect in the participant's vocal intensity. The degree to which the vocal intensity was matched was predicted by the social desirability of the individual. Studies of this nature, however, were not conducted in the presence of competing noise so there was less of a threat to intelligibility and they do not illustrate how speech production may vary as a result of a reduced SNR. Nonetheless, it could explain why the present study found no effect of the SNR of the interlocutor. Although there was no evidence of intensity matching as a whole, as the sound recordings spanned a whole conversation, it is again not clear whether intensity matching occurred in some instances whilst responding to the perceived SNR occurred in others, or similarly if some individuals matched intensity whereas others responded to the received SNR. The effects could have cancelled each other out.

This study recruited a limited sample of 20 undergraduates all of whom attend Cardiff University. This sample may not be representative of the general population, so care must be undertaken when making generalizations from these results. It could be that different members of the population respond differently to the SNR of the interlocutor. In particular, experience with using mobile phones may determine how one responds in an experiment such as this.

Although the design of this study attempted to foster generation of relatively spontaneous, conversational speech, speech in this experiment may not have been a true reflection of the spontaneous, uninhibited speech that occurs in real life. Participants may have noticed or guessed that the experimenter was able to hear them regardless of whether they compensated for the level of background noise and the speech signal. Participants may therefore not have made adjustments comparable to normal conversations where there is a true threat to intelligible speech. If there was no perceived threat to intelligibility, the speaker would not need to make compensatory changes in response to the incoming SNR. It was also quite difficult in some cases to mimic spontaneous speech using the pre-recorded sound clips. This may have caused the participant to become aware that the speech was coming from pre-recorded clips and that it was not a true live interaction, where compensations needed to be made. Earlier studies on the communicative factors governing the Lombard effect have allowed two participants to hold a natural conversation. It may be possible to refine the materials and procedure employed in the present experiment in order to better maintain the artifice of a natural conversation, whilst still maintaining strict control over speech levels. These factors may have limited the observed size of both compensation factors, explaining why the observed noise compensation factor was smaller than observed in some more naturalistic experiments.

Participants were often doing most of the talking. It is possible that the interlocutor's voice was not being presented for a sufficient duration for its level to have an effect. To better test the effect of the interlocutor level a more equal conversation should be established, where each individual is talking in turn. This factor may have limited the size of any compensation for the level of the interlocutor. It is also possible that using identical sound clips at different intensities did not produce a convincing impression of a speaker varying vocal intensity, because other features of Lombard speech such as vowel shortening (Sankowska et al., 2011) did not occur in concert. Again, this may have reduced the listener's tendency to respond to the manipulation.

The results suggest that, unlike auditory feedback from one's own voice (sidetone), the incoming SNR does not serve to indicate how loudly an individual needs to talk. Therefore, amplification of the interlocutor's voice would be unlikely to prevent individuals from shouting into mobile phones. Instead, what is required is increased sidetone. However, manufacturers of mobile phones often design them without any sidetone, because when background noise is present (which is common when using mobile phones, in public places), sidetone also includes background noise. This produces too much feedback and distorts the signal (Etter, 2002). Feedback suppression techniques are therefore a prerequisite to addressing this problem.

@&#SUMMARY@&#

These findings suggest that the SNR of the interlocutor does not influence a speaker's vocal intensity. The interlocutor's vocal intensity was controlled while still retaining a semi-natural conversation. While the conversations may still have seemed unnatural to participants, the results so far suggest that there is no effect of interlocutor's speech level on a speaker's own vocal intensity.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

