@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Speaking in noise: How does the Lombard effect improve acoustic contrasts between speech and ambient noise?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We investigate how speakers can improve their segregation from a background noise.


                        
                        
                           
                           Lombard speech is explored in realistic conditions (interactive game, loudspeakers).


                        
                        
                           
                           Speakers maintain a positive SNR in noise and boost their energy around 3kHz.


                        
                        
                           
                           They enhance the modulation of their speech in f
                              0 and intensity.


                        
                        
                           
                           When possible, they specifically adjust f
                              0 and F1 to minima of the noise spectrum.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Lombard speech

Noise

Production

Speech audibility

Auditory detection

Segregation

Energetic masking

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  What makes speech produced in the presence of noise (Lombard speech) more intelligible than conversational speech produced in quiet conditions? This study investigates the hypothesis that speakers modify their speech in the presence of noise in such a way that acoustic contrasts between their speech and the background noise are enhanced, which would improve speech audibility.
                  Ten French speakers were recorded while playing an interactive game first in quiet condition, then in two types of noisy conditions with different spectral characteristics: a broadband noise (BB) and a cocktail-party noise (CKTL), both played over loudspeakers at 86dB SPL.
                  Similarly to (Lu and Cooke, 2009b), our results suggest no systematic “active” adaptation of the whole speech spectrum or vocal intensity to the spectral characteristics of the ambient noise. Regardless of the type of noise, the gender or the type of speech segment, the primary strategy was to speak louder in noise, with a greater adaptation in BB noise and an emphasis on vowels rather than any type of consonants.
                  Active strategies were evidenced, but were subtle and of second order to the primary strategy of speaking louder: for each gender, fundamental frequency (f
                     0) and first formant frequency (F1) were modified in cocktail-party noise in a way that optimized the release in energetic masking induced by this type of noise. Furthermore, speakers showed two additional modifications as compared to shouted speech, which therefore cannot be interpreted in terms of vocal effort only: they enhanced the modulation of their speech in f
                     0 and vocal intensity and they boosted their speech spectrum specifically around 3kHz, in the region of maximum ear sensitivity associated with the actor's or singer's formant.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Noise exposure triggers an adaptation in speech production, commonly referred to as the Lombard effect. When communicating in noisy environments, speakers commonly increase vocal intensity and fundamental frequency (f
                     0) as compared to communicating in quiet environments (Castellanos et al., 1996; Junqua, 1993; Van Summers et al., 1988). Speech produced in noise (also called Lombard speech) is also characterized by a higher first-formant frequency of vowels (F1), boosted energy above 2kHz and increased vowel/consonant (V/C) ratio in both vocal intensity and duration (Boril and Pollak, 2005; Castellanos et al., 1996; Egan, 1972; Junqua, 1993; Kadiri, 1998; Mokbel, 1992; Stanton et al., 1988; Van Summers et al., 1988).

Lombard speech has been shown to be more intelligible than conversational speech produced in quiet condition (Dreher and O’Neill, 1957; Lu and Cooke, 2008; Pittman and Wiley, 2001; Van Summers et al., 1988). It remains unclear which speech modifications contribute to this gain in intelligibility and which aspects of intelligibility are improved by this speech adaptation (phoneme recognition, speech audibility, utterance parsing, etc.).

In this article, we focus on whether and how speakers may try to improve their audibility in noise, i.e. the detection and perception of speech information by their interlocutor within the background noise. Before envisaging and suggesting some possible strategies, let us first review the current knowledge on the mechanisms and factors that influence speech perception in noise.

First, it is known that the audibility of a sound is considerably degraded when it is heard simultaneously with a competing noise or sound stream that contains energy in the same critical frequency bands. The energetic-masking effect increases with increased spectral overlap and decreased signal-to-noise (SNR) ratio between the target sound and the masker (Hornsby and Ricketts, 2001; French and Steinberg, 1947). In the case of speech, multi-talker noise degrades the perception of vowels more than consonants, whereas white Gaussian noise has the opposite effect (Junqua, 1993). Similarly, speech is more degraded by a competing speech produced by a speaker of the same gender (Brungart, 2001).

Auditory fusion is another perceptual phenomenon that occurs when two or more sound streams are heard at the same time. The concurrent streams are interpreted as coming from the same source when they present similar acoustic characteristics (such as the average intensity, pitch and timbre, but also in the temporal modulation of these parameters). They are segregated from each other when acoustic contrasts exceed a given threshold (Darwin et al., 2003).

Both phenomena of energetic masking and auditory fusion underlie the “cocktail-party effect”, i.e. the difficulty of following a voice and understanding what is said within a multitude of other competing voices (Arons, 1992). Psychoacoustic research showed how the segregation of a target speech from another competing speech is particularly difficult when both voices are similar in spectral content and fundamental frequency (f
                     0) (Assmann and Summerfield, 1990), first-formant frequency (F1) (Darwin et al., 2003), when the target voice is not modulated in f
                     0 (Marin and McAdams, 1991), and when it is compressed in amplitude (Hornsby and Ricketts, 2001).

What could speakers then do to improve their speech audibility and segregation in noise?
                        
                           (1)
                           Speakers may try to decrease the amount of energetic masking and enhance acoustic contrasts by increasing the global vocal intensity of their speech, and more specifically the spectral energy in frequency regions where the background noise presents maximum energy (boosting strategies).

They may try to shift the spectral energy, or at least important phonetic cues coded in frequency (f
                              0, formants), to spectral bands where the background noise presents minimum energy (bypass strategies).

They may try to increase the temporal modulation of their speech in f
                              0 and vocal intensity (modulation strategies).

Evidence of boosting strategies was provided by Mokbel (1992) and Junqua et al. (1998). Mokbel (1992) demonstrated that a speaker enhances his speech energy more in the frequency band where noise was concentrated. In a single-talker experiment comparing speech adaptation to broadband noises filtered by different band-pass filters, Junqua et al. (1998) showed that, at constant masker level, the increase of vocal intensity varies with noise spectral tilt. Bypass strategies were observed in recent studies (Lu and Cooke, 2008, 2009a,b) that showed how the center of gravity (CoG) of the speech spectrum increases in frequency when speaking in low-pass noises (multi-babble noise, driving noise or low-pass filtered broadband noise). However, they did not observe such bypass strategies in high-pass filtered noises (Lu and Cooke, 2009a,b), in which the speech CoG and additional spectral cues (f
                     0, F1) were not shifted down but were still shifted to higher frequencies. No study has specifically explored the use of modulation strategies in noise. Nevertheless, enhanced intonation contours and wider f
                     0 ranges in noise have been reported by several authors (Boril and Pollak, 2005; Garnier et al., 2006, 2010; Welby, 2006).

In line with these previous studies, this study aims at examining whether speakers adopt boosting, bypass or modulation strategies in noise to adapt to the spectral characteristics of the background noise and enhance acoustic contrasts between their speech and that noise. Two different types of noise frequently encountered in ecological situations were chosen here to test speech adaptation to varying energetic masking: a broadband noise (with equally distributed energy below 10kHz) and a cocktail-party noise (with concentrated energy below 1kHz). Similarly to previous studies, evidence of boosting, bypass or modulation strategies was searched in the global adaptation of speech intensity and spectrum. In addition, more specific and local adaptations were searched (1) in the modification of spectral cues such as f
                     0 and F1, (2) in the temporal modulation of f
                     0 and vocal intensity (3) in the potentially different effects that noise type can have on speech modifications made by both genders and for different types of speech segments.

The corpus is similar to the experiments presented in Garnier (2008) and Garnier et al. (2010).

Ten native French speakers (five men and five women) aged 20–28 years old took part in the recording. Only one of them had some basic knowledge about the Lombard effect. None reported any speech or hearing difficulties.

To account for the effect of communicative interaction on the Lombard effect, speakers were recorded while playing a collaborative game in pairs. The game was inspired by the Map Task game (Brown et al., 1983). Its rules are summarized here, and more details can be found in Garnier et al. (2010). The speakers had to exchange information about 16 items drawn on their map, so as to reconstruct a path that linked the items. The items corresponded to target words comprised of two CV (consonant–vowel) syllables (see Table 1
                           ). They were selected to represent most of the French phonemes (all of the vowels except [œ], all the consonants except [ŋ] and none of the semi-vowels [w], [j] and [Ч]). The experimental condition aimed at reproducing as much as possible a realistic situation of face-to-face interaction in noisy conditions. Speakers were seated two meters from and facing each other. They could use audio and visual information from the face only, since hands and head movements were constrained. No carrier sentence was imposed, so as to preserve spontaneity. The speech content could not be predicted so that speakers had to adjust their intelligibility level. An example of utterances produced by the speech partners (translated from French) is given below.
                              1
                           
                           
                              1
                              Leader: “The first item is the shark (\Rəkɛ̃/ in French).”
                              Follower: “Well…the shark is associated with the summit (/sɔmmɛ/ in French)”
                              Leader: “with the what ?”
                              Follower: “with the summit !”
                              Follower: “Yes”
                              Leader: “Ah, ok. Hmm…Then I’m going to the pig (/koʃɔ̃/ in French)”
                            As in realistic noisy conditions, speakers were sometimes unsuccessful in their communication and had to repeat or reformulate their utterance. These repetitions were included in the long-term acoustical analysis (long-term average spectrum, distribution of f
                           0 and vocal intensity over the game duration). Only the first occurrence of the target words was considered for the analysis of syllables and segments.

Speakers played the game in a sound-treated booth in three sound conditions: (1) quiet, (2) 86dB SPL of broadband noise (BB) and (3) 86dB SPL of non-intelligible cocktail-party noise (CKTL). The two types of noise were selected from the BD_Bruit database (Zeiliger et al., 1994). Their spectral characteristics are given in Fig. 1
                           . In the BB noise, spectral energy is attenuated above 10kHz. The CKTL noise is made from the non-intelligible speech of four males and four females. The spectral energy is concentrated below 800Hz. It presents two maxima around 170 and 500Hz, and a local minimum around 340Hz. Noise files were 3min long. Noise started with a fade-in and was turned off once the two speakers had completed the game after approximately 2–3min.

To avoid perturbing the speakers’ self-monitoring feedback and their perception of the background noise, the two noises were played over two loudspeakers (Tannoy System 600) instead of headphones. Loudspeakers were positioned 1.5m from the speakers in each lateral direction and at the level of their ears. Noise levels were calibrated using a 1/2″ pressure microphone (B&K 4165) and an artificial head placed where the speaker would be seated inside the booth.

The audio speech signal was recorded with a cardioid headset microphone (Beyerdynamic Opus 54) placed about 5cm in front of the mouth. The signal was pre-amplified (RME Octamic) and sampled at 44.1kHz and 16bits (RME ADI 8 Pro converter and RME DIGI 9652 HDSP sound card). Speech intensity was calibrated prior to the experiment by recording the audio signal of a sustained vowel produced by the speaker, and by measuring the corresponding sound pressure level (SPL) at the microphone with a digital Sound Level Meter.

Noise was removed from the speech recordings using a dedicated noise-canceling method (Ternström et al., 2002). Before each noisy condition, 10s of white noise was played into the loudspeakers and recorded at the microphone with the speaker remaining quiet, which enabled the estimation of the impulse response of the loudspeaker-to-microphone channel. For each noisy condition, it was then possible to estimate the entire noise signal that would have been recorded at the microphone if the speaker had remained quiet, and to subtract this estimation, in the time-domain, from the actual noisy recording of speech. The result of this subtraction gave the audio signal of speech produced in noise, with little remaining signal from the surrounding noise. Such a method can be used in laboratory conditions where the noise signal is perfectly known, and where loudspeakers and microphones remain at the same place. However, the position of the speaker in the room also affects the channel estimation. As a consequence, it is necessary to restrain speakers’ movements to maximize the denoising performance and to guarantee the validity of acoustic measurements. When head movements are restrained, the possible bias introduced by the denoising is less than 0.2dB for intensity of voiced segments, 0.7dB for unvoiced ones, 0.13tones for F0, 10Hz for the first formant frequency and 3Hz for the centroid of the speech spectrum (Garnier et al., 2010). In this experiment participants remained still during the 2–3min of noise exposure. In between each speaking condition the participants were allowed to move and relax. The headset microphone was firmly attached to the participant's head to avoid any movement of the face away from the microphone. The map used for the interactive game was placed high enough on a stand so that the speakers could see both the map and their speech partner by moving their eyes but not their head. Writing on the map could be achieved with wrist movements only.

@&#ANALYSIS@&#

Sentences, syllables and segments of the target words were manually segmented from the audio signal using Praat software. All the acoustic analyses were made with MATLAB.

The long-term average spectrum (LTAS) was computed from 0 to 6kHz over the concatenated utterances produced in each experimental condition by each speaker (∼1min 30s). The LTAS center of gravity (CoG) was measured from speech normalized in intensity in order to compare the energy distribution between conversational and Lombard speech spectra. The mean energy (in dB SPL) in the 0–1kHz frequency band (corresponding to f
                           0 and F1) in the 2–4kHz band (corresponding to the actor's formant area) and in the 1–2kHz and 4–6kHz remaining bands were derived from this LTAS.

The fundamental frequency (f
                           0) was estimated by autocorrelation over the voiced parts of these concatenated utterances. The distribution of f
                           0 values was computed using a quantification step of 5Hz and was normalized so that its integration summed to 100%. The mode of the f
                           0 distribution was detected to estimate the f
                           0 value that is produced the most frequently by a speaker in a given condition. The amplitude of f
                           0 modulation was expressed in tones by taking out f
                           0 values that corresponded to the lowest 15% of the distribution (i.e. the least frequent occurrences of f
                           0) then extracting the width of that new distribution.

Mean f
                           0 and mean vocal intensity were measured for each CV syllable of the target word. Female speakers have higher f
                           0 and greater intra-speaker f
                           0 variations (in Hertz) than males. To account for the gender difference and allow intra-speaker comparisons, f
                           0 was expressed in tones (from f
                           
                              ref
                           
                           =50Hz). The magnitude of amplitude modulation was calculated for each CV syllable as the difference between the maximal intensity of the vowel and the minimal intensity of the preceding consonant.

For each talker and each condition, the mean frequency of the first formant was semi-automatically measured for the vowels [a] (4 occurrences), [i] (5 occurrences) and [u] (2 occurrences) of the target word, using a conventional autocorrelation-based LPC method.

Segments mean duration and mean vocal intensity were measured for vowels (32 measurements), sonorants with a formant structure ([n], [m] and [l]: 8 measurements), and unvoiced consonants ([f], [s], [ʃ], [p], [t] and [k]: 12 measurements) of the target word.

Using SPSS software, a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with repeated measures was conducted on each parameter, considering one mean value per speaker and per condition.

Main effects were tested first for the factor CONDITION (three levels: CONDITION 1 – quiet (i.e. no noise), CONDITION 2 – BB noise at 86dB SPL, CONDITION 3 – CKTL noise at 86dB SPL) and the inter-subject factor GENDER (two levels: 1-female, 2-male). The statistical interaction between these two factors was also tested.

Secondly, specific contrasts were examined using Bonferroni adjustments. The effect of noise exposure on speech production was tested as the contrast between quiet (CONDITION 1) and the two types of noise (CONDITION 2 and 3). The effect of noise type on speech modification was tested as the contrast between BB noise (CONDITION 2) and CKTL noise (CONDITION 3). The influence of gender on speech modification in noise (GENDER×(CONDITION 1 vs. CONDITIONS 2–3)) and on the effect of noise type (GENDER×(CONDITION 2 vs. CONDITION 3)) were also tested.

All the results are reported in Figs. 2–4 and 6–8. The conventional notation was adopted for indicating statistical significance of the ANOVA tests: *** for p
                           <.001, ** for p
                           <. 01, * for p
                           <.05 and ns (not significant) for p
                           >.05.

@&#RESULTS@&#

This section explores the three types of strategies mentioned in the introduction that speakers may adopt to improve their speech audibility and segregation from a background noise (boosting, bypass, modulation). Where necessary, the hypothesis is stated again, together with the expected results for a given strategy. The observations are then described and compared to the expectations.


                           Fig. 2
                            shows the variation of syllable intensity with noise exposure, noise type and speaker's gender. As expected, syllable intensity increased significantly when speakers adapted from quiet (i.e. 40dB SPL of room noise) to 86dB SPL of noise, regardless of the type of noise. The average increase was 16.6±3.1dB
                              2
                           
                           
                              2
                              This standard deviation is calculated from the mean modification observed in each participant (thus over 10 values).
                            (see Fig. 2). Despite the increase of syllable intensity in noise, the SNR ratio decreased on average by 29.4dB SPL between speech produced in quiet and that produced in noise. However, it would have decreased by 46dB SPL if the speakers had not adapted their vocal intensity in noise. Fig. 2 shows how speech modification contributes to maintain a positive SNR in noise of 12.5±3.7dB SPL on average, whereas, without adaptation, it would have been negative for all but one male speaker.

The CKTL noise is made of simultaneous voices and therefore induces greater energetic masking of speech than does BB noise. However, speakers did not increase their syllable intensity more in CKTL noise. On the contrary, the increase of syllable intensity was significantly greater in BB noise (17.7±2.7dB SPL) than in CKTL noise (15.4±3.8dB SPL) (see Fig. 2).

Furthermore, the long-term average spectrum of the CKTL noise demonstrates a first energy peak around 170Hz and a globally more similar envelope to the female voice spectrum. In comparison, BB noise has a flat spectrum, and thus does not induce greater energetic masking on one gender over another. However, no significant interaction was observed between the noise type and the speaker's gender: females did not increase their syllable intensity more than males in either BB noise or in CKTL noise (see Fig. 2).

Vowels and sonorants have a greater spectral overlap with the CKTL noise, compared with the BB noise. On the contrary, the spectrum of unvoiced fricatives ([s], [∫], [f]) and stop consonants ([p], [t] and [k]) is more similar to the BB noise spectrum. Consequently, if speakers adopted boosting strategies to compensate for the degree of energetic masking, we could expect that:
                              
                                 -
                                 [h1]: the variation of sonorants’ intensity and duration follow the same tendency as vowels, because they demonstrate a comparable spectrum.

[h2]: there is an interaction between the segment type and the noise type. Vowels and sonorants would be more emphasized in intensity and duration in CKTL noise compared to BB noise [h2a], and more emphasized than unvoiced consonants in CKTL noise [h2b]. On the contrary, unvoiced consonants may be more emphasized in intensity and duration in BB noise compared to CKTL noise [h2c], and more emphasized than vowels and sonorants in BB noise [h2d].


                           Fig. 3
                            shows how speakers modified the vocal intensity and the duration of vowels, sonorants and unvoiced fricatives and plosives in BB and CKTL noises. Results of statistical analysis are given in the table on its right side.

The results did not support our hypotheses.

Sonorants’ intensity and duration were not found to be modified in noise in a similar way to vowels (hypothesis [h1]) but rather similarly to unvoiced consonants. The intensity of sonorants and unvoiced consonants increased on average by 12.3dB and 12.8dB respectively, whereas vowels’ intensity increased by 17.3dB. Vowels were significantly lengthened (on average by 33±12ms), whereas consonants were significantly shortened for unvoiced fricatives and plosives (by −10±7ms). Sonorants were shortened by 6ms, however not significantly.

In contradiction to our hypotheses [h2], segment intensity and duration were not found to vary with noise exposure with a significant interaction between segment type and noise type. Instead, the following general tendencies were observed:
                              
                                 -
                                 Regardless of the type of noise and the type of consonants (unvoiced ones or sonorants), vocal intensity increased more for vowels than consonants, and segment duration increased for vowels whereas it tended to decrease for consonants. As a consequence, in all cases, the vowels to consonants ratio was found to increase in noise in both intensity (4.7±1.8dB) and duration (41±10ms).

Vowels intensity and duration increased more in BB noise (by 18.7±3.1dB SPL) than in CKTL noise (by 15.8±3.7dB SPL) (hypothesis [h2a]), whereas no significant effect of noise type was found on consonants’ intensity and duration (hypothesis [h2c]).

As shown in Fig. 1, the CKTL noise presents maximum energy below 1kHz, then decreased energy with increasing frequencies above 1kHz. The BB noise presents equal energy below 10kHz. If the speakers boosted the energy of their speech in the frequency bands where the background noise presents maximum energy, a greater increase of spectral energy in the 0–1kHz frequency band should be found in CKTL noise compared to BB noise.


                           Fig. 4
                            shows how male and female speakers modified the energy distribution of their voice spectrum in BB and CKTL noises. Results of statistical analysis are given in the table on its right side.

At normalized intensities, the spectra of voices produced in CKTL noise did not present enhanced energy in the 0–1kHz band, compared to voices produced in BB noise. Noise type did not show any significant influence on the distribution of voice energy in higher frequency bands either. Instead, the following general tendencies were observed:
                              
                                 -
                                 For both types of noise, female voices showed a similar an amount of energy in the 0–1kHz band compared to voices produced in quiet condition, whereas Lombard male voices showed slightly less energy in the 0–1kHz band, compared to voices produced in quiet condition.

For both males and females, and for both types of noise, the voice spectrum was significantly boosted in the 1–2kHz and 2–4kHz bands but decreased in energy at high frequencies (above 4kHz for males, and above 6kHz for females), compared to conversational voice produced in quiet condition.


                           Fig. 5
                            gives an example of typical spectral envelopes observed in this study for vowels produced by female speakers in quiet and noisy conditions. These graphs show how the boosted energy of Lombard speech in the 1–4kHz region comes not only from a flatter spectral slope but also from the specific enhancement of the amplitude of higher formants. Different formants were involved in this enhancement, depending of the vowel ([a], [i] or [u]). For the vowel [i], two different strategies of formant clustering were observed across speakers and experimental conditions: (1) two clusterings of F2–F3 and of F4–F5 (illustrated in Fig. 5, bottom left panel); (2) one clustering of F2–F3–F4 (illustrated in Fig. 5, bottom right panel).

An alternative to boosting speech energy in the frequency bands of maximum energetic-masking regions is to shift the energy of the speech spectrum away from these masking regions. As CKTL noise presents maximum energy below 1kHz, one may hypothesize the speech spectral energy to be shifted toward higher frequencies in CKTL noise than in BB noise.


                           Fig. 6
                            shows the variation of the CoG of the speech spectrum (including voiced and unvoiced segments) with noise exposure, noise type and speaker's gender. The table on its right side gives the results of statistical analysis. In both types of noise, speakers shifted their speech spectrum toward higher frequencies. This adaptation translated into a significant increase of speech CoG (by 533±368Hz on average), which was greater for female speakers (786±360Hz) than for male speakers (280±122Hz). In CKTL noise, this spectral shift contributed for female speakers to raise their speech CoG above 800Hz, where the energy of that background noise is considerably attenuated (see Fig. 1). For male speakers, however, their speech CoG in CKTL noise remained in the 500–900Hz region, above the frequency of the second peak of the CKTL noise spectrum, but not at a sufficiently high frequency to benefit from a significant release in energetic masking. Furthermore, contrary to our expectations, speakers were not found to raise their speech CoG more in CKTL noise than in BB noise, but they increased it by a similar extent in both types of noise.

The CKTL noise spectrum presents a local minimum of energy around 340Hz, which releases the energetic masking by 6dB in comparison to the two adjacent peaks of energy around 170Hz and 500Hz (see Fig. 1). An f
                           0 frequency of 340Hz seems an accessible target for female speakers. Consequently, a bypass strategy would involve raising their voice in CKTL noise so that their f
                           0 reaches the region of reduced energetic masking. On the contrary, male speakers rarely raise their speaking voice to f
                           0 higher than 250–300Hz. They cannot reach the local minimum of the CKTL noise spectrum. In their case, a bypass strategy would consist in limiting the increase of their pitch in CKTL noise in order to maintain their f
                           0 range below the first peak of energy of the CKL noise (around 170Hz, see Fig. 1 and top panel in Fig. 8
                           
                           ).


                           Fig. 7 shows the distribution of f
                           0 values for all the speakers in quiet condition, BB noise and CKTL noise. Its bottom table presents the variation of mean f
                           0 for the target words syllables, as a function of noise type and speaker's gender. As expected, all the female speakers were found to increase their syllable f
                           0 in CKTL (by 4.5±0.5 tones on average) so that their most frequent f
                           0 (corresponding to the mode of the f
                           0 distribution) in CKTL noise was found on average at 334±17Hz, i.e. 5.8 tones away from the first peak of the CKTL spectrum, and as close as 0.2 tones to its local minimum of energy. However, contrary to our expectations, male speakers were not found to limit the increase of their f
                           0 in CKTL noise. Similarly to females, they raised their syllable f
                           0 in CKTL noise by 4±1 tones on average. This brought their most frequent f
                           0 in CKTL noise to 180±38Hz on average, i.e. as close as 0.5tones from the center frequency of the main peak of the CKTL spectrum.

When considering vowel spectra, the amplitude of the two first voice harmonics was found to be comparable in CKTL noise for male speakers (H1–H2=0.1±2.1dB SPL), whereas the amplitude of the first harmonic was always much greater than that of the second harmonic for female speakers in the same condition (H1–H2=8.4±2.9dB SPL). Thus, even if male speakers do not raise f
                           0 high enough to reach the local minimum of the CKTL noise spectrum (around 340Hz), they may raise it high enough for the second harmonic (2f
                           0) to be located in that frequency region. The most frequent value of 2f
                           0 for males was indeed measured on average around 360Hz in CKTL noise.

As BB noise spectrum presents no local minimum in energy below 10kHz, one might expect speakers to still raise f
                           0 in BB noise – because of the well-known relationship between the variation of f
                           0 and vocal intensity (Titze, 1989) – but to a lesser extent compared to in CKTL noise, and without any specific adjustment of the f
                           0 distribution around 340Hz.

Syllable f
                           0 was indeed found to increase significantly in BB noise (by 5.5±0.5tones on average), by a similar extent for both males and females. However, contrary to our expectations, this increase was greater in BB noise than in CKTL noise (by 1.1±0.5tones). As a consequence, the most frequent f
                           0 of female speakers and the most frequent 2f
                           0 value of male speakers in BB noise was not specifically adjusted around 340Hz.

Similarly to the f
                           0 range, the range of F1 is situated below 1kHz, where the CKTL noise spectrum has maximum energy and exerts greater energetic masking. A bypass strategy would be to adjust F1 to frequency regions where the CKTL noise has reduced energy. The region around 340Hz, where the CKTL noise spectrum has a local minimum in energy, may be an accessible range to shift the F1 of closed vowels. On the other hand, the F1 of open vowels would have to be shifted above 800Hz if speakers aimed at improving the audibility of that information.


                           Fig. 8 represents the variation of F1 with noise exposure for the two closed vowels of French, [i] and [u], and for the most open vowel [a], as a function of noise type and speaker's gender. The table on its right side gives the results of statistical analysis. F2 was not examined here, since its range is already situated above 800Hz, where the energy of the CKTL noise is considerably reduced, and since our research question is not whether the vowel space is reduced or expanded in noise, but to determine whether the variations of formant frequencies can contribute to release the degree of energetic masking.

For the open vowel [a], F1 was found to increase on average by 140±30Hz, by a similar extent for both genders and both types of noise. For females, F1 values were raised above 800Hz, where the energy of the CKTL noise is considerably decreased. For males, however, F1 values in noise remained just below 700Hz, in the frequency region corresponding to the second peak of the CKTL noise.

For the closed vowels [i] and [u], females were found to increase F1 by an average of 145±36Hz, similarly to the open vowel [a], whereas males increased F1 by only 72±24Hz on average. Thus, gender was found to have a significant effect on the modification of F1 in noise for these two closed vowels. Furthermore, a significant interaction was observed between noise type and speaker's gender in the variation of F1 for these closed vowels; F1 tended to increase more in BB noise for females (by 43Hz on average) and more in CKTL noise for males (by 21Hz on average). As a result, modifications of the closed vowels [i] and [u] in CKTL noise contributed, for both genders, toward shifting their first formant away from the first main peak of the CKTL noise spectrum (around 170Hz), and close to the frequency where the CKTL noise spectrum presents a local minimum (around 340Hz) (see Fig. 9
                           ). These modifications appear to be specifically adapted to the characteristics of the CKTL noise, as they were not observed in BB noise.

Speakers significantly enhanced the intensity dynamics of their syllable when they adapted to noise by 3.3±1.2dB SPL on average (see Fig. 9a). A greater modulation of syllable intensity was observed in BB noise (4.8±2.0dB SPL) than in CKTL noise (1.8±1.1dB SPL) and this significant effect of noise type was more accentuated in females than in males.

In Fig. 7, it can be seen that speakers not only raise f
                           0 when they adapt from quiet to 86dB SPL of noise but also significantly widen their f
                           0 range, by an average of 0.8±0.4tones. The amount of widening was not significantly affected by gender or noise type (see Fig. 9b).

@&#DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS@&#

As in previous studies, we found a significant effect of noise type on the modification of speech intensity but no significant effect on voice spectrum. In this study, this effect of the noise type can be summarized by two main conclusions:
                           
                              (1)
                              The relative energy between 0 and 1kHz was not found to be more enhanced in CKTL noise, neither was the speech CoG more shifted toward high frequencies in CKTL noise.

So, contrary to Mokbel (1992) who showed that a speaker enhanced more his speech energy in the frequency band where noise was concentrated, and Junqua et al. (1998) that the increase of vocal intensity varied with noise spectral tilt at constant masker level, our results do not support the existence of such boosting strategies in speakers communicating in low frequency noise. However, our observations are consistent with those of (Lu and Cooke, 2009a,b) who also observed a greater shift of speech CoG toward high frequencies in broadband noises and in high frequency noises rather than in low frequency noises.

Noise type was not found to interact with the type of speech segment and with the speaker's gender in the modification of segments’ intensity and duration, syllable intensity and speech CoG:
                                    
                                       -
                                       Regardless of the speaker's gender and the type of segment, a greater increase of these parameters was observed in BB noise compared to CKTL noise, although CKTL noise induces greater energetic masking on speech. This result is in agreement with Egan (1972) and Lu and Cooke (2009b), who observed a greater increase of voice intensity in broadband noise than in noise enhanced in low frequencies or high frequencies. It does not reflect the results of previous studies (Junqua et al., 1998; Ternström et al., 2002; Jung, 2012), in which white noise, speech-shaped noise, music noise or driving noise did not induce any different adaptation in vocal effort. However, these studies compared noise types at similar perceived loudness (in dB A), whereas our own study compared CKTL and BB noises at similar physical levels in dB SPL.

Regardless of the noise type, vocal intensity and duration were found to increase significantly more for vowels than for consonants. Sonorant consonants followed the same tendency as unvoiced consonants, despite their spectral similarity to vowels. This observation is consistent with other studies (Castellanos et al., 1996; Junqua, 1993) that also reported the vowel-to-consonant ratio to increase in both intensity and duration in noise for each kind of consonant. However, this greater adaptation of vowels could also result from the small vocabulary size and the weak confusability between the target words of our experiment, which were only distinguishable by their vowels (except the pairs ‘cochon’ (pig) vs. ‘chausson’ (slipper), and ‘navet’ (turnip) vs. ‘vallée’ (valley)).

Regardless of the noise type, females raised their CoG more with noise exposure than did males. This partly comes from a notable decrease of the relative energy above 4kHz in males. Again, this observation is in agreement with previous studies (Castellanos et al., 1996; Junqua, 1993) that reported an increase of speech energy between 4 and 5kHz in female Lombard speech, whereas the greatest enhancement of speech energy in males was observed between 2 and 4kHz (Castellanos et al., 1996; Junqua, 1993).

As a consequence, our observations do not support the hypothesis that speakers modify their speech intensity and spectrum in noise in a way that specifically compensate for the degree of energetic masking, neither using a boosting nor a bypass strategy. Instead, our results rather support the idea that speakers adapt their level of vocal effort to the perceived loudness of the background noise, greater in broadband noise than in low frequency noises such as the CKTL noise of this study (because of the greater ear-sensitivity in the 2–4kHz frequency band). Thus, regardless of the spectral content of the background noise, the type of speech segment and the speaker's gender, the main strategy to cope with noise appears to consist in increasing vocal intensity to a level that preserves a positive SNR ratio (in dB SPL).

This main strategy of increasing vocal effort can very well account for the raised f
                        0, F1 and CoG observed in Lombard speech, as these acoustical modifications commonly accompany the increase of vocal intensity (Titze and Sundberg, 1992; Sundberg and Nordenberg, 2006) and are observed in shouted speech, even in absence of background noise (Rostolland, 1982; Schulman, 1989; Lienard and Di Benedetto, 1999; Traumüller and Erikkson, 2000).

Nevertheless, additional modifications that can improve speech audibility in noise have also been observed in this study, while they are not directly related to the increase of vocal intensity.

In CKTL noise, speakers of both genders shifted their f
                        0 distribution so that their most frequent f
                        0 or 2f
                        0 value was specifically adjusted in the frequency region where the CKTL noise presented a local minimum in energy. Likewise, we observed an interaction between noise type, vowel type (open vs. closed) and speaker's gender. In CKTL noise, speakers of both genders specifically adjusted the F1 of closed vowels ([i] and [u]) in the frequency region where the CKTL noise had a local minimum in energy. Such an improved contrast in spectrum, f
                        0 and F1 is predicted to release the energetic masking effect of the CKTL noise and to improve the segregation of Lombard speech from another competing speech stream (Culling and Darwin, 1993; Darwin, 1981).

Furthermore, a more detailed examination of the spectra of Lombard vowels indicated that the shift of speech CoG toward higher frequencies came not only from the flattening of the spectral slope, as commonly observed when vocal effort is increased, but also from specific higher-formants clustering and amplitude enhancement. This recalls the “singing formant” or the “actor's formant” observed in opera singers who sing over an orchestra, or in stage actors who have to project their voice at distance (Bele, 2006). This boosting strategy enhances energy around 3–4kHz, where the human ear is most sensitive to sound pressure level, and improves voice ‘projection’ and audibility. Such an energy boost of the 1–4kHz region is not observed in the shouted speech of untrained speakers, while it is reported in clear speech (Krause and Braida, 2004). Both artificial flattening of the spectral tilt and artificial enhancement of speech energy above 1.5kHz have proved to be efficient techniques of speech enhancement (Horwitz et al., 2008; Skowronski and Harris, 2006).

Lastly, modulation strategies were observed, as greater modulations of f
                        0 and vocal intensity were found in Lombard speech than in speech produced in quiet, both for male and female speakers. These modulation strategies are not directly related to increased vocal effort, as shouted voice demonstrates reduced f
                        0 modulations (Rostolland, 1982). On the contrary, a wider f
                        0 range (Picheny et al., 1986) and an increased low-frequency modulation of the intensity envelope (Krause and Braida, 2004) have also been observed in clear speech, and in speakers who are intrinsically more intelligible than others (Bradlow et al., 1996). Several psychoacoustic studies have shown that vowels degraded by an interfering sound are better detected and recognized when their f
                        0 is modulated (Ishizuka and Aikawa, 2002). Sound stream segregation is also improved by intensity modulation and temporal fluctuations (Ishizuka and Aikawa, 2002). Synthesis of natural f
                        0-contour variations has been shown to improve intelligibility of speech compared to flat contours (Laures and Weismer, 1999). Segmental intelligibility was worsened when applying compression effects that decrease the modulation in intensity (Boike and Souza, 2000; Hornsby and Ricketts, 2001). Consequently, this enhanced modulation of f
                        0 and vocal intensity observed here in Lombard speech are likely to reflect the intention of the speaker to improve his intelligibility.

In agreement to Lu and Cooke (2009b), our results suggest that there is no systematic “active” adaptation to the spectral characteristics of the ambient noise. The increase in vocal intensity, the spectral shift, the rise in f
                        0 and F1 appear to be primary and unavoidable features of Lombard speech, regardless of the type of noise and the speaker. The same tendencies have been observed in shouted speech, in the absence of ambient noise (Lienard and Di Benedetto, 1999; Stanton et al., 1988; Titze, 1989), and in Lombard speech with or without interaction (Amazi and Garber, 1982; Garnier et al., 2010). All these modifications may be interpreted as the different facets of one main action, which is to increase voice intensity in noisy conditions.

However, when compatible with this primary tendency, there also appear to be subtler and secondary variations of these same parameters in ways that optimize the acoustic contrast with the background noise. For example, the distribution of f
                        0 values is not only shifted to higher frequencies in noise (primary strategy of increasing voice intensity), but it is also widened and specifically adjusted in the frequency area where the CKTL noise has minimum energy (secondary strategies for improving acoustic contrasts).

This leads us to support the idea that speech adaptation to noise may broken down into two hierarchical “levels” of strategies. These primary and secondary speech adaptations can be related to different mechanisms underlying the Lombard effect. Thus, primary and unvarying modifications of speech in noise, related to the global increase of vocal effort, may very well be related to the automatic and uncontrollable regulation of voice intensity that leads speakers to raise their voice when they get an attenuated feedback of their own voice (Pick et al., 1989). Furthermore, the Lombard effect also depends on communicative interaction, as vocal intensity and related parameters are more modified in noise for interactive than non-interactive situations (Amazi and Garber, 1982; Garnier et al., 2010). Additional modifications that do not relate directly to vocal intensity are observed in noise for interactive situations only (Garnier et al., 2010). This communicative mechanism that also contributes to the Lombard effect may very well account for the secondary modifications of speech parameters observed in this current study, when they are compatible with the primary ones.

Speech modifications examined in this study have applications to the improvement of speech perception when speech is broadcast in noisy environments, such as train stations, car interiors, places with ventilation or multi-talker noise. In background noise of low frequency energy, it may be beneficial to shift speech f
                        0, formants and spectrum toward higher frequencies, as is observed in Lombard speech. Irrespective of the noise type, speech auditory detection and segregation may be improved by enhancing both frequency and amplitude modulation of speech, and boosting speech energy in the 2–4kHz frequency band.

It is more difficult to predict the perceptual consequence of conjoint speech modifications, as their effects are not simply additive. Thus, conjoint modifications may either lead to counterproductive outcomes or may have particularly positive consequences for speech auditory detection. For example, auditory detection may be particularly improved when enhancing speech modulation together with shifting the speech spectrum toward the 2–4kHz region, a frequency band where the human ear is most sensitive not only to sound pressure level but also to acoustic contrasts (Jesteadt et al., 1977; Wier et al., 1977).

Likewise, speech modifications can have multiple effects on these different aspects of intelligibility (audibility, phoneme recognition, utterance parsing). For instance, the enhanced modulation of speech in f
                        0 and intensity may both improve speech segregation from a background noise and the segmentation of the utterance into lexical units (Garnier et al., 2010; Welby, 2006). On the other hand, raised f
                        0 and F1 may improve speech segregation from a multi-talker noise, but may simultaneously degrade acoustic cues to vowel recognition.

These results may also have further applications for injury prevention and therapy in the case of vocal misuse and abuse in noisy working places (preschool teachers, bartenders, factory workers, etc.). Among the different observed modifications, enhancing speech modulation and spectral energy in the 2–4kHz region are communicative techniques that can be taught to people in order to improve their speech audibility in a safer way than simply increasing vocal intensity.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

We are grateful to Danièle Dubois for fruitful discussions on the methodological aspects of this study. We also warmly thank the 10 speakers who kindly agreed to participate in this experiment, despite the discomfort of the noisy situations.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

