@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Preliminary investigation into sources of uncertainty in quantitative imaging features

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Features measured at end-of-exhale phase did not significantly differ from T20 to T90.


                        
                        
                           
                           Features are highly correlated between end-of-exhale phase and average images.


                        
                        
                           
                           The impact of tube voltage on features may not be statistically significant.


                        
                        
                           
                           The impact of tube current modeled as Gaussian noise was statistically significant.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Several recent studies have demonstrated the potential for quantitative imaging features to classify non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients as high or low risk. However applying the results from one institution to another has been difficult because of the variations in imaging techniques and feature measurement. Our study was designed to determine the effect of some of these sources of uncertainty on image features extracted from computed tomography (CT) images of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) tumors. CT images from 20 NSCLC patients were obtained for investigating the impact of four sources of uncertainty: Two region of interest (ROI) selection conditions (breathing phase and single-slice vs. whole volume) and two imaging protocol parameters (peak tube voltage and current). Texture values did not vary substantially with the choice of breathing phase; however, almost half (12 out of 28) of the measured textures did change significantly when measured from the average images compared to the end-of-exhale phase. Of the 28 features, 8 showed a significant variation when measured from the largest cross sectional slice compared to the entire tumor, but 14 were correlated to the entire tumor value. While simulating a decrease in tube voltage had a negligible impact on texture features, simulating a decrease in mA resulted in significant changes for 13 of the 23 texture values. Our results suggest that substantial variation exists when textures are measured under different conditions, and thus the development of a texture analysis standard would be beneficial for comparing features between patients and institutions.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths both globally and within the United States [1]. Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounts for 85% of all lung cancer cases [2]. Survival rates in NSCLC have remained low despite progress in imaging and treatment techniques over the past forty years [1]. This problem is compounded by the substantial variability in outcomes among patients of the same stage or risk-group which can make choosing the optimal treatment strategy for any individual patient difficult. Because of these well-known statistics, a variety of research avenues have been explored to produce novel methods of predicting patient outcome or individualizing patient treatment. One method that has recently garnered a lot of attention is the use of image texture analysis to classify patients as high or low risk before they begin treatment.

Texture analysis is a computational method that assigns quantitative values to medical images of tumors. Textures are designed to assess the amount of heterogeneity or identify the patterns within a region of interest(ROI) [3,4]. As a result, tumors with higher or lower values than a chosen threshold can be grouped and the results correlated to patient outcomes in order to predict survival. Several groups have demonstrated the usefulness of this technique in NSCLC [5,6,7,8,9,10]. Taken together, these studies suggest image texture analysis may in future play a large role in the identification of patients with worse prognosis or high risk factors. This could substantially alter the way we select treatment regimens for NSCLC patients and potentially increase observed survival rates.

One obstacle to applying this technique in a clinical setting is the large level of uncertainty in whether features measured at different institutions can be fairly compared. Major sources of uncertainty for features measured from CT images of tumors encompass everything from imaging parameters (such as tube current, tube voltage, exposure, reconstruction algorithm, pixel dimensions, slice thickness, and CT manufacturer) to patient specific factors (such as motion artifacts and tumor size), to variations in feature measurement (such as ROI delineation, software, feature parameters, and pre-processing filters). Identifying the impact of each of these factors is nearly impossible due to the scale of the task and the fact that a ground truth does not exist for quantitative imaging features the way it might for histology or other imaging goals. However, a few of these factors could be controlled for if we knew that these factors have a substantial effect on extracted texture values. For example, while many studies have used textures measured from the entire tumor volume, certain studies used only the largest cross-sectional tumor slice [6,11]. Whether the results from one technique can be applied to tumors delineated with the alternative technique is not known. Similarly, studies have not previously been conducted on the effect the choice of breathing phase for ROI delineation may have on an individual patient's measurement. It is also still not well understood how the choice of imaging parameters affects the values measured. Because imaging parameters are known to vary from institution to institution, current texture studies are limited to local patients imaged with the same technique. The only study attempting to probe this question found that tube voltage variations had a larger effect on measured values than changes in tube current when textures were measured from a water phantom [12]. However it is not known if this same relationship applies to heterogeneous images such as actual patient tumors.

Our study was designed in order to begin to investigate these specific issues and suggest guidelines for the comparison of texture values obtained under different or unknown conditions.

@&#METHODS@&#

For this study, the 4D computed tomography (CT) thoracic scans of 20 patients with stage III NSCLC were obtained. These images are routinely collected as part of the radiation therapy treatment planning process. They are non-contrast images, as is routine in radiation therapy clinics. These images were selected because of the large number of published results demonstrating that image features calculated from non-contrast CT images may be used to predict patient outcomes [5,6,9,11,13], and because these images are taken prior to radiation therapy treatment, so are readily available at the time when radiomics predictions would be most useful. All patients were part of an institutional review board approved clinical trial and had signed consent forms allowing the use of their medical images in future research. Patient characteristics are shown in Table 1
                        . The results of two ROI selection conditions (breathing phase and slice vs. whole volume) and two imaging parameters (peak tube voltage and tube current) were investigated.

Texture features were measured with our texture analysis program, Imaging Biomarker Explorer Software V1.0β (IBEX) [14]. This program is an open source platform for the calculation of texture features from various modalities that provides the user with substantial flexibility in their choice of texture parameters and allows for the isolated testing of each individual feature. IBEX can be downloaded from http://bit.ly/IBEX_MDAnderson.

Before the calculation of each feature, the ROIs were further refined by a thresholding procedure, which removes voxels above and below a defined CT number range. This pre-processing step was completed to reduce contouring variability, remove air cavities, and better define the solid tumor. A lower threshold value of −150 Hounsfield Units (HU) and an upper threshold of 200HU were used.

Several categories of features were calculated including shape-based features, intensity histogram based features, co-occurrence based features [3], neighborhood intensity difference matrix features [4], and filtered features [5]. A complete listing of the extracted features and the selected parameters are shown in Table 2
                        .

To study the effect the choice of breathing phase had on texture values, the 4DCT image sets for the twenty patients were used. In 4DCT imaging, the tumor is imaged over the course of several respiratory cycles [16]. The images are then reorganized to create a full CT scan at ten evenly spaced time points during the cycle to remove motion artifacts [16]. We label the ten image sets corresponding to different phases of the breathing cycle as T0, T10, T20, …T90. These ten different phases are also averaged to create a new image set, referred to as Taverage (Tavg).

For each patient in this study, the ten respiratory phase image sets and the Tavg image set were imported into IBEX. Then the gross tumor volume (GTV) contour from each patient's treatment plan was copied onto each of their image sets. This ROI was adjusted if needed in IBEX to account for shifts in tumor location due to the respiratory motion. Each texture was measured on each image set resulting in eleven values for each individual patient. A Wilcoxon signed-rank test was used to compare the texture values from each phase and from Tavg to the values from the end-of exhale (T50) phase images. The Benjamini–Hochberg correction factor was used to control for the false discovery rate [17]. A p-value less than 0.05 was considered significant. All statistical analyses were performed using the R software package (version 3.0.2).

To investigate whether texture values calculated from the largest cross-sectional tumor slice correlated to measurements of texture from the whole tumor, the T50 phase images were used. For each patient, a 2D contour was drawn on each individual slice of their T50 image set. The 2D contours were traced along the original GTV contours from the treatment plan. For example, a patient whose tumor originally spanned 10 slices would now have 10 new 2D contours, one on each axial slice, along with their original 3D contour. The ROI containing the largest number of pixels after pre-processing was considered the largest cross-sectional tumor slice. A Wilcoxon signed-rank test with the Benjamini–Hochberg correction was conducted to compare the texture values measured from the largest cross-sectional tumor slices with those measured from the entire tumor volume. A p-value less than 0.05 was considered significant. The spearman correlation coefficient was also calculated for each feature to determine if the largest slice values were correlated with the entire tumor volume values. A correlation value greater than 0.85 was considered significant.

A simple image-manipulation algorithm was designed to simulate the intensity changes that occur in patient tumor images when the peak tube voltage changes. This algorithm was coded in MATLAB (The MATHWORKS Inc, Natick, MA). For input it requires DICOM images acquired at 120kV and the desired scan voltage for conversion. It offsets the image array by adding the quantity from Table 3
                         to the HU of each pixel and outputting the converted DICOM images for texture analysis.

The values in Table 3 were determined through a process diagrammed in Fig. 1
                        . First, the published material composition of five common tumor types [18] were used as input to the online XCOM: Photon Cross Sections Database by NIST [19]. XCOM uses the atomic composition of a material and a selected monoenergetic beam energy to calculate the expected linear attenuation of the material. This tool allowed us to predict how CT intensity values of tumors might change with different tube voltage and thus different amounts of attenuation. The results showed that for each of the five tumor compositions, the CT values were predicted to decrease with increasing beam energy. Knowing this, we imaged the Gammex-RMI tissue characterization phantom model 465 (Gammex Inc., Middleton, WI) four times using our institutional parameters (tube current of 300mA, slice thickness of 2.5mm, and rotation time of 0.5s) and a peak tube voltage of 80, 100, 120, or 140kV on a simulation CT (Discovery ST; GE Medical Systems, Milwaukee, WI). The Gammex phantom is made of cork and includes inserts of various tissue materials. On the resulting images, ROIs were defined for each of the fifteen rod inserts on an image slice taken at the center of the rods to avoid partial volume effects. The mean Hounsfield Unit (HU) and standard deviation for each region was calculated using ImageJ (U.S. National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland). The mean HU value for each of the tissue materials was plotted against peak tube voltage. The perceived trends (designated as either increasing or decreasing with increasing tube voltage) were compared to the predicted trends for the five tumor types. Of the original 15 materials, 3 had the same trend as the tumors (decreased CT values with increasing kV) and were selected for further study. The effective atomic number, Z
                        eff, for these three materials was calculated and compared to the Z
                        eff for the actual tumors. Water and liver had very similar Z
                        eff values, so both were tested to see which created simulated images of the Gammex phantom at different beam energies with values closest to the measured values, see Table 4
                        . The liver simulation produced values closer to the measured values of scans at various kV, Fig. 2
                        . This tissue became the basis for the image manipulation algorithm that alters DICOM images to simulate them being acquired at different beam energies.

The twenty T50 patient scans used in part one were input to this simulation function to output three simulated scans per patient—one at 80kV, one at 100kV, and one at 140kV. All four scans were then imported into IBEX and the original GTV contours from the treatment plans were copied to each image set. The same texture features listed in Table 1 were used for this analysis with the exception of the shape features since they would by definition show no change.

To evaluate the effect a change in kV had on texture values, the intra and inter patient variability were compared using an ANOVA analysis with a Benjamini–Hochberg correction. A value of p
                        <0.05 was considered significant.

To investigate the effect the choice of tube current has on measured texture, a methodology similar to the one described for tube voltage was used. The RMI Gammex tissue characterization phantom was again imaged with a simulation CT (Discovery ST; GE Medical Systems, Milwaukee, WI). This time the phantom was imaged five times using the institutional scanning parameters (kV of 300kV, slice thickness of 2.5mm, and rotation time of 0.5s) but the current was changed on each scan to 100, 150, 200, 250, or 300mA. The same ROIs as before were used in ImageJ to calculate the standard deviation at each tissue rod for each operating current. For each current, the standard deviations from the tissue rods were averaged and assumed to represent the amount of image noise characteristic to that tube current. Then a tube current simulation algorithm was designed in MATLAB to add varying amounts of Gaussian noise equal to the differences in these average standard deviations to DICOM images. This algorithm requires a DICOM series acquired with a tube current of 300mA and the desired lower tube current for conversion as input. For every pixel in the image series, this function adds a random number drawn from a Gaussian distribution (mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1) multiplied by the scale value corresponding to the simulated current, see Table 5
                        . The resulting image series represents a CT scan of the same patient taken at a lower tube current. The final images are output as DICOMs for texture analysis.

The same twenty patient scans, all taken on the default of 300mA, were then used as input to this simulation algorithm to output four additional simulated scans per patient: 100mA, 150mA, 200mA, and 250mA. These five scans were then imported into IBEX, where the initial physician drawn contour was assigned to each and the same texture features (Table 2) were extracted from each image. Shape features were ignored again since they would not change with the addition of noise.

To evaluate the effect a change in mA had on texture values, the intra and inter patient variability were compared using an ANOVA analysis with a Benjamini–Hochberg correction. A value of p
                        <0.05 was considered significant.

@&#RESULTS@&#


                        Table 6
                         summarizes the results of the Wilcoxon signed rank tests after multiplicity correction comparing the texture values measured from the T50 phase images to the Tavg images and the other breathing phase images (T0–T90). Of the 28 total features, 12 were significantly different when they were measured from the Tavg versus the T50 phase images. The 12 significantly different features included at least one from every category but shape. Features measured from phases closer in time to T50 were less likely to be significantly different. Thus T20–T90 had no feature that was significantly different from the value in the T50 images while T0 had two and T10 had 3 significantly different features.

The results of the Wilcoxon signed-rank test comparing the texture values calculated from the whole tumor to the values from the largest cross-sectional tumor slice are shown in Table 7
                        . The shape features were left out of this analysis because of the inherent difference between a 2D and 3D analysis. Of the remaining 23 features, 8 were significantly different including at least one from every feature category. However, filtered SD, entropy, and uniformity were never significantly different regardless of the filter size.

The spearman correlation coefficients between the 3D tumor values and the largest 2D cross-section tumor slice values are also shown in Table 7. Of the 23 features, 14 had a correlation greater than 0.85.

An ANOVA analysis was used to compare the variation between the simulated scans for each patient and the variation between patients. For every feature, the intra-patient variations measured from the simulated tube voltage images were significantly less than the inter-patient variations, Table 8
                        .

The impact of the choice of tube current on patient textures was also analyzed using an ANOVA analysis. The intra-patient variations due to tube current were significantly less than the inter-patient variation for only ten features. These included entropy, correlation from the COM, and 8 features measured after filtration. The within-patient variation for the other features could not be shown to be significantly different from the between-patients variation.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

From our analysis, the choice of phase did not result in statistically significant differences in values. However, comparing texture values from the T50 and Tavg image sets did result in significant differences for half of the features, including one from each category except for shape. We suggest either the end-of-exhale (T50) or Tavg phase be used in future studies for consistency with already published results. Several features (standard deviation, kurtosis, skewness, all of the shape features and all of the medium or coarsely filtered features) never significantly varied with phase or Tavg. These features could potentially be the most representative of patient tumors since they appear to be less susceptible to motion or noise in the image.

Approximately one-third of the features, 8 out of 23, showed significant differences when measured from the largest cross-sectional tumor slice compared to the entire tumor. However, the largest slice values were highly correlated to the values from the entire tumor volume for more than half the features when a spearman correlation coefficient was measured. This suggests that though the specific values may change substantially when they are measured from one 2D slice versus the entire 3D volume, the relative amount of heterogeneity remains the same. Thus using a value derived from only the largest cross-sectional tumor slice could be representative of the entire tumor. However, because the absolute value of a texture measured only from the largest cross-sectional tumor slice is often significantly different from the value measured from the entire tumor, the method used should remain consistent throughout a study. There is also still a risk that using only the largest cross-sectional slice could limit the effectiveness of a study as the particular choice of slice may play a substantial role in the final value for a patient. A selected cross-sectional tumor slice could alternatively highlight or ignore areas of heterogeneity and might overlook the importance of regional differences in the tumor. From these results we conclude that largest cross-sectional tumor slice analysis may be an effective substitute for whole tumor analysis for many features, but may still lead to erroneous conclusions. We recommend whole tumor analysis be used when possible to avoid this potential source of error. An alternative approach would be to calculate the texture for multiple slices, independently, and use those for the subsequent modeling.

Our results indicate that the choice of the peak tube voltage does not influence the measured texture significantly. This suggests that data acquired under different beam energies could perhaps be combined for a texture study. However while these results are optimistic, it should be noted that our algorithm to simulate patient data acquired at a lower or higher tube voltage is very simplistic. It is based largely on comparisons to projected values for tumors acquired using the NIST calculator which assumes a monoenergetic beam. This differs from the polyenergetic beams used during CT scans and thus it is possible that actual tumor tissue would respond differently to changes in the beam quality. A fully comprehensive model that accounts for multiple beam energies is beyond the scope of this initial project. However, we believe our technique while simple is still indicative of the trends we could expect and serves as an interesting first look at the susceptibility of textures to a change in tube voltage. Additionally, while the exact values predicted by the NIST calculator for tumors is unlikely to be correct for actual patient scans, the direction of change with increasing beam energy is unlikely to change. Based on this assumption we built our model on values from actual tissue samples that exhibit changes in that same direction, i.e. decreasing with increasing kV, and with similar Z
                        eff values to create a rough approximation. All of the measured shifts in magnitudes for the two tissue samples imaged with different beam energies were small and thus it is unlikely that tumors would exhibit substantially larger shifts with beam energy. If larger or more sporadic shifts do occur for patients imaged at different tube voltages, it is unlikely that they would have a greater impact than the large differences created by tube current and would instead fall somewhere in between our results for the tube voltage and tube current simulations. Thus the results from the tube current simulation may act as a better worst case scenario for texture analysis. Thus, we suggest that, within sensible limits, kV may not need to be restricted for these non-contrast CT scans, although further validation is recommended.

When patient data was simulated for low tube current values, only a few textures had an intra-patient variation that could be shown to be statistically different from the inter-patient variation. Of these ten features, eight were from the filtered category including all of the coarsely filtered textures. It may be that these features are less susceptible to noise than features measured from a histogram or the COM. These results suggest that an increase in noise can remove the subtle differences in texture values between patients. Thus, comparing datasets acquired at different tube currents could lead to meaningless results. Additionally, texture values obtained at lower tube currents may be misleading and represent the amount of noise in the image rather than actual morphological differences between patients. We recommend texture values obtained under different tube current conditions are not compared. One caveat to this conclusion is that the model we used to simulate patient data taken at a lower tube current is highly simplified. To simulate a lower tube current, we added Gaussian noise to the patient images, however actual images acquired at a lower tube current include non-Gaussian noise as well. Simulating the non-Gaussian noise inherent to CT images is a non-trivial task and beyond the scope of this study. However it is likely that it would result in even larger variation between patient images and thus fail our tests as well–so a more accurate model is not likely to change our conclusions. Thus, CT images taken with a range of tube currents (or patient dose) should be avoided.

One of the biggest limitations of this study was the small number of patients used (N
                        =20). It is possible that this small sample size limited the power of our analyses, and we may only have been able to find statistical significance for large effects. However this may have also helped to keep our results fairly conservative. The minimum meaningful effect sizes for texture analysis are likely to vary from feature to feature and are difficult to predict without a clinical relationship such as overall survival. As more studies are conducted and we obtain a better understanding of the physical or genomic characteristics that lead to significant differences in texture values, it will become easier to identify the minimum change in each feature that may have a clinically significant impact.

In this study we have attempted to determine whether some common differences in imaging techniques and feature extraction methods have a significant impact on texture values. However, it should be noted that this study was not exhaustive and other sources of uncertainty still exist. These include a wide variety of other imaging parameters such as the reconstruction algorithm or CT manufacturer or choices in feature pre-processing such as smoothing filters. Other sources may include the software used for texture analysis since many subtle parameters, such as bin size for histogram based features, can be selected by the user or set automatically by the software. The choice of software may also limit the features which can be studied, for example we did not include wavelet-based features which may have prognostic potential because they are not yet implemented in IBEX [9,20]. Very little is known about why features may correlate with outcome and what the biological underpinning for the observed relationships may be. Thus it is difficult to determine how these uncertainties in the features are likely to influence phenotyping, tumor classification, or predicted patient outcomes. For now, it should be clear that if significantly different texture values are obtained from the change of one parameter such as tube current, then this parameter should be kept as consistent as possible in a study and its value should always be clearly stated in the published results in order to allow other groups to build or validate that work. Features that are less susceptible to small variations such as tube current may be more useful for multi-institutional studies because they require less supervision, although this possibility would have to be evaluated from an independent study.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

Several studies have suggested that image texture analysis may be a useful tool for identifying non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients at high risk for poor survival. Before this technique can be clinically implemented, the effect of different approaches to measuring texture and of different imaging parameters must be analyzed to ensure features can be reliably and consistently evaluated. This paper investigated the susceptibility of texture features to four variables and may serve as a guide to other groups interested in the use of texture analysis. Our results showed that (1) texture features were not dependent on the choice of breathing phase (T0–T90), but that values from Tavg images varied significantly from T50 image values; (2) textures obtained from 3D volumes were not well approximated by using only the largest 2D cross-sectional slice but were highly correlated; (3) texture may not be significantly affected by the choice of peak tube voltage used for imaging; and (4) texture is affected by a decrease in tube current. Based on our results we recommend that a texture analysis standard be developed to enable accurate comparison of features between patients and institutions.

We have no conflicts of interest to disclose.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENT@&#

Xenia Fave is a recipient of the AAPM and RSNA Doctoral Fellowship. Molly Cook is a recipient of the AAPM Summer Undergraduate Fellowship.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

