@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Dynamic state of water molecular displacement of the brain during the cardiac cycle in idiopathic normal pressure hydrocephalus

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We evaluated the changes in displacement during cardiac cycle using q-space analysis.


                        
                        
                           
                           The changes in displacement were significantly higher in iNPH than in other groups.


                        
                        
                           
                           Brain parenchymal water was easily displaced beyond intrinsic displacement in iNPH.


                        
                        
                           
                           Change in displacement in cardiac cycle was influenced by compliance and loading.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Magnetic resonance imaging

Diffusion weighted imaging

Idiopathic normal pressure hydrocephalus

q-space

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The predictive accuracy of iNPH diagnoses could be increased using a combination of supplemental tests for iNPH. To evaluate the dynamic state of water displacement during the cardiac cycle in idiopathic normal pressure hydrocephalus (iNPH), we determined the change in water displacement using q-space analysis of diffusion magnetic resonance image. ECG-triggered single-shot diffusion echo planar imaging was used. Water displacement was obtained from the displacement probability profile calculated by Fourier transform of the signal decay fitted as a function of the reciprocal spatial vector q. Then maximum minus minimum displacement (delta-displacement), of all cardiac phase images was calculated. We assessed the delta-displacement in white matter in patients with iNPH and atrophic ventricular dilation (atrophic VD), and in healthy volunteers (control group). Delta-displacement in iNPH was significantly higher than those in the atrophic VD and control. This shows that water molecules of the white matter in iNPH are easily fluctuated by volume loading of the cranium during the cardiac cycle, due to the decrease in intracranial compliance. There was no significant correlation between delta-displacement and displacement. The delta-displacement and the displacement do not necessarily yield the same kind of information. Delta-displacement demonstrated to obtain biophysical information about fluctuation. This analysis may be helpful in the understanding physiology and pathological condition in iNPH and the assisting in the diagnosis.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Normal pressure hydrocephalus (NPH) has been characterized as a chronic communicating hydrocephalus in elderly patients with the clinical triad gait disturbance, dementia, and incontinence [1–3]. The clinical symptoms of both secondary and idiopathic NPH (iNPH) can be reversed by the removal of the accumulated cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) [3]. Secondary NPH can result in subarachnoid hemorrhage, trauma, and stroke. Although numerous investigations have attempted to clarify the underlying mechanism of and to diagnose iNPH, its exact causes remain poorly understood. The CSF tap test is one of the major supplemental tests for the diagnosis of iNPH; this test has a high positive predictive value of successful shunting, but is not sufficient to diagnose iNPH because of its low sensitivity in predicting surgical outcomes [4]. Other supplemental tests are used to diagnose iNPH, including external lumbar CSF drainage, the lumber infusion test, intracranial pressure monitoring, the aqueductal CSF stroke volume, and intracranial compliance measurements using a phase-contrast cine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) [5–11]. However, several problems remain in terms of the iNPH diagnostic criteria and the selection of appropriate patients for shunt surgery [13]. Marmarou et al. suggested that the predictive accuracy of iNPH diagnoses could be increased using a combination of supplemental tests for iNPH besides conventional X-ray computed tomography and MRI [3].

In contrast, Alperin et al. developed a hemodynamic-independent analysis to evaluate the mechanical coupling of vascular pulsations to spinal CSF, i.e., intracranial compliance analysis [12]. Arterial flow into the cranium induces venous CSF movement and spinal cord displacement during the cardiac cycle. Subsequently, the intracranial volume loading during the cardiac cycle is derived from the differences between the cranial inflow and outflow at each time point during the cardiac cycle. The intracranial compliance expresses the ability to buffer the rising intracranial pressure with an increase in intracranial volume loading. Miyati et al. reported that in iNPH, the intracranial compliance was low [11].

In a previous study, the apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) changes during the cardiac cycle (delta-ADC) were observed to synchronize with the volume loading [14]. This change in ADC during the cardiac cycle explained that the water molecules in intracranial tissues were moved by the systolic volume loading force. Moreover, in iNPH, the delta-ADC of the cerebral white matter increased in association with the decrease in intracranial compliance [15]. However, compared with ADC (mm2/s), a more appropriate dimension for analyzing the change in water diffusion is displacement (μm). The diffusion distance of water molecules was acquired by q-space imaging [16]. This measurement enabled researchers to noninvasively provide information about intracranial tissue geometry [17]. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the dynamic changes in regional water molecule displacement in the brain during the cardiac cycle (delta-displacement) in iNPH, using q-space analysis. These findings may improve our understanding of the physiology and pathological conditions of iNPH and help to diagnose in iNPH as a supplemental tool.

@&#METHODS@&#

Delta-displacement analysis was performed in patients with iNPH (12 men and 4 women; 77.6±4.15 years), atrophic ventricular dilation (VD) with an Evans index value greater than 0.3 (atrophic VD; 7 men and 4 women; 72.9±9.29 years), and in healthy volunteers (control; 4 men and 6 women; 71.9±6.98 years), using a 1.5-T MRI system (Gyroscan Intera; Philips Medical Systems International, Best, The Netherlands). The criteria for iNPH selection were based on clinical evidence from clinical examinations, brain imaging, and CSF tap tests, according to the Japanese guidelines [18]. All patients with iNPH showed improvement after CSF tap tests, according to symptom analyses after lumbar punctures and CSF removal. All patients with iNPH had the clinical symptoms, and positive CSF tap test result, while the atrophic VDs did not have any clinical symptoms and underlying diseases. The all images in the patients with iNPH were acquired before CSF tap tests. The purpose and procedures associated with our investigations were fully explained to all patients, and the studies were performed only after obtaining informed consent from each patient. This study was approved by the institutional review board of our institution.

Electrocardiogram (ECG)-triggered single-shot diffusion echo planar imaging (EPI) was performed to obtain diffusion-weighted images (DWI) for each b-value during the cardiac cycle. The signal decay was fitted using the exponential curve as a function of the b-value. Subsequently, we converted data from the fitted exponential curve into the reciprocal spatial vector q, defined as Eq. (1)-based curve:
                           
                              (1)
                              
                                 
                                    q
                                    =
                                    
                                       
                                          γ
                                          G
                                          δ
                                       
                                       
                                          2
                                          π
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        where γ is the gyromagnetic ratio, δ is the duration of the pulsed gradients, and G is the amplitude of the diffusion gradients.

We increased the data points as a function of the reciprocal spatial vector q, using interpolation and extrapolation processes to reduce the truncation artifacts in the subsequent Fourier transform and improve the resolution. Hence, the extrapolated maximum q value was 7941mm−1. The displacement probability profiles were obtained by performing a Fourier transform on the resulting curve with regard to the q for each pixel. The full width at half-height was used to calculate the mean water molecule displacement from these profiles on a pixel-by-pixel basis. The delta-displacement was calculated from the entire cardiac phase on a pixel-by-pixel basis, using the following equation:
                           
                              (2)
                              
                                 
                                    Delta-displacement
                                    =
                                    
                                       displacement
                                       
                                          max
                                       
                                    
                                    −
                                    
                                       displacement
                                       
                                          min
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     

In this equation, displacementmax and displacementmin represents the maximum and minimum displacement values during the cardiac cycle, respectively (Fig. 1
                        ). Moreover, the delay time of peak displacement during the cardiac cycle was also calculated on a pixel-by-pixel basis. We assessed delta-displacement, displacement, and the delay time of peak displacement value in frontal white matter. To obtain the inherent water diffusion data in the intracranial tissues, the diastolic phase displacement value was measured [19]. The region of interest (ROI) was manually defined only in the frontal white matter and excluded the periventricular high intensity area in b0 image, since the white matter areas excepting the frontal lobe were extremely small in the iNPH and atrophic VD cases. Therefore, we evaluated only the frontal white matter to avoid a partial volume effect. Moreover, Nakamura et al. reported that only ADC in the white matter was changed by volume loading [14]. Each value represented the estimated average of both deep white matter areas greater than 50mm2 (Fig. 2
                        ).

The DWIs for each b-value at the basal ganglia level were obtained using ECG-triggered multi-phase single-shot diffusion EPI, which is largely insensitive to motion. However, single-shot EPI alone cannot completely eliminate the bulk motion effect of the brain parenchyma because of the long data-sampling window. These artifacts may still be visible, even in a single-shot EPI image [20]. Therefore, single-shot EPI was combined with the parallel imaging, half-scan, and rectangular field-of-view (FOV) techniques to minimize this effect [21]. The trigger delay was set at regular intervals (30ms) from the R-peaks (15–32 cardiac phases). The total imaging time depends on the heart rate. The other scanning parameters were set at an echo time of 83ms, imaging matrix of 64×62, FOV of 256mm, flip angle of 90°, parallel imaging factor of 2, half-scan factor of 0.6, slice thickness of 2mm, average of 2 signals, b-factors of 0, 500, and 1000s/mm2, and three orthogonal oblique diffusion directions; the pulsed gradient duration and time separation between the leading edges of these gradients, i.e., diffusion time, were 28.6 and 48.7ms, respectively.

The Kruskal–Wallis test for unpaired samples was used to determine the significance in delta-displacement and displacement between each group. Furthermore, the linear regression analyses were used to determine the relationships between displacement and delta-displacement for each group, respectively. The level of significance was set at P
                        <0.05.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The signal to noise ratio of DWI was reached a sufficient level for the q-space diffusion analysis. The geometric distortion of DWI was almost invisible, because of the use parallel imaging, half scan, rectangular FOV, and small matrix size. Fig. 3
                      shows the delta-displacement values of the frontal white matter in patients with iNPH and atrophic VD and individuals in the control group. Delta-displacement values of the iNPH group were significantly higher than those of the atrophic VD and control groups (P
                     =0.0068 and 0.0003, respectively), whereas there was no significant difference in the delta-displacement between the atrophic VD and control groups (Figs. 3 and 4
                     ).


                     Fig. 5
                      shows the displacement values of the frontal white matter in patients with iNPH and atrophic VD and individuals in the control group. There was no significant difference in displacement between the groups (Figs. 5 and 6
                     ).

The relationships between the white matter delta-displacement and displacement in the control, iNPH, and atrophic VD groups are shown in Fig. 7a–c. There were no significant correlations between the delta-displacement and displacement in any group.


                     Fig. 8
                      shows that there were no significant differences in the delay times of peak displacement value during the cardiac cycle between the groups.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

There are several unsolved problems associated with iNPH in terms of the diagnostic criteria and selection of appropriate patients for shunt surgery. Moreover, there is a need to clarify the pathological physiology of iNPH and to develop a more reliable supplemental diagnostic test to provide scientific evidence for the diagnostic criteria [3]. Therefore, we noninvasively assessed the delta-displacement in cases of iNPH and atrophic VD, which sometimes have features similar to conventional images in iNPH. This paper is a first report to assess the change in diffusion distance of water molecules during the cardiac cycle.

Q-space analysis required the long diffusion time and the short gradient duration time as possible for measurement of various different size of structure. Because it is necessary that the measured water molecules are sufficiently restricted diffusion by structure walls [16]. However, Latt et al. reported that it is possible to obtain the geometric information under the violation of long diffusion time and short gradient duration time [22]. Moreover, Bar-Shir et al. demonstrated that the result of q-space analysis gave a diffusion distance and geometric information using mixture of various micro-cylinder in clinical scanner [23]. The q-space diffusion analysis can be performed and obtained the microstructural information under clinical MRI condition. Moreover, the high signal to noise ratio of DWI resulted from the small phase dispersion during the short diffusion time. Hence, the good imaging quality was obtained for q-space analysis without spending too much scan time. We considered that our q-space analysis was appropriate in this study and clinical use.

The important finding was that the delta-displacement was significantly higher in iNPH cases than in atrophic VD and control cases. This result agreed with those of Ohno et al. [15], who reported that the high delta-ADC in iNPH was caused by the decreased intracranial compliance [6,11]. Greitz et al. demonstrated that brain pulsation was induced by arterial expansion, compressed the cerebral ventricles and veins, and displaced the spinal cord during the cardiac cycle, and consequently, volume loading occurred periodically [24]. Since the temporal ADC change was significantly synchronized with the volume loading [14], it was inferred that the water displacement at systolic phase was the peak value in all cardiac phases. This was consistent with the results of the delay time of the peak displacement during the cardiac cycle in many cases of each group. Namely, the change in displacement during the cardiac cycle was a close relationship with the volume loading. The brain parenchymal water molecules at systole were displaced beyond the intrinsic diffusion displacement of the brain parenchyma. In other words, the water molecules were fluctuated periodically during the cardiac cycle, due to the volume loading [15]. A lower intracranial compliance condition decreases the ability to buffer the rising intracranial pressure with an increase in intracranial volume loading. Under the iNPH condition, the intracranial compliance was decreased, due to the small compensatory faculty of intracranial pressure [8]. Moreover, it has been widely recognized that in iNPH, the white matter is characterized by a reduced regional cerebral blood volume, particularly in the frontal lobe [25–27]. Nevertheless, the driving force, i.e., blood volume, was small [25–27] and the delta-displacement was significantly higher in iNPH cases than in atrophic VD and control cases. The intracranial tissue in iNPH easily transferred the volume loading force, because of its low capacity to buffer the volume loading force compared with that in atrophic VD. Therefore, the water molecules in iNPH were much displaced and fluctuated by the pulsatile volume loading force [15]. There was no significant difference in delta-displacement between the atrophic VD and control cases. This could be explained by the fact that the intracranial compliance did not change in the atrophic VD and control cases [11]. This result represented that the degree of fluctuation during the cardiac cycle in the iNPH cases differed from that in the atrophic VD and control cases. Stated another way, the relationship between the displacement change and the volume loading change during the cardiac cycle was associated with the transfer characteristics of the pulsatile volume loading force to the intracranial tissues. In contrast, there were no significant differences between the displacement values in each group. The displacement result shows that the intrinsic diffusion displacement of the brain parenchyma was no significant difference in each group. The displacement in this study was higher than that in other researches [17,28,29]. We used 0, 500, and 1000 b-factors to obtain the high quality DWI. Therefore, analyzed displacement values may include much information about free diffusion besides that about restricted diffusion. Moreover, there was no significant correlation between the displacement and delta-displacement in each group. These results indicated that displacement and delta-displacement do not necessarily yield the same information. Namely, the change in water molecular diffusion during the cardiac cycle, i.e., delta-displacement, was principally influenced by the intracranial compliance and the intracranial volume change, rather than the intrinsic diffusion displacement in white matter in iNPH.

Our study had some limitations, including the small samples of iNPH and atrophic VD patients. We recommend that further investigations be conducted with larger samples. As previous stated, the change in displacement during the cardiac cycle was varied by the complex relationship with the regional intracranial compliance, and various factors. Thus, it was difficult to fully explain that the delay time of peak displacement result had large amount of variation, because the delta-displacement analysis was no compared with other analyses. The forthcoming studies should conduct a simultaneous intracranial compliance, flow analyses, and magnetic resonance elastography for regional tissue property. The phantom analyses also are planned to change those parameters that cannot be easily changed in a controlled fashion in humans, e.g., intracranial compliance and volume loading. Furthermore relationships between delta-displacement and blood pressure, and medication effect should be investigated to clarify the mechanism of water fluctuation in human. Despite these limitations, delta-displacement analysis can provide information about biomechanical properties of the regional brain tissues. Therefore, our results may contribute to the research on iNPH mechanism verification and help to diagnose iNPH as a supplemental tool.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

In this study, we evaluated changes in displacement during the cardiac cycle. This was the first study to evaluate fluctuations during the cardiac cycle using q-space analysis. A delta-displacement analysis demonstrated the collection of new biophysical information about water fluctuation during the cardiac cycle. This analysis may facilitate an understanding of the physiology and pathological conditions associated with iNPH and could assist with the diagnosis of iNPH.

None of the authors have any conflicts of interest associated with this study.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

We are grateful for valuable discussions with Dr. Noam Alperin (Department of Radiology, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA). This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI (24601009).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

