@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Automated contrast medium monitoring system for computed tomography – Intra-institutional audit

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We evaluated a RIS-PACS-connected system for contrast medium (CM) monitoring.


                        
                        
                           
                           CM injection parameters for 8609 CT studies were systematically retrieved.


                        
                        
                           
                           Data related to patient, CT study and technical issues were also recorded.


                        
                        
                           
                           The system has the potential to improve CT protocol optimization and harmonization.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Computer applications

Contrast agents

Contrast dose

RIS/PACS

Audit and standards

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The aim of this study was to analyze the usage and the data recorded by a RIS-PACS-connected contrast medium (CM) monitoring system (Certegra®, Bayer Healthcare, Leverkusen, Germany) over 19 months of CT activity. The system used was connected to two dual syringe power injectors (each associated with a 16-row and a high definition 64-row multidetector CT scanner, respectively), allowing to manage contrast medium injection parameters and to send and retrieve CT study-related information via RIS/PACS for any scheduled contrast-enhanced CT examination. The system can handle up to 64 variables and can be accessed via touchscreen by CT operators as well as via a web interface by registered users with three different hierarchy levels. Data related to CM injection parameters (i.e. iodine concentration, volume and flow rate of CM, iodine delivery rate and iodine dose, CM injection pressure, and volume and flow rate of saline), patient weight and height, and type of CT study over a testing period spanning from 1 June 2013 to 10 January 2015 were retrieved from the system. Technical alerts occurred for each injection event (such as system disarm due to technical failure, disarm due to operator's stop, incomplete filling of patient data fields, or excessively high injection pressure), as well as interoperability issues related to data sending and receiving to/from the RIS/PACS were also recorded. During the testing period, the CM monitoring system generated a total of 8609 reports, of which 7629 relative to successful injection events (88.6%). 331 alerts were generated, of which 40 resulted in injection interruption and 291 in CM flow rate limitation due to excessively high injection pressure (>325psi). Average CM volume and flow rate were 93.73±17.58mL and 3.53±0.89mL/s, and contrast injection pressure ranged between 5 and 167psi. A statistically significant correlation was found between iodine concentration and peak IDR (r
                     
                        s
                     
                     =0.2744, p
                     <0.0001), as well as between iodine concentration and iodine dose (r
                     
                        s
                     
                     =0.3862, p
                     <0.0001) for all CT studies. Automated contrast management systems can provide a full report of contrast use with the possibility to systematically compare different contrast injection protocols, minimize errors, and optimize organ-specific contrast enhancement for any given patient and clinical application. This can be useful to improve and harmonize the quality and consistency of contrast CT procedures within the same radiological department and across the hospital, as well as to monitor potential adverse events and overall costs.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Iodinated contrast media (CM) are the most widely consumed drugs by hospitals in imaging procedures around the world. As other pharmaceutical products, iodinated CM are not completely devoid of risk and may therefore be associated with adverse reactions, which can be classified as non-renal and renal [1]. Non-renal adverse reactions (incidence 0.5–1% [2–4]) are CM dose-independent and can be classified as acute (occurring within 1h of CM administration), late (occurring 1h to 1 week after CM administration) and very late (occurring more than 1 week after CM administration) [1]. On the other hand, renal adverse reactions are commonly referred to as contrast-induced nephropathy (CIN) (average incidence of 5% [5–9]), also called contrast-induced acute kidney injury (CI-AKI), defined as an increase in absolute values of 0.5mg/dL or an increase of 25% in serum creatinine levels from baseline within 72h of exposure to intravascular CM that is not attributable to other causes [10,11]. CIN is associated with several patient- and procedure-related risk factors, including impaired renal function and cardiovascular diseases, large doses of CM, and multiple CM administrations within a few days [1].

From a healthcare management standpoint, the steady increase of computed tomography (CT) studies has been paralleled by a higher average usage of iodinated contrast material [2], raising cost effectiveness and ethical issues related to patient care. Moreover, the ability of newer CT scanners to cover larger body volumes within seconds (which is key especially for CT angiography applications, requiring accurate timing between the CT acquisition and CM enhancement peak) has highlighted the need for optimization of CM injection protocols in terms of iodine delivery rate, volume, and overall iodine dose [12].

For such reasons the development of software tools for CM monitoring in daily practice has gained primary importance, yet automated contrast injectors have long been disconnected from RIS-PACS networks, making it impossible to systematically track contrast injection data unless manually recorded and retrieved outside the RIS-PACS. To this purpose, dedicated platforms for CM monitoring have recently become available that integrate data from power injectors with RIS-PACS and other information systems.

The aim of this study was to raise operators’ awareness on the optimization of CM usage through intra-institutional auditing of injection protocols. In this setting, CM data were systematically recorded using a CM monitoring system connected to our RIS-PACS infrastructure over 15 months of CT activity, and injection parameters related to different protocols were compared in an attempt to minimize errors, as well as to improve and harmonize injection protocols through dedicated training.

The CM monitoring system used in this study was a commercial contrast monitoring device (Certegra®, Bayer Healthcare, Leverkusen, Germany) connected to two dual syringe power injectors (Medrad Stellant®, Bayer Healthcare, Leverkusen, Germany), each associated with a 16-row (Aquilion 16, Toshiba Medical Systems, Tochigi, Japan) and a high definition 64-row multidetector CT scanner (CT750 HD, General Electric, Milwaukee, WI), respectively.

Each power injector is connected to a dedicated workstation on which the Certegra® system is installed. This platform allows managing injection-related parameters through the injector according to a specific CT protocol, as well as sending and retrieving CT study-related information via RIS-PACS (Fig. 1
                        ) [13].

The CM monitoring system software is composed of multiple modules, each dedicated to collecting data related to a specific step of contrast injection. Each module is described in the following subsections.

The following two main tasks are performed by the Certegra® Informatics Platform Application Entity (AE):
                           
                              •
                              collect and match patient and study information with injection data (automatically and/or manually).

generate a DICOM (Digital Imaging and COMmunication in Medicine) secondary capture image containing a visual report of injection data to be archived into the PACS.

Patient and study context information can be obtained in different ways depending on the flavor of Certegra® Informatics Platform product installation available [14]. In our implementation (Patient Worklist Based Matching), the Certegra® Informatics Platform sends a C-FIND message to the RIS to obtain the scheduled procedure worklist from the Scheduler using the Modality Worklist Information Model. The list of patient schedules is shown to the user on a touchscreen interface (Fig. 2
                              ) [14]. The user can select a CT study from the Modality Patient Working List (MPWL) displayed on the touchscreen interface, including several non-modifiable fields related to patient demographics (such as patient name, ID, gender, date of birth, accession number as well as study description, study ID, and study date), which are all required to perform the procedure. As a second step, the operator can enter additional, optional information through the touchscreen interface related to the CT study (e.g. technologist ID, injection site, catheter gauge, and free-text notes) and the contrast agent used (type and iodine concentration). Further so-called “auxiliary” information (such as contrast medium lot, vial volume, and expiration date) can be filled in through the touchscreen or a web interface before or after injection. Additional patient-related details relevant to tailoring contrast injection to every single patient and diagnostic query can be entered, such as patient weight and height (Fig. 3
                              ).

The final step of injection planning consists in the selection of contrast injection parameters (i.e. volume and flow rate of contrast and saline flush, as well as injection delay), with the possibility to select the most suitable protocol for the patient under examination. To this latter purpose, it is possible to select a predefined injection protocol out of a maximum of 256.

Once the CT procedure has been completed, the CM monitoring system can retrieve from the injector the scheduled as well as the effective CM injection parameters, which may differ from the former in case transient events have occurred (e.g. flow rate limitation due to excessively high injection pressure). Therefore, effective volume and flow rate of delivered CM and saline flush, peak flow rate and peak injection pressure, and potential transient events (such as flow limitation or interruption) are recorded. Certegra® sends a Q/R C-FIND message to the CT modality for study matching and obtains Study Context information (Fig. 2).

The software can handle up to 64 variables, of which 16 related to the MPWL and 48 to the injector (Fig. 4
                              ). All parameters are physically stored in the workstations connected to each single injector having performed the procedure. Since the system only relies on local storage per single injector, systematic backup of injection data is performed to minimize the risk of information loss. Backup data can also be encrypted and stored on a separate hard drive as a further safety measure.

Upon completion of the procedure, the system sends the PACS a C-STORE message to obtain data matching (Fig. 2). If this latter is successful, a visual single-page report with the most relevant injection-related information is generated and archived onto the PACS as a DICOM secondary capture (Fig. 5
                              ).

The system allows to visually display CM injection parameters and to perform a descriptive data analysis through a web interface.

Web services are only reachable via local network with a personalized account, and logged-in users can access the database stored on local IT platforms connected to each single injector with the possibility to query/retrieve and statistically analyze contrast injection data sorted by:
                                 
                                    •
                                    Patient: Patient ID, Patient Name, and/or Patient Date of Birth

CT examination date: start and end date (for a given time range)

Study: Accession Number, Study ID, and/or Study UID

Contrast medium: users can specify Contrast Brand, Concentration, Lot Number, Vial Volume, and/or Expiration Date

Injection: Technologist ID, Injection Site, Protocol Name, Catheter Gauge, Total Iodine Delivered, and/or Atypical Events.

Access to the CM monitoring software is managed by 3 hierarchy levels for registered users, defined as follows:
                                 
                                    •
                                    Level 1 (Viewer): this user can access all information related to the procedures and has the privilege to generate and export data records, but cannot add nor edit data

Level 2, Manager: this user has the same rights as the Viewer, and can also add or edit some system data

Level 3, Facility IT: this is the highest rank user and has the right to manage all information stored in the data base, supervise other users’ privileges, set up the system and fix potential issues. However, this user has no access to Protected Health Information (PHI), including patient information such as name, ID, gender and date of birth.

CT examinations were divided into three main categories, including chest-abdomen-pelvis CT, coronary CT angiography, and non-coronary CT angiography studies. For each category, CT acquisition parameters are summarized in Table 1
                        .

Data related to CM injection parameters (i.e. iodine concentration, volume and flow rate of CM, iodine delivery rate [IDR] and iodine dose, CM injection pressure, and volume and flow rate of saline), patient morphometry (i.e. weight and height), and type of CT study over a testing period spanning from 1 June 2013 to 10 January 2015 were retrieved from the CM monitoring system. Technical alerts occurred for each injection event (such as system disarm due to technical failure, disarm due to operator's stop, incomplete filling of patient data fields, or excessively high injection pressure), as well as interoperability issues related to data sending and receiving to/from the RIS/PACS were also recorded.

Continuous variables (including volume and flow rate of CM, IDR and iodine dose, CM injection pressure, and volume and flow rate of saline) were expressed as mean±standard deviation. CM injection pressure values were expressed in terms of pounds per square inch (psi), as displayed on the system interface. The correlation between iodine concentration, peak IDR, and iodine dose for all CT studies was calculated using the Spearman rank test. A p-value less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Statistical analysis was carried out using software (GraphPad Prism v. 5, www.graphpad.com).

@&#RESULTS@&#

During the testing period, the CM monitoring system generated a total of 8609 reports. Successful injection events were recorded in 7629 out of 8609 patients (88.6%) (i.e. completed without disarm due to technical failure, disarm due to operator's stop, or incomplete filling of patient data fields).

Over the entire testing period, a total of 715,130mL of contrast medium and 251,953mL of saline flush were used for the 7629 injections, with an average of 93.73±17.58mL of contrast medium and 33.02±9.57mL of saline per patient, ranging from a minimum of 30mL in a coronary CT angiography study to a maximum of 150mL in a 152kg patient for a chest-abdomen-pelvis CT study.

Analysis of injection parameters revealed an average peak CM flow rate of 3.53±0.89mL/s, ranging from a minimum of 0.42mL/s in a pediatric patient to a maximum of 9.21mL/s for a coronary CT angiography examination in an obese patient, corresponding to a peak injection pressure of 5 and 167psi, respectively. A statistically significant correlation was found between iodine concentration and peak IDR (r
                     
                        s
                     
                     =0.2744, p
                     <0.0001), as well as between iodine concentration and iodine dose (r
                     
                        s
                     
                     =0.3862, p
                     <0.0001) for all CT studies (Tables 2 and 3
                     
                     ).

The reports related to chest-abdomen-pelvis CT examinations were collected in 6497 patients, revealing an average CM volume of 95.28±15.85mL and an average saline flush volume of 31.4±8.36mL injected at an average flow rate of 3.39±0.77mL/s.

Considering the huge study population, average CM volume values were stratified based on patient weight into 5 classes. Average CM volumes classified by patient weight are reported in Table 4
                        .

A total of 155 coronary CT angiography studies were counted. Patients had an average weight of 79.5±18.35kg and an average height of 170.91±10.46cm, and received an average CM volume of 69.70±20.62mL injected at a flow rate of 5.78±1.23mL/s, corresponding to a relatively low pressure peak of 166.9±90.72psi. Such combination of a relatively high flow rate for optimal enhancement of the coronary arteries and low injection pressure was possible owing to the use of large bore iv catheters for CM injection (≤18 Gauge, allowing a flow rate as high as 9mL/s) and CM preheating (Table 5
                        ).

529 non-coronary CT angiography studies were performed. Such studies were divided into two main categories (CT angiography of the thoraco-abdominal aorta and peripheral CT angiography, including upper and lower limb vessel CT angiography studies) and classified based on patient weight. Injection parameters are summarized in Tables 6 and 7
                        
                        .

The system reported 331 alerts:
                           
                              •
                              40 technical alerts with exams interruption:
                                    
                                       -
                                       36 injector disarm events: disarm by users for any procedural problems.

1 communication loss event: communication between injector and console was lost, probably due to mechanical interruption of optical fiber communication or low battery level Fig. 6
                                          .

1 stalling and disarm due to a stall condition: whenever a technical problems occurred, the injector made up to three attempts to complete the examination, then the injection was stopped and the injector stalled (disarm due to a stall condition) (Fig. 7
                                          ).

2 disarms due to excessively high fluid pressure (>325psi): the system locked after three attempts to reduce the excess pressure (Fig. 8
                                          ).

Five technical alerts included multiple minority alerts due to high fluid pressure (2 disarm due to a high fluid pressure+2 high fluid pressure, 1 disarm due to a stall condition+1 high fluid pressure, 2 injector disarm+2 transient high fluid pressure).

291 minority technical alerts not compromising the procedure:
                                    
                                       -
                                       High fluid pressure: the injector was able to perform the injection, but reduced the flow to prevent stalling and disarming (Fig. 9
                                          ).

These minority alerts occurred whenever injection pressure exceeded the limit of 325psi and were more common at the beginning of our testing period due to the use of relatively narrow-bore iv catheters (20G) for CT angiography studies and/or not preheated CM. This issue was fixed using large bore iv needles (18G) whenever scheduled CM flow rate exceeded 3.5mL/s and preheating CM.

Technical issues related to data mismatch between the RIS/CT equipment and the CM system occurred that did not invalidate workflow.

In overall 319 reports the system wrongly filled in the “Study Description” field. In particular, in 185 cases the system erroneously filled the DICOM field of the Study Description with the Application Entity Title (AET) of our RIS, so that the acronym EBIT was erroneously displayed. In the remaining 134 reports, the code numbers 255-1426 and 255-1429 (related to the RIS AET) were reported instead of the proper Study Description.

Such issues have been fixed with the introduction of an updated software release.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The dramatic increase in the number of CT studies over the last decade and the increasing awareness about inherent biological risks to patients from CT have led to a growing commitment from professional users and vendor communities to develop tools for monitoring CT activity. Most of this effort has been focused on radiation dose records due to the increased radiation exposure from CT on a population level [15–17]. Recently, some vendors have developed solutions that can monitor and archive contrast dose too. Indeed, although iodinated contrast media are generally safe, their use poses some risks and can even be problematic on some occasions. The most common risks are hypersensitivity reactions and contrast-induced nephropathy, but more recently it has been shown that CM could amplify DNA damage caused by ionizing radiation [18–20]. For these reasons, the usage of dedicated software may contribute to increase patient safety by enabling optimization of CM protocols.

Systematic CM monitoring has some advantages. Firstly, in follow-up CT studies radiologists can quickly check injection parameters of previous examinations, which can be helpful to improve image quality for a given diagnostic query, maximize reproducibility and reduce the likelihood of errors. Secondly, the possibility to look for previous CM injection-related adverse events may be key to identify patients at risk and take appropriate actions in advance. Thirdly, the prompt availability of procedure-related information stored into the PACS can be relevant in case of legal proceedings.

Robinson et al. had used Certegra® to gauge discrepancies between scheduled and effective values of CM dose and flow rate [21], while to our knowledge, this is the first paper aimed to assess all its available monitoring capabilities. In our work, the fact that a high overall number of CM variables (550,976) could be analyzed without any data loss shows that, despite some technical issues, the system is reliable. Data retrieval was quick and easy, allowing complete managing of all information related to CM injection both before and following procedures.

The availability of such a huge amount of data allowed to perform a systematic analysis of contrast-enhanced CT studies in the perspective of optimizing CM protocols. The first problem radiologists have to face is the choice of the right amount of CM depending on the specific clinical task and patient peculiarities, such as age, sex, clinical condition, etc.

The most common formula used to calculate CM volume takes into account the patient's total body weight (TBW), based on the assumption that TBW correlates with blood volume, resulting in higher contrast enhancement with lower TBW and vice versa [12]. However, relying upon TBW only may lead to an overestimation of delivered iodine dose in obese patients and an underestimation in patients with high lean body weight (such as in pediatrics), as body fat is less vascularized (i.e. has a lower blood distribution volume) than muscle tissue or visceral organs.

For this reason, a multiparametric approach has been proposed in the literature to size contrast medium volume and flow rate as a function of contrast agent properties [22–24] (such as iodine concentration), CT scan factors [12,25,26], and patient-related parameters (such as lean body weight [27–29], body fat percentage (BFP) [30] or body surface area [31,32], as well as cardiac output [33]).

In order to standardize radiologist/technologist behavior and to avoid any unjustified variation of CM amount for the same patient category, the Certegra® platform is equipped with the P3T plugin (Personalized Patient Protocol Technology), allowing operators to individually optimize contrast protocols based on patient body weight, type of CM, injection speed, CM/saline ratio, and scan delay [34]. However, as previously mentioned, this plugin has the limitation of taking into account patient body weight only, which partly limits its accuracy.

In perspective, the possibility to sort CT examinations by study and patient category could allow to derive optimal patterns of CM injection for specific classes of patients and CT studies. This can be useful to find the most appropriate injection parameters to optimize vascular and/or parenchymal contrast enhancement in the various diagnostic scenarios.

Another potential application of the system is a systematic multiparametric statistical analysis of all CM injection-, patient- and CT study-related variables, which can be stored in and retrieved from the PACS with the possibility of auditing image quality and overall costs related to contrast-enhanced CT examinations performed in a radiological department.

Our study has some limitations. Firstly, it was performed in a single center with only two CT scanners, which may partly limit the generalizability of our findings, though this latter event seems to be unlikely due to the high number of CT studies collected from many different patients and performed by a relatively wide range of technologists and radiologists working in a tertiary care center (24 technologists and 20 radiologists). Secondly, we did not assess the technologists’ performance on an individual basis (which would have allowed us to monitor the behavior of any single technologist and track performance variability and individual error rates), as this was beyond the scope of this preliminary study due to the large amount of additional data that should have been stored and analyzed. Thirdly, some technological limits of the system prevented the correct registration of all contrast injection incidents such as system disconnection, subcutaneous injections or reactions to CM. For instance, in case of mechanical disconnection or CM extravasation the system simply marks the event as disarm by the user, but does not give any explanation regarding the cause of the interruption. Fourthly, the system lacks a dedicated section to contrast reactions or other specific adverse events, which must be annotated manually by the user in an all-purpose free text dialog box. This latter process is quite time-consuming and error-prone and prevents such important information from being directly searchable through the system database, thus increasing the risk of data loss. Finally, the system currently lacks an interactive control system allowing to automatically retrieve the CM injection parameters of previous studies in patients undergoing follow-up CT examinations (which may be useful to reduce variability among CT studies on the same patient) and does not allow to use previously acquired data to guide planning of future CT studies in patients with similar features. On the other hand, we believe that periodic auditing of CM injection protocols may play a significant role in preventing future errors if coupled with dedicated training of technologists and radiologists, which has already proved effective with institutional programs on CT radiation dose optimization [35,36].

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

Our findings show that the usage of an automated CM management system can provide a full report of contrast use with the possibility to systematically compare different contrast injection protocols, minimize errors, and optimize contrast enhancement for any given patient and clinical application. This can be useful in order to improve and harmonize the quality and consistency of contrast CT procedures within the same radiological department and across the hospital, as well as to monitor potential adverse events and overall costs.

In perspective, data provided by automated tools for contrast injection monitoring could be integrated into dedicated structured reports for better communication and traceability. More generally, we believe that this new technology can be a valuable resource for systematic benchmarking inside the same department as well as among different radiology centers.

None.

None.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

