@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Imaging results of multi-modal ultrasound computerized tomography system designed for breast diagnosis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We designed the multi-modal ultrasound tomography system for breast diagnosis.


                        
                        
                           
                           We present imaging results of a breast biopsy phantom structure and a wire sample.


                        
                        
                           
                           We show quantitative transmission ultrasonic images and qualitative reflection ones.


                        
                        
                           
                           We compare our method with CT, MR mammography and US with good result.


                        
                        
                           
                           Our system can be used as diagnostic tool for breast screening in vivo.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Breast imaging

Breast cancer

Ultrasound computed tomography (USCT)

Ultrasonic B-mode imaging (US)

Computed tomography (CT)

Magnetic resonance (MR) mammography

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Nowadays, in the era of common computerization, transmission and reflection methods are intensively developed in addition to improving classical ultrasound methods (US) for imaging of tissue structure, in particular ultrasound transmission tomography UTT (analogous to computed tomography CT which uses X-rays) and reflection tomography URT (based on the synthetic aperture method used in radar imaging techniques). This paper presents and analyses the results of ultrasound transmission tomography imaging of the internal structure of the female breast biopsy phantom CIRS Model 052A and the results of the ultrasound reflection tomography imaging of a wire sample. Imaging was performed using a multi-modal ultrasound computerized tomography system developed with the participation of a private investor. The results were compared with the results of imaging obtained using dual energy CT, MR mammography and conventional US method. The obtained results indicate that the developed UTT and URT methods, after the acceleration of the scanning process, thus enabling in vivo examination, may be successfully used for detection and detailed characterization of breast lesions in women.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The most widely applied diagnostic tests used for early detection of breast cancer lesions currently include palpation (manual), X-ray mammography, ultrasonic B-mode imaging (US), and magnetic resonance (MR) mammography [1]. In the case of suspected malignancy of the breast cancer, cytology or histopathological examination is performed on material obtained through biopsy. There are other diagnostic methods which can be used for preventive examinations of breast, such as [2]: elastography (USE), thermography, electrical impedance tomography (EIT), single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) and positron emission tomography (PET). In particular, ultrasound transmission tomography (UTT) and reflection tomography (URT) may be used for imaging and early detection of neoplastic lesions of female breast [2–7]. Recently, several research centres around the world (including the Laboratory of Ultrasound Technology at the Chair of Acoustics and Multimedia at the Faculty of Electronics, Wroclaw University of Technology) carry out work to build a prototype of the ultrasound computer tomography device for breast screening imaging tool in women (with the ability of in vivo scanning, measuring, data acquisition, image reconstruction and processing) [2–12]. The design, operation and imaging methods of each device are specific and varied.

The group of Nebojsa Duric and others (Karmanos Cancer Institute, Detroit, USA) [4] has developed the Computed Ultrasound Risk Evaluation (CURE) prototype with the vertical moved ring-shaped ultrasonic transducer array (consisting of 256 elements used ultrasound frequency of 1.5MHz), which surrounds female breast submerged in a water tank. The CURE system is capable to provide two types of UTT images (the speed of ultrasound and the ultrasound attenuation), and two types of URT images performed by migrating the time-dependent signals and their envelopes.

The group of Nicole Ruiter and others (Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany) [5,9,10] is working on 3-D Ultrasound Computer Tomograph (USCT) in two versions, with the sparse-aperture 3-D ultrasonic transducer array of a cylindrical shape [9], and a semi-ellipsoidal shape [10]. Both of these systems are equipped with many advanced assembled transducer array systems (TAS) [5,9]. The 3-D USCT I system consists of 48 transducer arrays arranged equidistantly in three parallel circles on the inner cylindrical aperture filled with water. Each array consists of eight transmitter- and 32 receiver-transducers. The aperture can be rotated to increase the number of transducer positions. The 3-D USCT II is equipped with 628 ultrasound senders and 1413 receivers, grouped into 157 transducer array systems, mounted at the inner semi-ellipsoidal surface of the measurement basin [10]. The aperture can be rotated and lifted in arbitrary steps. Pulses of 2.4MHz center frequency are applied for both USCT systems. The USCT systems can operate with the same imaging modalities as the CURE prototype.

The group of Michael Andre, Steven Johnson, James Greenleaf and others (TechniScan, Inc., Salt Lake City, USA) [6] has developed clinical prototype of Computerized Volumetric Ultrasound System (CVUS) consists of a circular water tank with the tri-arm containing the linear transmitter array, the linear receiver array (with 1536 elementary transducers operating at a frequency of 1MHz), and the three linear reflection arrays (with 192 elements) focused at 2.5, 4 and 7.5mm and operate at a frequency of 6MHz [6,12]. The scanner can provide data in both transmission and reflection mode using several imaging arrays. All arrays are mechanically rotated describing a full circle. The transmission mode data are acquired with two arrays (the transmission and the receiving one) facing one another at opposite sides of the tank and operating at a nominal center frequency of 1MHz. The data were used for constructing tomographic images of speed of ultrasound. The reflection mode data are acquired with three arrays located at approximately 45°, 90° and 135° from the transmitter array.

The group of Vasilis Marmarelis, Jeong-Won Jeong and others (Alfred E. Mann Institute for Biomedical Engineering of University of Southern California, Los Angeles, USA) [11] has developed an experimental prototype of the High-resolution Ultrasonic Transmission Tomography (HUTT) system, which employs transmit-receive pairs of linear ultrasonic arrays by which the data collection is performed in transmission mode over successive elevation planes. The arrays are rotated around and moved vertically along an examined breast submerged in a water tank. In order to reduce scanning time, several elementary transducers of the transmitting and the receiving array are simultaneously activated. The concept of orthogonal coding (code-division multiplexing) is utilized to alleviate problems arising from cross-talk between different transmit-receive elements. Because of wide band ultrasonic transducers, which operate at 8MHz center-frequency, the HUTT system provides a set of 2-D tomographic images (termed multi-band images) corresponding to the various frequency bands of interest at each elevation plane. This set of images provides the potential capability of “multi-band” analysis of the constituent parts of the image for the purpose of tissue differentiation.

This paper presents and analyses the results of ultrasonic tomography transmission imaging of the internal structure of the female breast biopsy phantom CIRS Model 052A (designed to train biopsy assisted with ultrasonic B-mode imaging) and the results of the ultrasonic tomography reflection imaging of the wire sample cross-section. Imaging was performed using a multi-modal ultrasound computerized tomography system developed with the participation of a private investor [8]. The results were compared with the results of imaging using dual energy CT (X-ray Computed Tomography), MR mammography, and conventional US method (B-mode scanning). Such comprehensive comparison is hard to find in the world-wide literature, because of difficulties associated with measurements of the same phantom using different expensive imaging systems with different scanning methods, in different locations. It requires the cooperation of several medical and technical centers. Particular aspect of novelty in our paper is to present the possibility of ultrasound tomography imaging in comparison to other known and used methods in relation to the breast tissue examination. The advantages of our system is very good compromise between high quality images and simple and short scanning time, fast data acquisition, signal processing and image reconstruction, as well as ultrasonic transducer array and electronics are not so expensive and not very difficult to mass production. Our methods, algorithms and system have been developed since 1993. Finally, a very important advantage is multi-modality, which can be realized using the same electronics: three UTT sub-modalities [7,8], URT modality, classical real-time US imaging from sectors around breast cross-section and automated full angle ultrasound spatial compound imaging (FASCI) [13].

Block diagram of the developed multi-modal ultrasound computerized tomography system is shown in Fig. 1
                        .

Circular array of piezoelectric transducers [14,15] with the internal diameter of 260mm (Fig. 2
                        ) is the main element of the multi-modal ultrasound computerized tomography system. Piezoceramic transceiver transducers (in the shape of narrow pillars), which are evenly distributed on the inner side of the 1024 array attachment ring, are stimulated when transmitting by short rectangular pulses with a length of one to several cycles, a frequency of about 2MHz and an amplitude of about 60 Vpp by the voltage amplifier circuit and demultiplexer system. The pulse generator is controlled from a PC via GPIB. The multiplexer and low noise receiver amplifier receive signals passing through the tested media (immersed in distilled water and placed inside a ring of the circular array) and signals reflected in their structure. Received signals are recorded by the computer using a digital data acquisition card. Transmission tomography images of sections of the internal structure of the examined medium are reconstructed using the appropriate software with implemented algorithms for measuring the acoustic parameters of the ultrasonic pulse after passing [2,7] (in particular, its time of flight [16]). Reflection tomography images of sections of the internal structure of the examined medium are reconstructed using the appropriate software with implemented algorithms determining the sampled envelope of reflected signals. The final reconstruction of transmission images is achieved by the modified algorithm of the filtered back-projection and the final reconstruction of reflection images—by algorithms used in the methods of synthetic aperture focusing (SAF) [17,18].

In the UTT modality one transmitting transducer runs in one of 1024 measurement sequences, emitting an ultrasonic wave pulse, and at the same time there are a few hundred (usually half) of receiving transducers, located symmetrically on the opposite side in the ring of the circular array relative to the transmitting transducer (see Fig. 3a), in operation. In the URT modality, during one of 1024 measurement sequences, one transceiver transducer generates an ultrasonic wave pulse and receives the signal of returning echoes in the time corresponding to the passage of the ultrasonic wave through a distance of about a double inner diameter of the circular array filled with water (Fig. 3b). Ultimately, signals reflected for each of the 1024 transmitting sequences in the URT modality will be registered simultaneously by at least 257 receiving transducers including the transmitting one, located symmetrically, 128 on each side, around it (STA—synthetic transmitting aperture method [19]). Switching of transmitting and receiving transducers is controlled by the computer through an USB port. Measurements are carried out in distilled water which fills the interior of the circular ultrasonic array, using a holder (shifted base) allowing precise vertical movement of the examined object. A complete measurement of one section of the object structure (for a fixed vertical position of the holder) using multi-modal ultrasound computerized tomography system currently lasts about 10–15min for the UTT modality and about a minute for the URT modality. The total measurement time of one section for the two modalities in the currently tested device prototype has been reduced to no more than one second as the result of parallel acquisition and received signal processing, as well as the use of fast FPGA chips. The time of optimized image reconstruction of one section of the examined object will not exceed a few milliseconds.

Breast biopsy phantom CIRS Model 052A (Fig. 4
                        ) has been chosen for ultrasound transmission tomography examination. This phantom simulates the average values of acoustic parameters of tissue found in female breast for training the biopsy needle assisted by ultrasonic B-mode imaging [20]. The size (150:120:70mm, volume 600cm3) and shape of the phantom simulate a woman's breast in the supine body position. Phantom is made of Zerdine™ tissue-mimicking gel which contains liquid and solid inclusions imitating lesions in the form of suitably cysts and nodules (solid mass).

Ultrasonic wave propagation speed in Zerdine™ gel is about 1500–1540m/s depending on the temperature [20,21]. CIRS Model 052A phantom contains six amorphous (non-spherical shapes) green inclusions of sizes 8–15mm imitating cysts and six amorphous black inclusions of size 6–12mm imitating nodules (solid lesions). The location of inclusions in the phantom is random, undefined by the manufacturer. The advantage of the phantom, when considering its use for transmission tomography examination in water, is its smooth surface which minimizes the weakening of the ultrasonic wave at the oblique incidence, low ultrasound attenuation in the structure of the phantom, small difference in the speed of ultrasound in the phantom gel and in solid and liquid inclusions, as well as the diversity of acoustic impedance values (the product of the speed of ultrasound in the medium and its density). The difference in the speed of ultrasound should allow the quantitative visualization of sections of inclusions in UTT images. The variations in the acoustic impedance allow the qualitative visualisation of inclusions using standard ultrasonic B-mode imaging. In the case of breast imaging in vivo, the capability of precise quantitative measurement of ultrasound speed in the sectional areas of breast can be successfully used to distinguish between various types of lesions (cysts, benign tumour, malignant tumour) [22]. For example, Yang et al., measuring the tissue fragments in vitro using precision techniques showed that the average speed of ultrasound in the tissue with the malignant tumour was 1560m/s, while the speed range in the surrounding normal tissue was 1404–1450m/s [23].

A wire sample consisting of seven objects, which are highly reflecting and scattering the ultrasound—aluminum and steel nails and screws with known and suitably varying diameters (Fig. 5
                        ), was used for the ultrasound reflection tomography studies.

Mean values of acoustic parameters of aluminum, steel, iron and water at 20°C under normal atmospheric pressure (P
                        =101.325Pa) are summarized in Table 1
                         
                        [24].

Ultrasound pressure reflection coefficient from the boundary of two media (designated 1 and 2, respectively) at the normal incidence can be determined from the following formula:
                           
                              (1)
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       R
                                       ′
                                    
                                    =
                                    
                                       p
                                       r
                                    
                                    /
                                    
                                       p
                                       i
                                    
                                    =
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             Z
                                             2
                                          
                                          −
                                          
                                             Z
                                             1
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    /
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             Z
                                             2
                                          
                                          +
                                          
                                             Z
                                             1
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        where, p
                        
                           i
                        —acoustic pressure of the incident wave, p
                        
                           r
                        —acoustic pressure of the reflected wave, Z
                        1—acoustic impedance of medium 1 and Z
                        2—acoustic impedance of medium 2. The values of this ratio of water/aluminum and water/steel boundaries, respectively, are 84% and 94%. Calculations show that for the transmission of the ultrasonic wave through the cross-sections of screws and nails of the wire sample immersed in water, most of the ultrasound energy will be reflected, which should allow for accurate visualization of the location and diameter of “wires” by reflection tomography and rough imaging of their location and size using standard ultrasonic B-mode scanning.

The average speed of ultrasound in distilled water during transmission tomography examination of the breast biopsy phantom was c
                        ≈1491.63m/s (t
                        ≈23.13°C, temperature variation Δt
                        ≈±0.38°C). 28 coronal sections of the phantom were measured (the base of the phantom perpendicular to the surface of transducers of the circular array), in increments of 2mm vertically, in the range of 54mm from its base (Fig. 6
                        ). The values of projection of the ultrasonic pulse speed (converted from the ultrasonic pulse transition time between a transmitting and a receiving transducer) were measured with the high precision (about 0.01m/s), which allows to obtain a small dispersion of reconstructed local values of the ultrasound speed in quasi-homogeneous areas of tissue (less than 1m/s) for UTT modality.

Five hundred and eleven opposite receiving transducers of the circular array were used for each of 1024 sequences of the activated transmitting transducer (see Fig. 3a). The diameter of the area of the reconstructed image is 182.4mm. UTT image reconstruction was performed using the modified algorithm of filtered back-projection, assuming rectilinear propagation of ultrasonic wave on the way from the source to the detector [17,25]. The resolution of the resulting UTT images is 457×457pixels with a size of 0.4mm.

The average speed of ultrasound in distilled water during reflection tomography examination of the wire sample was c
                        ≈1480m/s. Low precision local values of the ultrasound speed in water (and inside the measured tissue cross-section) are needed to proper convert the return times of backscattered ultrasonic pulses to distances for URT modality. The cross-section of the wire sample was measured (sample base perpendicular to the surface of transducers of the circular array—see Fig. 5). Scanning was performed using classic SAF method, by activating each of 1024 transducers in a circular array as a transceiver (Fig. 3b). It was assumed that wave scattering is isotropic and sound speed in the medium is known or calculable. Reconstruction of cross-section of the wire sample was made in an area with a diameter of 130mm, using a method analogous to synthetic aperture radar (SAR) or delay-and sum beam forming techniques [26]. The location of points of the envelope of reflected signals was converted from the delay to the distance assuming the average constant speed of ultrasound in the reconstruction area c
                        =1480m/s. The resolution of the resulting URT image is 519×519pixels with a size of 0.25mm.

For comparative purposes, the internal structure of the examined breast phantom was imaged using standard methods used in breast diagnosis: MR mammography, US. Dual energy CT method was used as a reference imaging at high resolution [27].

CT and MRI examination of the breast phantom was carried out at the Department of General Radiology, Interventional Radiology and Neuroradiology of the Wroclaw Medical University Hospital, using Discovery CT 750HD (GE Healthcare) and MR Signa HDxt 1.5T (GE Healthcare) devices, respectively.

CT examination of the breast phantom was carried out according to the dual energy protocol (80keV and 140keV in single acquisition), and then secondary reconstructions of images corresponding to the energy of 75keV were obtained using dedicated software (GSI Viewer, GE Healthcare). The phantom base was positioned parallel to the gantry opening and perpendicular to the plane of the bed (Fig. 7a). CT acquisition parameters were as follows: slice thickness 0.625mm, field of view (FOV) 266mm, acquisition matrix was 512×512pixels resulting in voxel dimensions 0.52×0.52×0.625mm3.

In the conventional US method, (B-mode scanning), transverse sections of the breast phantom were imaged using linear ultrasonic probe with the operating frequency of 3.5MHz (with the Picker LS2400 device), immersed in water and moved along the phantom on a special cradle (Fig. 8
                        ) with increments of 5mm.


                        T
                        2 FSE sequences were used in MRI examination with the following parameters: repetition time T
                        
                           r
                        
                        =5000ms and echo time T
                        
                           e
                        
                        =86.968ms. The breast phantom was examined using the 8ch HD Breast Array (8-channel coil dedicated for breast imaging). The phantom was positioned in a special holder on the breast (grip), with the side surface parallel to the opening of the gantry (Fig. 7b). MRI acquisition parameters were as follows: slice thickness 5mm, field of view (FOV) 195mm, acquisition matrix was 512×512pixels resulting in voxel dimensions 0.38×0.38×5mm3.

For comparative purposes, a cross-section of the wire sample (Fig. 5) immersed in distilled water was visualized by using the conventional US method based on two different devices: LS2400 Picker device with a linear ultrasonic probe with the operating frequency of 3.5MHz and the DUS 101 mobile device with 5MHz ultrasonic mechanical sector probe, made by DRAMIŃSKI S.A. Medical Instruments Company from Poland.

@&#RESULTS@&#

UTT images corresponding to the distributions of local values of ultrasound speed were reconstructed (in shades of gray from black to white) from digitally determined values of transition time of ultrasonic pulses recorded using the developed multi-modal ultrasound computerized tomography system (Fig. 1) in individual coronal sections of the breast phantom CIRS Model 052A (Fig. 6), in the divergent geometry arrangement (see Fig. 3a). The results of ultrasound transmission tomography examinations for the selected three coronal sections of the breast phantom (in the form of images of sections and distributions of real pixel values along the selected dotted lines in the image) are shown in Fig. 9
                     .

Three images corresponding to the sections measured by UTT were selected from the set of CT images of the CIRS Model 052A breast phantom sections reconstructed in coronal planes based on measurements using Discovery CT 750HD device (Fig. 7a), and they are shown in Fig. 10
                     .

MRI images of the CIRS Model 052A breast phantom sections in sagittal planes were reconstructed based on the measurements made using MR Signa HDxt 1.5T (Fig. 7b). Images in the coronal planes were obtained from the acquired layered images in sagittal planes using multiplanar reconstruction (MPR). Three such images corresponding to sections measured by UTT and CT are shown in Fig. 11
                     .

Exemplary US images (B-mode scans) of cross-sections of CIRS Model 052A breast phantom (for setting the axis of the ultrasonic linear probe at a distances in the range of 4.5–11cm from the edge of the container, see Fig. 8) obtained using Picker LS2400 device are shown in Fig. 12
                     .

Tomographic URT image showing the boundaries of the structures reflecting and scattering the ultrasound wave (Fig. 13a) was reconstructed (in shades of gray from black to white) from digitally determined envelopes of reflected signals in the divergent geometry arrangement (Fig. 3b), registered with the developed multi-modal ultrasound computerized tomography system (Fig. 1) in the cross-section of the wire sample (Fig. 5). This image was compared with the actual cross-section of the wire sample (Fig. 13b) and its ultrasonic B-mode images obtained using the Picker LS2400 device with the linear ultrasonic probe at 3.5MHz (Fig. 14a) and the DUS 101 mobile device with the ultrasonic mechanical sector probe at 5MHz (Fig. 14b). Due to the insufficient length of the linear ultrasonic probe, which does not include the entire cross-section of the wire sample, two US images were recorded in this case, and each of them comprised screw #1 (Fig. 13b), which allowed for the proper matching and putting together.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

This chapter shows a comparative analysis of the images of the examined breast phantom that were obtained using different methods along with a discussion on the spatial and contrast resolution. The authors have not used objective descriptors for comparing pixel values of image, because they do not contribute much in this case from the point of view of diagnostic evaluation. Visualized values, e.g., around inhomogeneities, are distorted, and each quantitative parameter, which analyses the compliance of average values of pixels of compared image in predetermined areas with the reference image, shows large discrepancies, which does not mean that the structures and their sizes are not properly recognized. Furthermore, the examined phantom made of soft gel was measured at different positions (as in the case of breast examination in vivo), under various conditions (air, water), so it is impossible to provide a perfect compliance of position of tested structures—they have undergone minor shifts due to deformation of the structure of gel. In order to compare the UTT, CT, MRI, and US methods, the contrast resolution was evaluated by using standard deviation of pixel values in selected quasi-homogeneous areas of reconstructed images of the examined breast phantom.

In the case of the URT method, the accuracy of mapping the size and position of reflective structures of the wire sample was evaluated in comparison with its real cross-section. Additionally, a comparison with the classical US method was made.

The CT method was chosen in this paper in order to obtain reference images of the structure of the examined phantom with high resolution. CT method is characterized by soft tissue contrast resolution of about 0.2%. Possible spatial resolutions achieved in CT systems are about 0.2–0.3mm [28]. The differentiating parameters here are: radiological density (degree of impermeability to X-rays), and based on the Hounsfield scale, which is a linear transformation of the original measurement of the linear attenuation coefficient of X-ray. The radiodensity of distilled water at standard temperature and pressure is defined as zero Hounsfield units (HU), while the radiodensity of air at standard conditions is defined as −1000 HU [28]. In dual-energy CT imaging, the value of the linear coefficient of the beam attenuation for two different energies is checked simultaneously [27]. HU values of the examined material at a specific energy are then calculated based on this coefficient. It should be noted that any CT method is not conventionally used as an imaging diagnostic modality for women's breast evaluation due to the hardness of the radiation beam (typically 120keV), which results in too small differences in the radiation attenuation in tissues. For this reason, the imaged inclusions (Fig. 10) have sharp edges, but stand out poorly from the background (phantom gel). Fig. 15
                         shows standard deviations (SD) and average values (AVG) calculated from all pixel values in suitably selected quasi-homogeneous square areas (gel, nodule, cyst) of the CT image of the examined breast phantom section (z
                        =22mm). Contrast resolution in these areas was estimated by referencing the standard deviation to the total number of shades of gray (CR=(SD/256)100%). The average contrast resolution determined in this way is about 1.9%.

The reconstructed UTT images of the distribution of local values of the speed of ultrasound in the sections of the examined phantom (Fig. 9) are quantitative images which enable to identify the inhomogeneities in the background differing in ultrasound speed by a single m/s. The average speed of ultrasound in the phantom gel varies in the range of 1503–1507m/s. The range of variation of ultrasound speed Δc
                        ≈4m/s in gel results mainly from the instability of measurement conditions within approximately 12min (including changes in temperature, movement of the layers of water), affecting the uncertainty of the measurements.

Moreover, no corrections were applied in this case related to the location of transducers in the array ring and their varied effectiveness and sensitivity. The advantage of UTT is to visualize both continuous and abrupt changes (Fig. 9 shows the penetration of water in the phantom gel on the edges resulting in the reduction of ultrasound speed). The disadvantage of this type of imaging is the blurring of edges related to errors in estimating the size of small inclusions, and introducing errors in the speed of ultrasound in heterogeneities of small size and small differences in the speed of ultrasound in comparison with their surroundings due to the phenomenon of the multipath effect during the propagation of ultrasound wave in a heterogeneous structure [29]. The highest distortions occur at the borders of heterogeneities, due to the weakening and fading of the transmitted signal and the refraction of ultrasonic wave beam (Fig. 9). The structure of the phantom in sections shown in UTT images is very similar to the structure revealed in reference CT images–the same inclusions are visible (see Fig. 9 and Fig. 10). Lateral resolution of UTT method (density of scanning in a horizontal plane) depends primarily on the resolution of the ultrasonic array (the number, width and spacing of elementary transducers). For the 1024-element ultrasonic circular array used in this study, lateral resolution can be estimated at about 0.4mm. Assuming the longitudinal resolution of UTT imaging (axial, along the path of the wave beam) as a half wavelength for a frequency used we also obtain the value of about 0.4mm. Vertical resolution (in height) depends primarily on the density of vertical scanning (layer thickness), with a restriction resulting from the height of the transducer and it is about 5mm in this case, which can however be improved by vertical focusing (mechanical or electronic) of the ultrasonic wave beam. Such a small vertical resolution results in that UTT images show structures existing in sections a little above and below the examination plane (see Fig. 9 with Figs. 10–11). It may even turn out to be a diagnostic advantage, shortening the examination time (one can apply a larger vertical movement step of the circular array and collect fewer sections). Fig. 16
                         shows standard deviations (SD) and average values (AVG) calculated from all pixel values in quasi-homogeneous square areas (gel, nodule, cyst) of the UTT image of the examined breast phantom section (z
                        =22mm). For comparative purposes, the same areas were selected having the same size as in the case of estimating the resolution in CT images (Fig. 15). Contrast resolution was evaluated in the areas in the same manner as in the case of the CT image, as well. The average contrast resolution is about 1.9%. It should be noted that the contrast resolution of UTT significantly depends on the examined structure. The quantitative nature of the UTT image representing the distribution of local values of ultrasound speed in the examined section enables to read these values for each pixel (Fig. 18a—resolution 457×457), also with a much higher dynamics in selected small areas of the examined section, which can be reconstructed independently with the resolution not lower or slightly lower than that of the entire section (e.g., Fig. 18b—resolution of 375×375).

Calculations show that when assuming the total accuracy of the determination of the projection of the ultrasound speed of 0.01m/s (apart from the uncertainty of measurement, which may be much larger) heterogeneities can be identified in the UTT image which differ from the surrounding tissue by the value of ultrasound speed: 1m/s in size>2.3mm, 2m/s in size>1.2mm, 5m/s in size>460μm, 10m/s in size>240μm, 15m/s in size>160μm, 20m/s in size 120μm [16]. Fig. 17
                         shows the dependence of the relative UTT contrast resolution of the distribution of local values of ultrasound speed inside the structure on its size in relation to the average speed of 1540m/s in soft tissue.

Based on the UTT image of the z
                        =32mm section of the examined breast phantom, the estimate of the reconstruction accuracy of local values of ultrasound speed was made taking into account their dispersion in gel along the image line in the segment shown in Fig. 18a. This accuracy can be treated as the ultrasound speed contrast resolution (USCR). The standard deviation (SD) of the reconstructed values of ultrasound speed in this segment is 1m/s. The accuracy of the reconstruction is USCR=(SD/1540)100%=0.065%, which is consistent with the calculated results (Fig. 17). Image distortion in the form of lines of varying shades of gray (Fig. 18b) result from different parameters of the ultrasonic transducers in the circular array and fine unevenness of their location. These disturbances can be significantly minimized (before reconstruction) through the use of corrective algorithms and a median filter on the values of the sinogram [25].

MR mammography (magnetic resonance imaging of the female breast) is a method enabling the detection of even small areas in breast evaluated with a high probability as cancer in its early stages, however, it requires intravenous administration of contrast agents, therefore, the procedure cannot be safely performed in patients with renal insufficiency or allergy to the contrast agent [28]. MRI is also associated with a strong magnetic field and is contraindicated in patients with different types of ferromagnetic devices or metal implants. Magnetic resonance tomography shows the concentration of hydrogen nuclei (protons) [28], which enables to record changes in the resonance emission signals from hydrogen atoms present in the molecules of water contained in the tissues. As a result, MRI is the most suitable for the detection of diseases which cause an increase of fluids in areas pathologically changed by tumours, infections, and inflammation. Resolution of MRI images depends on the content of free protons and protons included in the macromolecules of water in the examined medium. Resolution of magnetic resonance tomography achieves the range of about 0.4–1mm. The contrast resolution of MRI images is significantly influenced by the capabilities of measuring devices (the value of magnetic induction of the magnet, the strength of gradients, the receiving system, the coil used, etc.) and the selection of scan sequence parameters [28] by the operator. Seemingly minor changes in settings of basic imaging parameters may lead to slightly different data with varying diagnostic interpretations. Despite the poorer resolution than in the case of CT images, MRI images of the examined breast phantom clearly show the same inclusions in its structure. The boundaries of the inclusions are a bit fuzzy. There was a significant problem in a test method (similar to that of breast screening in vivo) consisting in placing the phantom in a special grip for breast, angled, with the side surface parallel to the gantry opening (Fig. 7b), which involves difficulties in matching and comparing sections with other types of imaging, and the need to use multiplanar reconstruction technique. Furthermore, the cross-sectional scanning resolution of the phantom was only 5mm in this case. Fig. 19
                         shows standard deviations (SD) and average values (AVG) calculated from all pixel values in quasi-homogeneous square areas (gel, nodule, cyst) of the MRI image of the examined breast phantom section (z
                        =22mm). For comparative purposes, the same areas were selected having the same size as in the case of estimating the resolution in CT and UTT images (Fig. 15, Fig. 16). Contrast resolution was evaluated in these areas in the same manner as in the case of CT and UTT images. The average contrast resolution is about 2.8%.

Ultrasonography (US) is a routine method of breast diagnostic imaging used as a primary modality or complementary to X-ray mammography [1]. This method can also enables to distinguish between cysts and solid lesions (nodules) and is useful for assessing the location of the nodule, especially before the planned needle biopsy in young women whose breast weaving is typically too dense to allow for diagnostically reliable X-ray mammography. The use of Doppler US devices enables to evaluate the vascularity of the change, but this method cannot clearly differentiate between malignant and benign changes. Reflections of ultrasonic wave pulses on microcalcifications (with sizes from several μm) can produce signals received by the ultrasonograph, however, this does not mean that these signals will always be recognized in the US image among many other signals from the edge of fat, fibrous, glandular tissue and their heterogeneity (speckle, tissue noise) [30]. US imaging has a limited field of view, is subjective (depending on the diagnostician) and produces results of a compromise between the depth of penetration of the ultrasonic wave and the image resolution. The probability of early detection of breast cancer using US is estimated at approximately 50% [31]. In the US images of the examined breast phantom sections, heterogeneities of its structure can be recognized and cysts can be distinguished from nodules. Acoustic impedance is the differentiating parameter here. US is a quality imaging and only exposes the edges and possibly the nature of heterogeneities, without being able to quantify their characteristics. Fig. 20
                         shows the standard deviations (SD) and average values (AVG) calculated from all pixels values in selected quasi-homogenous square areas (gel, nodule) of the US image of one of the surveyed cross-sections of the breast phantom (x
                        =11mm).

Contrast resolution was evaluated in these areas in the same manner as in the case of CT, UTT and MRI images. The average contrast resolution is about 3.8%.

In order to assess the accuracy of mapping of size and location of reflective structures of the wire sample in the URT image, the actual contours of the cross-section of the wire sample (Fig. 13b) were overlapped on its URT image (Fig. 13a). Such images are shown enlarged in Fig. 21
                         for each reflective structures of the sample. Location of reflective structures in the URT image exactly coincide with their actual position, which is due to the homogeneity of the surrounding medium (water), and proper selection of the speed of ultrasound in this medium when converting time to distance. For imaging of the breast structure in vivo, reflective structures may be moved by due to the differentiation of the speed of ultrasound in their surroundings. These errors can be corrected, however, by determining individual flight times of the ultrasonic wave on the paths from each reconstructed pixel to each transducer of the circular array based on the UTT image of the distribution of local values of speed of ultrasound of the same breast section obtained earlier.

Based on Fig. 21, one can estimate that the diameters of reflective structures of the wire sample were mapped to an accuracy of about 0.3–0.5mm, except for the structure No. 1 and the structure No. 2, whose diameters were mapped as reduced by about 1–1.5mm. Reduction of diameters of structures No. 1 and No. 2 is due to the fact that they are threaded screws, and their maximum diameter was taken into account in the actual section. The resulting accuracy of the URT mapping is correlated with a half wavelength (0.4mm). This accuracy depends on the length (duration) of the ultrasonic wave pulse in the medium (axial resolution), most of all.

The location of reflective structures is mapped roughly in the obtained US images of the wire sample (Fig. 14). These errors primarily result from the assumption made in ultrasonic B-mode scanners that the ultrasound speed value for conversion of time to distance equals the mean value in the soft tissue (1540m/s), thus being higher than in water for this case (1480m/s). Moreover, it was difficult to provide exact parallel position of the surface of the US probe with respect to “wires” of the sample during the cross-section examination. Reflecting structures of the wire sample are visible in the US images, while it is difficult to accurately assess their size, or even estimate the differences in diameter (Fig. 14). Certainly, one can produce better mapping using modern ultrasonic B-mode scanners, however, due to one-sided scanning and artefacts related to the classical US imaging, it is no match to SAF and STA images [19], and in particular STA imaging using a circular array, which scans the examined object around from all directions.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

The resulting UTT, CT, MRI, and US images of the structure of the breast biopsy phantom CIRS Model 052A visualize the comparable (in the location and size) heterogeneities inside it. They are poorly differentiated with respect to the background in CT images, and somewhat clearer with fuzzy edges in MRI images. UTT images of ultrasonic speed distribution well expose the continuous and abrupt changes; however, the edges of small inclusions are a little fuzzy here. UTT image is quantitative due to the high accuracy of digital determination of the transition time of ultrasonic pulses, so it is possible to recognize the nature of breast lesion (benign or malignant) based on the values of pixels in the changed area with respect to the background, which provides significant diagnostic information. The resulting resolutions of UTT, CT, MRI and US images of examined breast phantom sections are compared in Table 2
                     . A perfect complement to quantitative ultrasonic transmission tomography (UTT) imaging of breast in vivo is an qualitative ultrasonic reflection tomography (URT) imaging which allows for visualization of the edges of even small reflective structures (walls of blood vessels, lymph vessels, fibrosis) with an accuracy of a fraction of a millimeter, which allows for imaging of tumour vasculature. Ultimately, it is possible to achieve a better resolution by shorten the duration of the pulse propagated in tissue (through the reduction of mechanical quality factor of ultrasonic transducers in a circular array). Shortening the scanning process should significantly reduce the measurement uncertainty and improve image resolution, as well. It is also possible to shorten the duration of echo in the receiving signal using coded excitation (CE) and matching filtering techniques in order to increase the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). Both images (UTT and URT) may be overlapped.

Finally, in the multi-modal ultrasound computerized tomography system at least 4 further imaging modalities will be added: UTT imaging of distribution of local ultrasound attenuation values based on measurements of changes in the amplitude of the transmitted pulses, UTT imaging of the distribution of the local values of the derivative of ultrasound attenuation with respect to frequency by measuring the frequency change of transmitted pulses [7], the classical US imaging using individual switched multi-element circular array sectors as curvilinear probes of the ultrasonic B-mode scanner, full angle ultrasound spatial compound imaging (FASCI) [32]. It is possible to obtain 3-D images of the breast for all of these modalities using maximum intensity projection (MIP) and any 2-D sections determined by using the multiplanar reconstruction (MPR) technique similar to CT.

The obtained results indicate that the developed UTT and URT methods, after the acceleration of the scanning process, thus enabling in vivo examination, may be successfully used for detection and diagnosis of breast lesions in women. UTT method combines the advantages of US (neither irradiation nor the need to use a contrast medium, and there are no contraindications such as ferromagnetic implants) with the transmission technique used in CT, thus becoming innovative and sensitive diagnostic method.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The authors would like to thank DRAMIŃSKI S.A. Medical Instruments Company for financing the research as part of a process of introducing an ultrasonic tomograph for examining women's breasts to the market.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

