@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Phantom study of an ultrasound guidance system for transcatheter aortic valve implantation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           A guidance system for TAVI using ultrasound and magnetic tacking was developed.


                        
                        
                           
                           Eliminates the use of nephrotoxic contrast and ionizing radiation.


                        
                        
                           
                           In phantom experiment, similar accuracy in deployment depth as with fluoroscopy.


                        
                        
                           
                           A new delivery tool with integrated ICE further improves deployment accuracy.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Transcatheter aortic valve implantation

Transapical

Mixed reality

Image guidance

Fluoroscopy

Echocardiography

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  A guidance system using transesophageal echocardiography and magnetic tracking is presented which avoids the use of nephrotoxic contrast agents and ionizing radiation required for traditional fluoroscopically guided procedures. The aortic valve is identified in tracked biplane transesophageal echocardiography and used to guide stent deployment in a mixed reality environment. Additionally, a transapical delivery tool with intracardiac echocardiography capable of monitoring stent deployment was created. This system resulted in a deployment depth error of 3.4mm in a phantom. This was further improved to 2.3mm with the custom-made delivery tool. In comparison, the variability in deployment depth for traditional fluoroscopic guidance was estimated at 3.4mm.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI) is a safe and effective treatment for aortic stenosis in patients unsuitable for conventional surgery [1]. As a result, this stent-based technique for delivery of a bioprosthetic valve has been used in over 40,000 patients worldwide [2]. This minimally invasive technique relies largely on single-plane fluoroscopy, with only gross structures visible [3]. In addition, the contrast agents injected into the aortic root during fluoroscopic guidance are nephrotoxic and can increase a patient's risk of acute kidney injury [4–7]. This is a major concern as many TAVI patients have underlying renal dysfunction and are more vulnerable to acute kidney injury. Furthermore, fluoroscopic imaging exposes both the patient and physicians to ionizing radiation. While the radiation dose for a single procedure is low, the cumulative radiation exposure of health care professionals at centers with a high throughput of TAVI is a concern [8].

There have been several proposed alternatives to single plane fluoroscopy that aim to improve stent placement and reduce or eliminate the use of nephrotoxic contrast and ionizing radiation, including rotational angiography, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) guidance. In rotational angiography, an intraoperative cone beam computer tomography (CT) volume is acquired by rotating a C-arm around the patient. This volume can be used to generate models of the aortic root which are overlaid on the fluoroscopy images to provide more anatomical context and can also be used to select the ideal fluoroscopy imaging plane [9]. This technique requires contrast and ionizing radiation to acquire the intraoperative CT volume and for fluoroscopy throughout the procedure. Alternatively, intraoperative MRI has been used to guide placement of the valve stent, resulting in successful implantation in animal studies [10]. Although this technique eliminates contrast and radiation exposure, intraoperative MRI is expensive and not widely available [11].

Intraoperative ultrasound provides a more attractive modality for image guidance since it does not require nephrotoxic contrast agents or ionizing radiation in addition to being inexpensive and easily integrated into surgical workflow. TEE is frequently used during TAVI procedures for assessing valve function after the stent is deployed. Intraoperative guidance using only TEE [12] and TEE with fluoroscopy (without contrast agents) [13] has been previously reported. However, TEE does not provide satisfactory imaging of the catheter or surrounding tissue due to the highly reflective surface of the catheter and resulting shadowing artifacts. For this reason, TEE has been proposed as a bridging modality allowing preoperative models to be registered into the intraoperative environment. Lang et al. [14], proposed using TEE to register preoperative CT models to fluoroscopy to improve image guidance without requiring rotational angiography. Luo et al. [8] proposed a system using magnetic tracking of the TEE and catheter to eliminate the need for fluoroscopy entirely. In this system, a preoperative model of the aortic root was registered to the tracked ultrasound. The tracked catheter could then be visualized in relation to the aortic model so that the stent could be deployed at the desired depth. One challenge of these techniques is that the registration between ultrasound and preoperative CT is difficult resulting in a target registration error of 5.9±3.2mm and 3.3±1.6mm respectively. In addition, both these works used a manual segmentation of the aorta from preoperative CT which is time consuming and difficult to integrate into clinical workflow. Previous work with mitral valve repair has found that simply defining the valve annuli from tracked TEE is sufficient for image guidance and eliminates the need for complex preoperative models and registrations with associated errors [15]. Here, a simplified guidance system using TEE and magnetic tracking is developed and validated against fluoroscopic guidance in a phantom environment. A preliminary version of this guidance system was presented in McLeod et al. [16]. In our current paper we extend the guidance system to make use of biplane ultrasound, develop a novel delivery tool and validate our methods against fluoroscopy in a phantom environment.

@&#METHODS@&#

The proposed guidance system consists of a mixed reality environment displaying real-time ultrasound along with the location of the tracked valve stent and the intraoperatively defined anatomy. In order to display the TEE images and catheter in a common frame of reference, both of these tools were magnetically tracked using the Aurora tabletop tracking system (NDI, Waterloo, Ontario). A 6 degree of freedom (DOF) magnetic tracking sensor was affixed to the Ascendra TAVI catheter (Edwards Life Sciences, Irvine, California) just below the balloon with the cable running inside the outer sheath of the catheter. The iE33 ultrasound system with an X7-2t TEE probe (Philips Healthcare, Andover, MA) was used and is capable of providing 2D, biplane and live 3D imaging. A second 6 DOF sensor was integrated into a custom-made cap that attaches to the TEE probe and calibrated using a Z-bar phantom. Once the valve was crimped onto the catheter, it was calibrated by inserting it into a tracked calibration block designed to hold the catheter shaft and valve in a precise configuration with the leading edge of the valve resting against a ledge inside the calibration block (Fig. 1
                        ).

The aortic valve can be defined intraoperatively by selecting points on the aortic valve in the tracked biplane ultrasound. These points, along with a tubular spline outlining the valve, are displayed in the guidance system and a targeting plane is then created at the ideal deployment depth. The remaining distance from the catheter to this plane is displayed numerically and the targeting plane changes color to indicate when the ideal deployment depth is reached (Fig. 2
                        ). When visible in the echo image, other pertinent anatomy including the coronary ostia can also be displayed in the guidance system.

One limitation of relying on mixed reality guidance is the lack of adequate imaging during deployment. In conventional procedures, live fluoroscopy video provides feedback to monitor deployment and fine tuning the position of the stent as the balloon is inflated. The image quality of TEE is very poor once the catheter and stent have entered the aortic valve, limiting its usefulness at this stage of the procedure. To overcome these issues a custom-made stent delivery tool with integrated ultrasound imaging was created for transapical procedures. The delivery tool contains a channel through which an intracardiac echocardiography probe can be inserted. The ICE probe acquires images through an acoustic window in the shaft of the tool. The prosthetic valve is positioned so that it partially covers the ICE transducer. This ensures that the leading edge of the stent will be visible in the ultrasound image. Calibration is performed using a similar method to the one used for the tracked catheter. The delivery tool is placed inside a calibration block with the leading edge of the valve resting against a ledge in the block. However, this calibration block is half open to accommodate the delivery tool and a tracked needle is used to locate the tip of the delivery tool so that both the tool and the valve may be tracked and visualized in the guidance system (Fig. 3
                        ).

The tool itself was manufactured through rapid prototyping, using VeroWhite material on an Objet30Pro printer (Stratasys, Eden Prairie, MN), and contained a channel for an AcuNav10F ICE catheter (Siemens, Erlangen, Germany). The outer diameter of the shaft was 14mm to accommodate the fragility of the rapid prototyping material. In comparison, the TAVI introducer used in conventional transapical procedures is 10mm in diameter and other transapical tools are of similar sizes. For instance, the Neochord (Neochord, Eden Prairie, MN) is a rigid tool being used successfully for mitral valve repair and is approximately 9mm diameter. The diameter of the delivery tool could easily be reduced to under 10mm if machined from stronger material. While the size and rigidity of the tool are unlikely to pose a problem for transapical procedures, it would be very difficult to create a similar system for transfemoral procedures as a small and flexible catheter is required for this approach.

The phantom used in this experiment is a modified version of a custom-made system designed to simulate functional mitral and aortic valves. The phantom consists of a left ventricle, atrial reservoir, valve sheet containing mitral and aortic valves, and an actuator system. The ventricle has an apical access port to simulate interventions such as TAVI. In this instance, the phantom was made of a soft silicone (Shore A 30 durometer) while water was used to simulate blood. The inner diameter across the aortic valve was 23mm at the commissures. To facilitate fluoroscopic imaging for this study, the aortic valve annulus was placed approximately 30mm beyond the mitral valve plane, relative to the apical entry point. Experiments were performed in a static model to simulate rapid pacing, but a raised tower was attached beyond the aortic root to increase pressure on the basal side of the valve, allowing realistic simulation of contrast enhancement for fluoroscopy (Fig. 4
                        ).

As the balloon-inflated TAVI valves are single use, a surrogate stent was used for the experiments to allow a larger number of trials to be performed (Fig. 5
                        ). The surrogate stent was made from an elastic material with radiopaque markers simulating the struts of the stent and had an appearance in both fluoroscopy and ultrasound similar to the real valve stent. The surrogate stent could be reused without significant wear and would collapse as the balloon was deflated. For this reason, all measurements were acquired while the balloon was inflated.

The proposed guidance system, both with and without the ICE delivery tool, was compared against fluoroscopic guidance in the phantom model. A cardiac surgery resident deployed the surrogate valve in the phantom 10 times using each of the three guidance methods. After each deployment, a camera jig was positioned over the phantom to photograph the stent inside the aorta from a fixed position. A reference checkerboard was mounted beside the aorta at the same depth as the two commissures visible from the camera's position. Immediately after deployment, a photograph was acquired for retrospective analysis in which the stent struts and the two visible commissures were manually identified. The distance between the commissure plane and the furthest visible stent strut was measured using the checkerboard reference for scale (Fig. 6
                        ).

The first experiment simulated conventional contrast enhanced fluoroscopic guidance. First, a guidewire was inserted through the apex of the phantom and passed through the ventricle and aortic valve, terminating in the aortic reservoir. A pigtail catheter was deployed through the aortic reservoir and rested above one of the aortic leaflets. In a real procedure, the pigtail catheter is used to deliver contrast and serves as a radiopaque marker identifying the aortic valve. The valve delivery catheter was inserted onto the guidewire and into the left ventricle of the phantom. Prior to each trial, contrast was injected into the aortic root so that the valve, including commissures and nadir, were visible in the fluoroscopic image. The stent was positioned using fluoroscopic video so that it appeared that half of the stent lay on either side of the valve (Fig. 7
                           ). Before deployment, the pigtail catheter was withdrawn to ensure that it would not become caged by the stent. As the current standard of care is to deploy the valve using the fluoroscopy images qualitatively without any quantitative target, it is difficult to give an exact deployment error or location for ideal deployment. In this experiment, the user was instructed to strive to achieve consistent deployment in all 10 trials. The variability of valve deployment depths give an estimate of the minimum error achieved in fluoroscopic guidance.

In the second experiment, valve deployment took place using the proposed guidance system. As in the fluoroscopy study, a guidewire was passed through the aortic valve. The surrogate stent was placed on the modified valve delivery catheter and the position of the stent was determined using the calibration block. After the delivery catheter was inserted into the left ventricle, all three aortic commissures were identified in the ultrasound image. A targeting plane was created 5mm beyond the commissural plane, and the valve was deployed at this location. The aortic valve and stent calibration were repeated for each trial so that variability in these steps was included in the stent deployment. In addition to the photographic measurements, the deployment depth reported by the guidance system was also recorded.

The choice of features and deployment depth were arbitrary and the valve nadir or any identifiable points on the aortic valve could be used instead of the commissures so long as the deployment depth is adjusted accordingly. In our case the commissures were chosen as they were easily identified and were the features closest to where the leading edge of the stent should be deployed. The deployment depth of 5mm was chosen to ensure the leading edge of the valve was deployed beyond the commissures and clear photographic measurements could be acquired. In practice, the deployment depth would depend on the patient's anatomy and the profile of the prosthetic valve to ensure the coronary ostia are not obstructed by the stent.

In the final experiment, the specialized delivery tool was used instead of the traditional catheter. As when using the tracked catheter in the previous experiment, the position of the stent on the device was determined using a specialized calibration block. The same image guidance system was used to guide the delivery tool into the aortic valve and in initial positioning of the stent. As the tool was advanced, both the stent and aortic valve leaflets were visible on the live ICE video (Fig. 8
                           ). The stent was deployed such that the tip of the leaflet was approximately 5mm behind the leading edge of the stent as seen in the ICE images.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The results for all three guidance systems are shown in Table 1
                     . The fluoroscopy guidance system achieved a deployment depth of 6.3±3.4mm (mean±standard deviation). The guidance system resulted in a deployment depth of 7.0±2.9mm as recorded by photographic measurements while the deployment depth report by the guidance system itself was 5.03±0.03. Finally, when the ICE delivery tool was used a deployment depth of 5.7mm±2.3mm was achieved. The deployment depth for all trials is reported in Table 1 and box plots summarizing the distribution are shown in Fig. 9
                     .

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

@&#EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS@&#

The root mean squared error (RMSE) of the deployment depth was 3.4mm when using the tracked catheter. This was reduced to 2.3mm when using the customized delivery tool with integrated ICE imaging. In comparison Luo et al. [8] achieved an RMSE of 3.3mm in transefemoral procedures on a porcine model using a magnetically tracked catheter. While the overall accuracy is similar, we experienced slightly less bias but greater variability in valve deployment error 2.0±2.9mm and 0.7±2.4mm, for the catheter and ICE delivery tool respectively, compared to 3.2±0.9mm in Luo et al. Balloon deployed stents are more challenging to deploy than self-expanding stents which could contribute to the increased variability we observed.

Our study also included a comparison with contrast enhanced fluoroscopic guidance. In clinical practice, the stent would need to be deployed at a depth sufficiently low to prevent obstruction of the coronary ostia but still far enough into the aorta to prevent migration or obstruction of the mitral valve. The fluoroscopic images are used to ensure these conditions are met before valve deployment. The qualitative nature of this type of image guidance makes it difficult to assign a desired target depth, and even if one were chosen, it would be difficult to accurately achieve this deployment depth without more elaborate intraoperative analysis of the fluoroscopic images. Instead, we only evaluate the precision of deployment in fluoroscopic guidance where we achieved a standard deviation in deployment depth of 3.4mm. In comparison, the RMSE reported in the previous experiments, which incorporates both the bias (mean) and precision (standard deviation) added in quadrature, was as good or smaller (3.4mm for the tracked catheter and 2.3mm for the ICE delivery tool). This suggests that a similar level of accuracy can be achieved with these guidance systems even when discounting the possibility of a consistent bias in identifying the site for valve deployment in fluoroscopy.

In this study the ICE delivery tool appeared especially promising in producing low deployment errors. It is likely that the majority of the error in the image guidance system comes from defining the aortic annulus and the magnetic tracking itself. This is supported by the near perfect deployment reported by the magnetic tracking of 5.03±0.03. Integrating the ICE probe into the delivery tool allows the user to correct for these errors based on live ultrasound where both the stent and aortic valve are visible. It is interesting to note that all but the first two trials with the ICE delivery were within a 3mm range from 4.9 to 7.9mm. This experiment was the first exposure the cardiac surgery resident had to the new delivery tool and the ICE images were difficult to interpret leading to a substantial learning effect, which could explain why the first two trials were so far outside this range as seen in Fig. 9.

The proposed guidance system is easily integrated into the operating room. The NDI Aurora tabletop generator fits on top of the operating table, requiring less space than alternative systems, and was specifically designed to work in the presence of ferrous and conducting objects so that conventional surgical tools may be used. The tracking sensors attached to the TEE probe and stent delivery devices do not impede workflow in the operating room. The delivery tool with integrated ICE requires an additional ultrasound machine to be brought into the operating room, nevertheless, this system has a smaller footprint and lower costs than other alternatives relying on intraoperative MRI or rotational angiography.

Besides the additional ultrasound and magnetic tracking equipment required, the aortic valve and other pertinent anatomy must be defined intraoperatively so they may be displayed in the guidance system. In balloon deployed TAVI procedures, an ideal opportunity to define the valve is presented during rapid pacing. Rapid pacing is performed twice during these procedures: first, to test the leads prior to advancing the catheter into the aortic valve and then again to arrest cardiac motion as the stent is deployed. The aortic valve may be defined during the first rapid pacing without disrupting surgical workflow. This also ensures that, when the valve is defined from tracked biplane ultrasound, the heart is relatively stationary and in the same condition as during final deployment. The real time tracked ultrasound is displayed in the mixed reality environment. If the aortic valve or any other pertinent features have moved, they can be redefined before proceeding.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

This paper proposes an image guidance system using magnetic tracking and intraoperative TEE along with intraoperatively defined anatomy to guide TAVI deployment. This system achieved similar deployment accuracies to fluoroscopic guidance in a phantom model. The standard deviation in deployment depth using fluoroscopic guidance was 3.4mm providing a lower bounds for the RMSE deployment error. The RMSE for the guidance system was also found to be 3.4mm using the tracked catheter and 2.3mm when ICE imaging was integrated into the delivery tool. These results show that such a guidance system may achieve similar or better results than contrast enhanced fluoroscopy while eliminating the use of nephrotoxic contrast and ionizing radiation. The proposed system used only intraoperatively defined anatomy resulting in simplified clinical workflow without requiring preoperative models to be registered to the intraoperative TEE. In addition, the tool with integrated ICE provided real-time imaging during valve deployment that shows the position of the stent relative to the native aortic valve. In these experiments, the ICE imaging decreased the error in valve deployment. In addition, the direct imaging of the stent and pertinent anatomy provides an extra layer safety if there were errors in tracking the stent or in the definition of the aortic valve. The phantom study presented here provides a direct comparison of these techniques to fluoroscopic guidance on a larger scale than feasible in animal studies.

The authors have no conflict of interest pertaining to this work.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

We would like to thank Ivailo Petrov for performing the fluoroscopic imaging. We also thank Elvis Chen and Feng Li for valuable assistance with the experiments. We gratefully acknowledge funding received from Natural Science and Engineering Research Council, Canadian Institute of Health Research and Canadian Foundation for Innovation. Graduate student funding for Jonathan McLeod is provided by the Vanier Canada Graduate Scholarship Program.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

