@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#How do we define the “general purpose”?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Interoperability standard is a key to the global personal health services industry.


                        
                        
                           
                           Medical device regulation policy is behind the development of interoperability.


                        
                        
                           
                           We analyze the pros and cons of using intended purpose for regulation.


                        
                        
                           
                           We analyze the ‘over-regulation’ and ‘no-regulation’ scenarios.


                        
                        
                           
                           We conclude that a balanced regulation policy framework is immediately needed.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Medical device regulation

Device interoperability

Personal health device

Protocol stack

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The intended purpose of a device is a key reference when regulators decide whether or not to regulate it as a medical device. However, when coming into consumer health domain, it is sometimes difficult to decide whether a device (or system) has a general purpose or not. The authors discussed the regulatory policy around health device connectivity, operating system and software market, and proposed to regulate them with enough granularity.
               
            

@&#BACKGROUND@&#

Empowered by the advancing consumer technologies related to connectivity, mobility and sociality, service providers now have chance to deliver next generation health services towards end consumers in a ubiquitous pervasive environment. Personal health management, disease management, health service navigation, virtual care, big data analytics and aging independence living have become emerging services in the consumer health market, and have attracted many investors. They have been widely recognized as efficient ways to improve people's quality of life and reduce the overall healthcare cost. Modern information technologies, together with evolving medical device technologies, form the end-to-end infrastructure of the above service systems. To allow rapid deployment of service system and promptly scale-up of business setup, as well as ensuring necessary quality and safety, the infrastructure has to be designed in a standardized way and allowing easy plug-and-play among different manufactures, thus to establish a set of interoperability standards becomes a key to ensure better connectivity and cost efficiency.

Currently, a number of international or regional standard developing organizations (SDO) are producing interoperability standards for personal health service industry. Among them, IEEE 11073-Personal Health Device Working Group (PHD WG), Bluetooth Special Interest Group (BT SIG) and Continua Health Alliance (CHA) have made significant progress and achieved good reputation in the market. In this article, we will briefly describe the current status and inter-relationship between several major interoperability standards in personal health domain. After that, we will discuss the regulatory problems they are facing with and the future possibilities.

Starting from 2006, PHD WG has been continuously developing the IEEE 11073-PHD standards [1], which is a series of interoperability standard enabling communication between personal health devices and external computer systems. Such personal health devices include, but not limited to, the devices used for life activity, wellness monitoring, and/or health monitoring in domestic home, communal home, and/or mobile applications. These devices are names as “Agent” in the context of IEEE 11073-PHD standards, and the counterpart is called “Manager”. Typical examples of Manager include mobile phone, tablet and personal computer. Agent devices typically are low-cost, consumer devices. They have limited hardware capabilities (small memory size, simple central processing unit) and limited power resources (small battery). To keep things simple and save power, they usually use fixed configurations and disconnect when inactive. Manager devices typically have more hardware capabilities than Agent devices, and are able to connect to multiple agents. They often use wall power or larger batteries. The IEEE 11073-PHD standards consist of the following four core elements:
                        
                           1)
                           The Nomenclature is a stable and harmonized set of terminologies. It assists in the use of agreed terms for the same concept to ensure sematic interoperability. Thus, a blood glucose reading together with all necessary details such as timestamps, units of measurement, device ID, and so on, is always distinguishable from other pieces of data. Consistent nomenclature is helpful during the work on the architecture and during all other phases of implementation and use of systems.

The domain information model (DIM) defines a set of atomic elements, each representing a piece of information within the targeting personal health device use cases. The DIM also describes the relationship between these elements, and how they are organized to provide a dedicated functionality. For example, a body weight object contains a numeric value, a timestamp, a unit code and its identifier. This object as a whole can be utilized to communicate the body weight information from a weighing scale (Agent) to mobile phone (Manager).

The Service Model which defines how protocol interacts with objects and attributes. It defines the protocol methods like GET, SET and Scan-Report, which are quite common in other types of interoperability protocols.

The Communication Model describes the connection state machine and details the communication characteristics. It is designed to be transport-portable. In real market, IEEE 11073-PHD standards are often built on top of widely-adopted commercial communication technologies, such as Universal Serial Bus (USB) [2] and Bluetooth [3].

During the same timeframe when IEEE 11073-PHD standards were developed, the Medical Device Working Group of BT SIG developed Multi-Channel Adaptation Protocol (MCAP) [4] and Health Device Profile (HDP) [5] dedicatedly to port IEEE 11073-PHD standards. The MCAP defines how classic Bluetooth transport channel can be managed and utilized to convey IEEE 11073-PHD protocol messages. The HDP defines a series of behaviors, procedures and information pieces which ensure the plug-and-play interoperability between peer devices when running IEEE 11073-PHD standards over MCAP.

Based on the above technical infrastructure, the global experts in CHA developed the Continua Design Guideline (CDG) [6] to provide a comprehensive technical guideline for vendors, manufactures, integrators, service providers and regulators on various important issues around the products that utilize the aforementioned technical standards. These standards are implemented by device vendors with the form of an end product or module. These products can be a hardware, software or firmware depending on the product requirements. They are built into a Software Operating System (OS) as a protocol stack where engineers create personal health applications on top of them. In addition, CHA also take the responsibility to test and certify relevant products following CDG.

The outcome of this work has resulted in the publication of more than 20 international standards and more than 80 CHA-certified products available in the global market. It has become the most popular interoperability standard family among the world's. For example, Denmark has mandated the compliance to CDG for interoperability of devices in its national health IT reference architecture [7]. US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) published a list of recognized standards for interoperability intended to assist manufacturers who elect to declare conformity with consensus standards to meet certain requirements for medical devices. Among them, 8 out of 25 are 11073-PHD standards [8].

Currently, this architecture works well from technical perspective, but when digging into details, there is a gray area from medical device regulation perspective. The MCAP and HDP standards develop by BT SIG are meant for conveying IEEE 11073-PHD and potentially other application-level standards on top of the classic Bluetooth communication technology. It is mandatory to implement MCAP and HDP if a vendor wishes to produce a Bluetooth-based device that is compliant to IEEE 11073-PHD standards and is to be certified by CHA. Generally, a Bluetooth-enabled device that contains MCAP/HDP stack can be seen as having a quite obvious health-oriented intended marketing purpose compared to other Bluetooth-enabled devices.

The Android OS has the largest global adoption rate in the smart mobile device market. In order to leverage its large user base, MCAP/HDP has been integrated into Android OS by personal health industrial stakeholders since its version 4.0. However, searching the Bluetooth-certified product list [9] with the filters “Android” under “Medical” category returns zero hit, but one may easily find numerous Android 4.x devices under other product category. This means that the general Android device vendors never explicitly indicate the medical- and health-oriented capability of their products in their marketing signal. This is because FDA used to identifying the “intended purpose” by screening market signal, and the general Android device vendors wish to avoid the medical device regulation by hiding the potential purpose of their products. However, engineers know very well the technical details and are quite willing to use MCAP/HDP when implementing a personal health device or service, due to the gain in saving R&D investment and accelerating market adoption. In other words, with MCAP/HDP stack embedded in Android OS, any software engineer with arbitrary domain background and skill level is able to build personal health devices and services and get them certified by both BT SIG and CHA. If the device gets an update of Android OS via Over-the-Air channel which affects its MCAP/HDP stack, at least theoretically there will be risk that the upper-layer personal health application doesn't work properly due to the lack of system-level regression test. And what makes this a real trouble is the fact that neither FDA MDDS Rule [10] nor EU MEDDEV 2.1/6 [11] includes OS into the scope of medical device regulation, i.e., a widely-available and easy-to-use medical device component is not under regulation at all. The reason for such regulatory gap is that the current regulation strategy doesn't fully adapt to the above reality. Policy makers need to refine the current regulation policy with regards to the definition of ‘general purpose’. The key is to allow sufficient granularity in the regulation policy. In [12], Daidi et al. proposed to differentiate the intended use case and technical requirements from the perspective of the expected quality of service (QoS), the proactivity of communication unit, and the risk of data conversion. However, at the moment when this article is written, the authors haven't noticed any other discussion in academic and industry journals which has specified how exactly such granularity could be achieved.

Another relevant policy gap is the regulation towards online software market (e.g., app store). Based on technical restriction and market reality, the current technical architecture of major global interoperability standards allows personal health device extending its health-oriented functionality easily, e.g., by downloading and installing a software driver from the internet. Such operation can be achieved via online software market or other online platform. Since such software driver is considered as a medical device component and thus falls under dedicated regulation, so theoretically, the distributor and dealer of such products should be licensed and regulated (like what the online drug dealer does). Again, neither FDA MDDS Rule nor EU MEDDEV 2.1/6 includes the online software market into the scope of medical device regulation because they are regarded as “for general purpose”.

Simply excluding online software market from the scope of medical device regulation doesn't reflect the potential risk embedded within the software marketing and distribution process. Furthermore, such way of practicing regulation actually pushes the entire liability burden towards application developer's side. Policy makers shall recognize the fact that many application developers are small groups containing 1–5 people; they have very limited capability and experience to deal with the costly regulatory process and liability. They are however essential stakeholders who can help in cultivating the personal health industry ecosystem. Therefore, a sensible regulation policy should include a balanced framework with shared liability by all the stakeholders. For example, the online software distributor may share the regulatory liability with app developers and help them to mitigate the potential risk (e.g., providing consultation and training to consumers). From ecosystem perspective, joint effort is the key for achieving win-win situation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

Developing and implementing a set of personal health device interoperability standards is a mandatory pre-requisite to cultivate a healthy global industry ecosystem. The outcomes of such standardization efforts are often used as technical components of software OS which are further embedded by eHealth or mHealth systems, thus subjecting them to medical device regulation. However, current regulation systems do not include OS and online software market into the scope of medical device regulation, which results in a regulatory gap between the evolvement of personal health technologies and the expected quality/safety of personal health device products. This issue needs to be solved as soon as possible to ensure a healthy development of personal health industry. The promising part is: several regulatory bodies have already begun to explore the regulatory gaps and to make plans on how to fix them. During March 19–21, 2013, USA Energy & Commerce Committee held three hearings to discuss the regulatory policy about applying ICT technologies in healthcare domain. The participants, who are the representatives of industry stakeholders, collectively require FDA to clarify the rules for mobile medical apps and to establish a balanced regulatory framework for mHealth services and applications that protects patient safety and privacy while facilitating continued progress in applying mobile innovation to advancing the nation's health and wellness. As a sequence of many similar ongoing discussions and consultations like this one, Section 618 of the FDA Safety and Innovation Act (FDASIA) Workgroup called upon the Department of the Health and Human Services (HHS) through the FDA, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and the Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology (ONC) to develop “a proposed strategy and recommendations on an appropriate, risk-based regulatory framework pertaining to health information technology, including mobile medical applications” [13]. Although this is still an ongoing work, we have seen some initial consensus built based on an active collaboration and dialog in the FDASIA Workgroup. In September, 2013, ONC published the report from FDASIA [14] which contains the following recommendation — “FDA could use the current regulatory framework to clarify ambiguities.” And under that recommendation, the Workgroup specifically states that FDA should “expedite guidance on HIT software, mobile medical applications (MMA) and related matters”.

So far, none of the above initiatives have specifically touched the issues discussed above, but they are along the same direction of what we are proposing here. As a group of SDO contributors, we do expect a positive outcome of these initiatives and we hope that they could also take the above issues into consideration in their future works.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

Partial funding was provided by Chongqing University (project no. CDJZR-11230013, CDJRC-10230009 and CSTC2013JCSF10034). As the sponsor of this research, Chongqing University didn't get involve in the review and approval of the manuscript for publication.


                  Conflicts of interest
               

All authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

