@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#A Learning Quality Metadata approach: Automatic quality assessment of virtual training from metadata

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           LQM is a metadata schema based on IEEE LOM which has been expanded with information on quality of educational resources.


                        
                        
                           
                           The quality of virtual education courses cataloged with LQM can be automatically evaluated with the tool LOMPAD-Q.


                        
                        
                           
                           Using metadata for representing the quality of learning objects is a key point for fostering quality in e-learning.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

e-learning standards

Learning objects

Metadata

Quality

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  This paper presents the LQM metadata schema, an extension of the IEEE LOM standard. LQM is capable of registering information related to the quality of virtual education resources. As a complement, we have developed a cataloging and evaluation tool capable of registering LQM metadata and performing the subsequent quality estimation according to UNE 66181:2012. The proposal identifies and describes the dimensions and properties of the LQM element data. The research results show that it is feasible to provide an automatic estimation of quality of digital educational resources using LQM.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The huge amount of learning objects (LO) and e-learning courses creates difficulties in interoperability between different LO repositories (cf. e.g. [1–5]). At the same time, it is increasingly common to find LO that do not meet the quality requirements expected by the end user [6].

Quality assessment applied to education is still far from being easy. However, relevant progress has enabled the identification of elements of the quality of LO which enhance their reusability [7], on metrics and indicators for ranking LO [8] and [9], or on profiles identifying quality educational resources [10].

Related research has been based on the study of existing standards and their support to LO quality evaluation. A standardization in the achievement of e-learning quality is considered useful [11]. There are metadata standards that can be applied to LO, such as Dublin Core, or specific metadata standards for LO such as IEEE LOM [12]. Metadata for LO are still under investigation and development. In fact, the International Organization for Standardization is developing a new metadata standard called ISO/IEC MLR [12] and [13]. Additionally, metadata applied to educational resources have been proven helpful as a tool for managing the search, location, and selection of educational resources [14]. As a consequence, there is a line of research focused on studying the relationship and evolution of metadata to Web 3.0 and Linked Data [15].

On one hand, quality in e-learning and its measurement are aspects to be considered in LO evaluation; on the other hand, the LO metadata which store information about educational resources, are widely accepted and developed. The present study aims at enhancing the storage of information on the quality of virtual education, based on a new proposed structure of metadata which takes existing known standards as a starting point.

This article presents LQM, a metadata schema for virtual education based on the IEEE LOM standard. It will be helpful to get information on LO quality: the final goal is enabling end users, teachers, students, or any other interested stakeholder, to find and use the virtual learning resources with the highest quality. The novelty of our approach resides in the proposed structure for metadata which allows reporting the quality of educational resources, with the additional support of a cataloging software tool. Moreover, the tool is also able to perform an automatic quality evaluation of LO which are cataloged with LQM.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses the meaning of quality in education and the existence of standards that apply to e-learning, introducing the concept of metadata for LO. Section 3 proposes a data structure for storing information on quality of virtual education. Section 4 describes the methodology of this research. Section 5 shows the results of the study while Section 6 includes the corresponding discussion. Finally, Section 7 summarizes the main conclusions of the study.

From a standard perspective, the term quality is defined in ISO 9000:2005 as “the degree to which a set of inherent characteristics fulfills requirements” [16]. In the case of education, these expected requirements are determined by the preferences of the stakeholders. Multiple facets arise when talking about quality in education, e.g., Harvey and Green [17] studied the concept of quality connected to higher education, stating that quality can be viewed as exception, as perfection, as fitness for purpose, as value for money, and as transformative. Other important values in quality management in education are control, continuous improvement, commitment, and breakthrough [18]. Therefore, the quality of education should foster improved learning methods for teachers and help students meet their expected learning goals. This effectiveness in teaching requires an appropriate teaching and learning process, with defined learning activities, assessments, and evaluation criteria.

Quality standards and quality management are proven solutions for continuous improvement [19]. In fact, Six Sigma quality model can be implemented in educational settings [20] and the same happens with the ISO 9001:2008 quality management standard and the EFQM European model of excellence [21].

Once an organization implements a quality management system, it is necessary to use different metrics to know the actual degree of perception of quality in the organization. Metrics are the tool to evaluate the quality of education, and the ISO 19796–3 standard includes a framework for defining quality metrics for teaching, which also can be extrapolated to e-learning [22].

The new reality in education and the growth, variety, and success of e-learning services have led to the emergence of several paradigms as m-learning, blended learning, e-tutoring, collaborative e-learning, adaptive e-learning, or u-learning. Even now, informal learning with social web and networks is already influencing young and older adults both in the workplace and in higher education [23]. Studies have found that instructors and students have favorable views of synchronous online learning despite the existence of relevant problems related to the impact of online courses on the quality of training [24].

The trend toward e-learning provokes that teachers and training producers change their concepts regarding design of education [25]. The adoption of a quality certification system is useful to facilitate this change as it encourages the design of high-quality courses despite the difficulties in the content, discrimination, and generalization [26]. The quality in the context of virtual education will impact the relationship between the student and the learning environment. Recent studies show that students are capable of distinguishing between their preferences on quality [27]; therefore, the best strategy for the development of quality e-learning is giving opportunities to and reinforcing behavior of the student. This new educational framework should be analyzed from the perspective of the management and improvement of quality in e-learning, but the development of quality standards progresses more slowly than the evolution of the new virtual teaching methods. In fact, recent studies concluded that cloud file hosting services presented higher levels of perceived usefulness and usability than standard learning management tools [28].

Standardization is also essential for the development of interoperability and quality in e-learning even in specific fields such as educational video games [29]. ISO/IEC 19796–1 is a standardized framework for quality in teaching [30,31]. The problem arises due to the existence of a wide variety of really different standards. New educational challenges require a harmonization of these standards, the existence of a common controlled vocabulary and a terminology to describe the vocabulary terms, and the existence of a reference framework for e-learning systems. These goals can only be achieved through consensus among standardization initiatives [32].

Metadata are data related to the data, intended to describe the content, format, structure, and purpose of such data. In the educational context, LO metadata can report title, creator of the resource, education, goals, etc. Metadata for e-learning is used in learning object repositories (LOR) and assist users in the search and retrieval of LO [33]. Metadata has also been used to provide personalized LO for the student [34].

There are standards for governing LO metadata, such as the well-known “ISO 15863:2009 The Dublin Core metadata element set” (Dublin Core) [35], or “1484.12.1-2002 IEEE Learning Object Metadata” (LOM) [36], which is an accepted standard and implemented in multiple LOR [1], as well as other initiatives such as the Canadian proposal Can Core [37], based on IEEE LOM. Standard “ISO/IEC 19788 Metadata for Learning Resources” (MLR) is currently under development and aims at specifying metadata elements and their attributes for the description of LO, relying on the compatibility and modularity.

The usefulness of metadata standards for LO has been already revealed in practical cases. For example, Mylonakis et al. [38] developed a Multimedia Open Learning Environment (MOLE) based on IEEE LOM for course management and sharing of LO. Studies on standards, metadata, and repositories have analyzed the semantics, content, syntax rules, and metadata for LO, the relationship and impact of metadata on the search of educational resources, the architecture of LOR and learning content management systems (LCMS), where standards play a key role to ensure interoperability between all these elements [39].

In addition, metadata are the scaffolding for an e-learning architecture based on the Semantic Web [40,41]. In fact, Nikolopoulos et al. [42] proposed an application profile of the IEEE LOM with new attributes to represent concepts such as learning outcomes, creating an ontological representation to improve the search and retrieval of LO. Finally, recommendations of interoperability for e-learning system components [43] have led us to propose possible methods for the improvement of the storage of information on the quality of virtual education.

In the literature, we can find indicators of quality for LO allocated to different dimensions of quality. For example, Ivory and Hearst [44] analyzed the dimensions of web usability and graphic design as elements of quality measurement, besides considering quantitative factors such as the number of words or images. Custard and Sumner [45] grouped quality indicators in five categories: provenance, description, content, social authority, and availability. Following a similar approach, Stefani, Vassiliadis, and Xenos [46] distinguished four dimensions in quality metrics: functionality, reliability, usability, and efficiency, including quantitative aspects such as the number of broken links. LearnRank proposal defines quality metrics for LO classified in three dimensions: topical, personal, and situational [8]. These three dimensions provide information about learning goals, personal relevance, and the conditions and limitations of the learning task. Moreover, Bethard et al. [47] studied the automatic characterization of quality LO in educational digital libraries, measuring aspects such as the existence of sponsor, the clear identification of age range, and how well organized is the resource to help achieving the learning goals. LOR have also been subjected to analysis of LO quality: an example is the case of Merlot where Cechinel, Sánchez-Alonso, and García [10] conducted a study of the intrinsic characteristics of highly valued LO in this repository.

All these measurable aspects of quality of LO can be classified into two groups: quantitative and qualitative. The quantitative features can be extracted from the internal characteristics of the educational resource and can be automatically identified by an automated process. These features are dependent on the size of the LO, such as the number of words, number of links, number of images, etc. So, from this point of view, the quantitative characteristics of an LO are intrinsic to the resource itself. The qualitative characteristics of an LO are those which cannot be quantified with numbers. They provide additional information about the LO, reflecting its structure, functionality, and services. These characteristics are therefore relatively independent of the size of the LO and include both intrinsic and extrinsic features. The intrinsic features are dependent on the internal structure of the LO, such as the design of a virtual learning environment. The extrinsic features depend on external elements, such as the extent of the tutoring support.

Student satisfaction surveys are normally the support of methods for evaluating LO. For example, Kay and Knaack [48] makes a proposal for evaluating LO with data collected through student surveys: information on the contribution of educational strategies, the improvement in understanding concepts, the perceived benefits after the use of the LO, and the interest in reusing the resources. The subjective information about an LO is a true indicator of its quality, which can be assessed by teachers, students, experts, or any other agent. However, assessment methods proposed by Williams [49], which need the involvement of users and other stakeholders at the stage of LO design, require an oversized effort.

The quantitative characteristics should not influence quality assessment of LO. For example, educational resources, whether small or large in size, can be high-quality resources, effective for training, and with a valuable educational impact. Subjective evaluations of LO are made retrospectively, so they are not helpful as information about the quality of the LO itself prior to be used. As a consequence, quality of LO have to rely in other features. As we learned from literature review, the focus should be in the qualitative objective characteristics. We have selected the following indicators as reference:
                           
                              1.
                              Provenance [45] and sponsor [47] which relate to the cognitive entity that created the educational resource. This may result in an assessment of the level of recognition of training given by the institution, evaluated primarily on the basis of the certification it provides.

Functionality and efficiency [46], which collect information on the quality of service offered by a virtual campus infrastructure. This information is mainly related to the educational environment. Functionality depends on the environment of learning and communication tools, enhancing the efficiency with good instructional adequacy and tutoring support.

Usability (e.g. [44] and [46]) and availability [45], which are related to the accessibility capabilities of the LO: they can be measured in terms of compliance with accessibility standards.


                        Table 1
                         shows how these indicators are grouped into three dimensions. The third column shows a possible association to qualitative objective features related to these quality indicators.

Following this concept, we can find COdA [50] which is a tool for evaluating quality of LO. It introduces a rubric with several dimensions which are useful as quality indicators. COdA latest version is currently under development and it is intended to become a Spanish standard [51].

UNE 66181:2012 is a standard for managing and measuring the quality of virtual training [52] aimed at improving the satisfaction of virtual training users. This satisfaction measurement depends on the difference between the initial expectations and the final perception, so as a requisite, the information available in the training offer must be complete enough and clear avoiding false expectations of future users.

This standard provides a quality model based on quality indicators that represent factors of customer satisfaction enabling a way to improve it. Each factor is broken down into one or more subfactors, containing a set of key attributes. The quality of a training activity is assessed through the combination of the level of satisfaction of each factor. These factors and subfactors, with their key attributes, are listed below:
                           
                              ●
                              Factor: Recognition of training for employability. It represents the extent up to which virtual training increases the capacity for integration in the labor market.
                                    
                                       ○
                                       Subfactor: Recognition of training for employability. Key attributes: degree of acceptance, and prestige of the training provider.

Factor: Methodology. The virtual training potential to promote learning and to stimulate the student to understand the contents.
                                    
                                       ○
                                       Subfactor: Didactic design. Key attributes: description of learning objectives, use of a learning method, design of knowledge assessments, consideration of learning context, flexible learning itineraries, and methodology involving real projects.

Subfactor: Training resources and learning activities. Key attributes: existing interaction with the student, activities for evaluation, provision of support and tutorials, variety of resources, practice through sufficiently complex activities, and synchronous group work sessions.

Subfactor: Tutoring. Key attributes: determined response time for the tutor, and personalized follow-up.

Subfactor: Technological learning environment. Key attributes: availability of communication tools, FAQ, forums, navigation aids, search options, group management, mechanisms for persistence and resumption in the learning path, shared repositories, progress indicator of learning, existence of several reporting options, and support for collaborative learning.

Factor: Accessibility. How much virtual training is understandable, usable, efficiently and effectively usable by everybody.
                                    
                                       ○
                                       Subfactor: Hardware accessibility. Key attributes: hardware aids and adaptations for people with disabilities.

Subfactor: Software accessibility. Key attributes: software aids and adaptations for people with disabilities.

Subfactor: Web accessibility. Key attributes: Web aids and adaptations of the Web environment for people with disabilities.

Under this standard, the quality level of each factor is determined by the combination of the satisfaction level of each subfactors, which are quantified using a ranking of 5 levels of quality. The scale ranges from level 0 or 1 Initial to level 5 Excellent. In order to reach one of these levels, all the specified requirements for it must be met. The standard also requires a minimum general information that must be included with the course: title, objectives (including the skills that can be reached), training type, market demand, previous knowledge, estimated study time, and hardware and software requirements.

We have developed a new metadata model for learning objects named Learning Quality Metadata (LQM). The LQM model is a proposal of a set of qualitative objective elements related to quality in virtual education. It can be used to establish quality indicators linked to different methods of quality assessment. It uses a metadata model in order to store features on the quality of LO.

We have also developed a cataloging software tool, named LOMPAD-Q, for generating the XML structure of LQM metadata according to the XSD metadata schema of LQM. This tool carries out an automatic measurement of quality of the virtual resource according to UNE 66181:2012, a standard for measuring the quality of virtual education [52]. The analysis is done once the metadata information is filled in the tool.

The functionality provided by LQM in conjunction with LOMPAD-Q represents a step forward in the automated quality measurement for virtual training: the effort of cataloging with metadata is effectively reused at the time of assessing the quality of LO according to various quality parameters that users can interpret to select educational resources according to their personal criteria.

LQM metadata model is an extension of the IEEE LOM metadata standard [53] but including additional data elements to store information about the quality of virtual education. XSD schema for LQM metadata model is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License and is available at https://github.com/lqm-project/lqm.

No changes have been made to the data elements defined in the IEEE LOM standard to ensure conformance with IEEE LOM. We decided not creating any new category in the IEEE LOMv1.0 base schema. LQM only brings new extended data elements that do not replace data elements in the IEEE LOM structure. As a result, an instance of LQM conforms to IEEE LOM metadata structure.


                        Table 2
                         shows the categories and data elements that LQM extends over the ones in IEEE LOM to enable storing information about LO. The numbering of the new data elements defined in Table 2 is consecutive and complementary to the numbering of items in IEEE LOM. In all cases, order is not specified and they are non-binding. The Metadata Schema data element defined in Meta-Metadata category of IEEE LOM should be filled out with “LQM v1.0” to indicate that LQM is being used.

The structure of Table 2 is the same as the one used in the IEEE 1484.12.1-2002 standard for defining IEEE LOM metadata schema. If the Size column has no value, it means that the element of this row is a category, not an item. If the Size value is 1, it means that the item can only have an instance, otherwise the item can have multiple instances. Data type column specifies the data type of the item. For example, an item can be a CharacterString: free text string, a LangString: text string from a language, or Vocabulary (State): the item has a restricted value space and its possible values are shown in column Value space. Another case is the Duration data type, which is defined in IEEE LOM as a Timestamp. Item 1.10.2 Entity is different from others: it is a CharacterString, allowing at least a length of 1000 characters, with a value space defined by RFC 2425
                           1
                        
                        
                           1
                           
                              https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2425.txt.
                         and RFC 2426,
                           2
                        
                        
                           2
                           
                              https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2426.txt.
                         that is, a standard format for the exchange of personal information. If the item has Data type value set to “-,” the item is a data type composed of its nested subitems.

The 1.9 Demand item has been added within the IEEE LOM category 1 General for reporting the market situation of the educational resource. If it is possible to get a certificate of training, 1.10 Certification subcategory contains data about the entity issuing the certificate, as well as the certificate characteristics, e.g., whether it is a certificate of attendance or a certificate of course completion, and the scope of recognition of the certificate. Category 4 named Technical has been complemented with accessibility information regarding hardware, software, and web perspectives. Category 5 named Educational is the IEEE LOM part which has been significantly strengthened. The features of the learning environment are listed in the subcategory 5.12 Environment. One can specify if there is an integrated environment of contents and communications, if it is possible to customize the environment, the existence of a teaching guide, and availability of help on how to use the interface or FAQs. Besides, more information can be recorded: the available training supports, the existence of a progress indicator on the contents, the ability to continue from where the student held back the study, the existence of an initial or final assessment, and the ability to generate follow-up reports. Communication possibilities will be listed in item 5.12.2 Communication, such as the availability of email or any type of asynchronous messaging, the existence of a forum or a repository for file sharing, or the integration with social networks of Web 2.0.

For item 4.8.4 Software of Table 2, referred to meeting software accessibility requirements, the Software_Accessibility data type has been defined to represent a value space for the set of software accessibility requirements numbered and defined in ISO 9241–171:2008. Something similar happens with items 4.9.1 General Usability and 4.9.2 Web Usability. Table 3
                         contains the three defined data types: for each data type, Table 3 has a brief explanation. Size equal to 1 means that the data type can only have an instance. The Value space column specifies the structure of the string. For example, a Software_Accesibility item could be “8.1.1.” Data type column indicates that the data type is a character string, indicating the required size of the character string. For example, Sofware_Accesibility is a string with a maximum of length of 8 characters.

LQM is extendable to ISO MLR standard, which still does not have a final version. A project for transforming IEEE LOM metadata into ISO MLR is currently being developed within the seventh part of ISO/IEC 19788; therefore, this proposal can be converted to ISO MLR once the corresponding associations have been defined.

Five quality assessment frames have been matched with LQM to prove its effectiveness as a source of quality indicators.

As a first case, LQM metadata items are matched with UNE 66181:2012 quality criteria [52]. Table 8 in Annex shows the LQM elements that must be reported to represent the information required by UNE 66181:2012 standard in order to assess the quality of virtual training according to this standard.


                           Table 8 in the left column includes all quality evaluation criteria set out in UNE 66181:2012. For each criterion, right column has the corresponding LQM metadata items. Some UNE 66181:2012 criteria match with a LQM item, e.g. Name match with 1.2 Title LQM item. Other UNE 66181:2012 criteria match with more than an LQM item. For example, Objectives criterion match with 5.10 Description and 9.2 Taxon Path LQM items when 9.1 Purpose equals to “educational objective.”

For information on the Recognition of training for employability, the following criteria are applied:
                              
                                 ●
                                 Level 1 is always true, that is, an LO will at least have level 1 in Recognition of training for employability.

Level 2 will be reached when 1.10.1 Type is equal to attendance.

Level 3 will be reached when 1.10.1 Type is equal to completion.

Level 4 will be reached when 1.10.3 Validity is equal to recognized and 5.15.1 Type is equal to post-course.

Level 5 will be reached when 1.10.3 Validity is equal to international.

Other specific cases are: for reaching Level 3 in Didactic instructional design, 1.4 Description must not be empty in order to have information concerning the learning method. To satisfy Level 4 for Didactic instructional design, it is required that 1.8 Aggregation Level item is equal to 2, 3, or 4, at the same time than 1.7 Structure must be equal to collection, networked, or hierarchical. Level 4 for Software accessibility will only be reached when item 5.13.4 Software in LQM have registered the whole set of numbers defined in UNE 66181:2012.

The rest of Table 8 can be interpreted analogously. In short, all UNE 66181:2012 criteria can be appraised from the LQM items, therefore LQM can be useful as a source of information for evaluating an LO with UNE 66181:2012.

As a second case, Sanz-Rodriguez, Dodero, and Sanchez-Alonso [59] conducted a study on the quality of educational materials approached from the point of view of reusability metrics with the corresponding subfactors.

The reusability factors are entirely derived from IEEE LOM. Due to the fact that LQM is an extension of IEEE LOM, LQM contains all these IEEE LOM items, and therefore the reusability metrics can be extracted from LQM items. Table 9 in Annex corresponds to the four reusability metrics and reusability factors defined by Sanz-Rodriguez, Dodero, and Sanchez-Alonso [59]. The LQM items that match with the reusability factors are shown in the LQM items column.

Leacock and Nesbit [60] developed LORI, a tool to evaluate LO based on nine dimensions: Quality of content, Adequacy of learning objectives, Feedback and adaptability, Motivation, Presentation design, Usability, Accessibility, Reusability, and Standards compliance.

Each LORI dimension can be rated from 1 to 5: the LORI tool provides descriptions that help evaluators rate each dimension. These dimensions are written down in the first column of Table 10 in Annex. Each row of Table 10 shows the link between the LORI dimensions and LQM items, thus it is possible to extract information from LQM items to outline the rating of the LORI dimensions. Column 2 of Table 10 shows the values that the items of LQM must have to rate LORI dimensions with a value higher than 1. However, in order to rigorously assess LORI dimensions from 1 to 5, it is necessary to apply some subjective criteria to decide the final rating. Therefore, although LQM contains items that provide information about the LORI dimensions, it is not possible to fully assess the LORI dimensions of an LO taking LQM as the only source of information.

The European Foundation for Quality in e-Learning has developed the ECBCheck certification scheme. The ability to measure the quality of e-learning programs is offered to organizations dedicated to capacity building while it also supports continuous improvement through collaboration and learning by comparison (“benchlearning”) [61].

ECBCheck has several criteria and subcriteria, shown in first column of Table 11. Each criterion is left aligned and its subcriteria are tabulated. The value for each criterion is calculated adding the values of its subcriteria. Table 11 in Annex shows the LQM items which collect information on the ECBCheck subcriteria. As a complement, ECBCheck has short descriptions for each subcriterion that helps on applying an objective ranking. The simplicity on the ranking of each ECBCheck subcriterion enables inferring its ranking from LQM items.

Finally, Kay and Knaack [62] proposed LOEM, a metric for evaluating LO based on five main dimensions that include Interactivity, Design, Engagement, Usability, and Content. Concerning Content dimension, the subcategories in LOEM belonging to Content dimension are Accuracy and Quality: they are features that correspond to a subjective global assessment of the LO, therefore Content dimension is not included in Table 12 in Annex.

Each row of Table 12 contains the matching between each LOEM dimension and the LQM items that are related to that LOEM dimension. Column 2 of Table 12 shows the values that the LQM items should have to provide a ranking higher than 1 for each LOEM dimension. In the same way as with LORI, LOEM dimensions include a subjective aspect for their evaluation, hence it is possible to get information about LOEM from LQM items, but it is not possible to reach a precise LOEM ranking.

As a contribution of this article, we present the development of the LOMPAD-Q tool, which support LQM metadata schema. LOMPAD-Q is a new branch of LOMPAD tool [63], i.e., it inherits all the functionality of LOMPAD and it is able to read and write metadata in XML format according to the IEEE LOM standard. LOMPAD-Q is under the GNU General Public License and is available at https://github.com/lqm-project/lompad-q.


                        Fig. 1
                         shows the GUI of LOMPAD-Q. Fig. 1 shows tab 5-Educational in particular, which is one of the IEEE LOM sections that has been widely increased in LQM with new metadata items. Fig. 1 shows the new 5.12 Environment item which is a compound data type that encompass 5.12.1 Features and 5.12.2 Communication data items. Fig. 1 also shows the new 5.13 Tutoring, 5.14 Learning Method, and 5.15 Training Type items. LOMPAD-Q has been built to read and write the XML format of LQM. LOMPAD-Q can read the XML file with the LQM metadata schema and fill in all the fields of the tool forms. With LOMPAD-Q, it is possible to modify the values of every data item using the GUI. Even more, it is possible to save changes in a new XML file storing an updated LQM metadata schema.

The most innovative feature and the strong reason of developing LOMPAD-Q tool is to perform an automated quality evaluation of LO using LQM metadata schema as a source of information. The prerequisite is that the virtual training course has to be cataloged with LQM metadata schema. LOMPAD-Q tool is able to generate an automatic evaluation of different dimensions of quality according to several criteria, as the defined in UNE 66181:2012. The LOMPAD-Q tool shows the results of the automatic evaluation in a separated window (Fig. 2
                        ). These results can be saved in XML. However, the automatic evaluation is not completely reliable because the assessment is conducted in some cases starting from free text areas. Therefore, the tool displays a warning message.


                        Fig. 2 shows the quality dimensions evaluated by LOMPAD-Q. First of all, the Recognition of training for employability is evaluated. Learning Methodology is the most meaningful part of the evaluation. This dimension is disaggregated on Didactic instructional design, Training resources and learning activities, Tutoring, and Technological and digital environment. Finally, Accessibility is evaluated according to Hardware, Software, and Web accessibility. All these dimensions were detailed in Section 2.4 of this paper.

Each student is different from any other. Student's expectations may vary, hence the quality of the LO can be seen from very different points of view. It is feasible to perform a quality assessment of the LO considering the customization of student expectations using LQM in combination with LOMPAD-Q. Both LQM and LOMPAD-Q are able to offer values from 1 to 5 in several dimensions of the quality assessment. These dimensions generate a difference among several criteria, such as the recognition of the training, learning style, personalized learning methods, training resources, learning activities, tutoring system, technological learning environment, and accessibility. Therefore students can use these differences to priorize between their preferences depending on the value obtained in each dimension. Note that value 1 is the minimum one for each dimension. These dimensions and their values are the following ones:
                           
                              •
                              Recognition for training. The criteria for each level are the following: a certificate is issued (level 2), the certification specifies if the student has passed (level 3), the issued certificate is accredited (level 4), and the issued certificate is internationally accredited (level 5).

Didactic instructional design. This parameter takes into account several aspects depending on the values got during the automatic evaluation with LOMPAD-Q but it covers all aspects related to the personal needs of students. If goals are correctly set up, level is 2. In case of existing a final evaluation, level is 3. For those students demanding carrying out activities and problems in a realistic context, with some degree of freedom on the formative itinerary according to an initial evaluation, the value of this dimension should be 4. The existence of real projects and a post-course follow-up raises the value of this dimension to 5.

Training resources and learning activities. If value is 2, it means that resources are interactive, with self-assessments and instructions. If value is 3, it is required the existence of group activities along with a teaching guide. A value of 4 implies a variety of training resources and real case activities. If value 5 is reached, synchronous training sessions are held and input from students are stored and managed.

Tutoring. The value of this dimension will allow the student to know the degree of involvement of the tutorial system of the training. The value 2 indicates the existence of a tutor, and value 3 implies that there is a commitment of the tutor to respond to students' requests. Value 4 in this dimension indicates a personalized monitoring of students while level 5 includes individual feedback or synchronous work sessions 1 to 1.

Technological learning environment. A value set to 2 in this dimension means the existence of a communication tool for direct interaction among participants. If there is an integrated FAQ, help functionality, and intuitive navigation environment, level is 3. Level 4 is reached when the technological system has the option of pausing and resuming the learning process, and there is also a content repository and a discussion forum. Level 5 in this dimension includes higher requirements for the student learning environment: the existence of a progress display, use of different content presentation formats, and the use of collaborative tools such RSS, Wiki, or Blogs.

Accessibility. Depending on the value of this dimension, students with disabilities will know how accessible the LO is in terms of hardware, software, or Web environment. Values 2 and 3 indicate that the tool shows some readiness of support for some level of disability. Values 4 and 5 include compliance with specific requirements of accessibility standards.

Additionally, LQM is able to register one or more teaching–learning processes, such as project-based learning, case-based learning, problem-based learning, goal-based scenarios, reciprocal teaching, and traditional learning. So students can choose LO according to their personal preferences concerning the teaching-learning process supported or promoted by the LO.


                        Fig. 2 includes the result of an automatic evaluation with LQM and LOMPAD-Q. Fig. 2 shows that each dimension may obtain a different value, proving that LQM is able to evaluate the quality of LO according to the personal needs of students.

@&#METHOD@&#

The purpose of our study is exploring the following research questions: (1) Are there differences between the different methods of quality assessment of LO? (2) Does the LOMPAD-Q tool provide the same cataloging results with LQM and quality assessment when it is used by different cataloguers? (3) Is the automated quality assessment with LOMPAD-Q based on the LQM metadata reliable enough when compared to the perception of students? (4) How much effort is typically involved in providing these quality-related metadata?

@&#OVERVIEW@&#

We have followed a three-step procedure to reach conclusions about the usefulness of LQM and the automated quality evaluation with LOMPAD-Q. Firstly, we have done a quality assessment of 32 virtual training courses using 4 different assessment tools: LORI, LOEM, ECBCheck, and UNE 66181:2012. These virtual training courses have been selected from open courses and educational resources available in the Internet, ensuring that they were as different as possible between them, covering different topics, educational levels, and depth of contents. In a second stage, the cataloging tool LOMPAD-Q has been tested by people cataloging 5 virtual training resources with LQM metadata schema. The selection of these resources guarantees that they were different enough from each other: activities for children, language courses for primary school, physics and chemistry resources at secondary school, a non-interactive course on music theory, and a teacher training course on sound and computer music. Once the learning resources have been cataloged, an automatic quality assessment has been produced with LOMPAD-Q tool according to UNE 66181:2012. Finally, we conducted a survey targeted to students who have attended 30 virtual training courses, which have been cataloged with LQM and assessed with LOMPAD-Q. These courses have taken place under a distance teacher training program dealing with primary level education, secondary level education, and information technology.

During the test phase of cataloging virtual training resources with LQM using LOMPAD-Q, a test environment was deployed to N
                        =21 participants. The distribution of participants based on their previous experiences on virtual training was as follows: 81% had at some point attended a virtual training course and 36% had been online mentors.

The distribution of the students that performed the surveys of the 30 virtual training courses varies from a minimum of 22 students per course to a maximum of 40 students.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

A quality assessment was applied on the 32 selected courses to compare LORI, LOEM, ECBCheck, and UNE 66181:2012 tools. The assessment data were independently recorded in a spreadsheet for each assessment tool. The evaluation criteria were applied considering the different scales of each assessment tool.

The test environment for LOMPAD-Q was available through a Web access with a clear specification of instructions on the tasks to be performed. We supplied a short general help guide to use the tool as well as descriptions on the meaning of some relevant fields. Most of these fields were operated with a dropdown list of options, whose meaning was also briefly explained. Contributors cataloged five courses; then, we asked cataloguers how much effort they have devoted to the cataloging process using the following scale:
                           
                              1.
                              Very little effort: the cataloging is intuitive.

Little effort: it has been possible to understand the cataloging except in some cases.

Moderate effort: there are parts that do not require almost any effort, but there are other parts requiring relevant effort.

Big effort: cataloging has been difficult to perform in most cases.

Very big effort: cataloging is really difficult.

The results of the LOMPAD-Q test were contrasted with student surveys in order to evaluate the effectiveness of the LOMPAD-Q tool. The surveys have been addressed to teacher training courses under different educational stages. These surveys were aimed at gathering the student perception of the courses they had attended. Students had to answer questions related to the evaluation of several aspects of the course. A Likert scale was used with values from 1 to 4: very low, low, high, very high. The variables are the attributes of the virtual course, namely, Tutoring, Impact, Practice, Contents, Environment, Communication, and Didactic design. Tutoring refers to the global satisfaction with the mentoring of the course. Impact is the extent up to which the course is considered useful for employment and job market. Practice refers to the usefulness of exercises and practical activities. Contents relates to the deepness, broadness, and quality of the contents. Environment relates to the ease of use and visual appearance of the user interface. Communication refers to the usefulness of the virtual communication supported during the course. Finally, Didactic design tries to describe the methods and strategies that contribute to optimize the acquisition of new knowledge and skills.

@&#RESULTS@&#

A Pearson correlation test was performed to determine whether the analyzed quality evaluation tools varied significantly among them. The most significant correlation occurs between UNE 66181:2012 and ECBCheck (r
                        =0.934, p
                        <0.05). Fig. 3
                         shows the scatter plot, where a good correlation between them is observable. These results show that UNE 66181:2012 and ECBCheck have similar, objective criteria.

The correlation between UNE 66181:2012 and LORI (r
                        =0.696, p
                        <0.05) is also relevant; however scatter plot does not reveal a clear linear relationship, but rather a relationship by zones (Fig. 4
                        ). Except in isolated cases, evaluation of training resources under UNE 66181:2012 and LORI concentrate in the upper-right quadrant of Fig. 4, but there is not a clearly defined correlation inside this quadrant. These relationships show that it may happen that some training resources may obtain high-quality values under some quality factors of UNE 66181:2012, e.g., in Employability or in Environment, but the resources are not highly ranked with LORI because some of the dimensions are not fully covered in LORI.

Although 32 training resources were under study, some of them obtained the same ranking and their points are overlapped in Figs. 3 and 4. The correlation between LORI and ECBCheck is relevant (r
                        =0.623, p
                        <0.05); however, their scatter plot only showed a cloud of points. The remaining correlations (LORI-LOEM, LORI-ECBCheck) show even lower values of correlation.

The LQM metadata has been recorded for each of the 5 courses cataloged by contributors. Subsequently, we computed the values for the quality criteria through the automatic quality assessment and Table 4
                         shows the mean value and the standard deviation. If cataloguers have appropriately filled in LQM metadata, LOMPAD-Q should provide the expected value drawn from the optimal usage of LOMPAD-Q tool, shown in Table 4. However, if the evaluators did not fill-in the LQM metadata correctly, LOMPAD-Q will presumably provide values that deviate from the expected value. Table 4 shows these values.

Five educational resources and courses corresponding to different educational levels have been measured. In this way, we can approximate LQM cataloging according to different contexts. The educational resources and courses are the following:
                           
                              •
                              Child (kindergarten) Education: Activity for children.

Primary Education: Language third elementary digital course.

Secondary Education: Additional resources for physics and chemistry subject.

University: Notes on music theory.

Vocational: Official training course for teachers in sound and computer music.

We compared the mean and standard deviation against the expected value to analyze the results shown in Table 4. Best results are reached when mean equals the expected value with a small standard deviation. This would mean that cataloguers have properly cataloged the educational resources.

Cataloging results were correct in Employability indicator at all educational levels, except in Child Education (x
                        =1.5714, sd=0.87014), where the expected value is the highest by far. This happened because Employability is not an indicator applicable to the lowest educational level.

In those cases where cataloging was successful in the elements concerning Didactic design, ie, the mean value is close to the expected value (Primary Education (x
                        =0.9524, sd=0.21822), Secondary Education (x
                        =0.7143, sd=0.46291), University (x
                        =0.7619, sd=0.43644)), the cataloging results of Methodology provided mean values far from expected values. In Child Education, Methodology is satisfactory (x
                        =0.9048, sd=0.30079), but not Didactic design (x
                        =0.9524, sd=0.21822). So it is difficult to discriminate between the ambivalence of both quality criteria, due to the dependency of Methodology on other quality criteria. It can be concluded that Didactic design and Methodology could be unified under the same quality criterion. In Vocational Education, Methodology (x
                        =0.0952, sd=0.30079) and Didactic design (x
                        =0.5714, sd=0.50709) are not correctly predicted.

The assessment of Resources quality criterion is completely satisfactory (x
                        =1, sd=0) in the case of Secondary and Vocational levels. In addition, the average value of Resources is also close to the expected value in Child Education (x
                        =1.0476, sd=0.21822) and University (x
                        =1.1905, sd=0.40237) educational levels. These results lead us to observe that the criteria applicable to cataloging Resources have been quite clear for cataloguers. However, when cataloging the Primary Education educational resource, the values obtained on the Resources criterion (x
                        =1, sd=0) differ from the expected value because the learning environment was not suitable. This is the same reason that made mean values of Environment quality criterion (x
                        =0.8571, sd=0.96362) far from expected value. In other cases, Environment approached the expected values, concluding good results in the evaluation of the cataloging process.

The effectiveness of the LQM cataloging in the Tutoring quality criterion depends on the educational level: the observed values are far from the expected values in low educational levels because it makes little sense to evaluate a distance e-learning tutoring system in such levels. However, in educational levels where mentoring has a more important role, such as University (x
                        =0.9524, sd=0.58959) and Vocational Education (x
                        =0.8095, sd=0.40237), cataloging results were correct and the average values obtained in Tutoring approach the expected values.

In order to measure the effectiveness of the automatic assessment, we have compared the outcomes of LOMPAD-Q with the results of the survey addressed to students. The study is segmented by educational levels to perform a personalized approach on the quality evaluation of LO.


                        Table 5
                         shows the relationship between the concepts that have been asked in surveys and the quality dimensions evaluated by LOMPAD-Q. Due to the fact that LOMPAD-Q is based on UNE 66181:2012 and that the dimension of quality Methodology is derivated from the values obtained in other dimensions, Methodology has not been used in the study and it does not appear in Table 5. It should also be pointed out that surveys obtained information concerning Practices and Content, and both concepts are under the Resources quality criterion in UNE 66181:2012. Likewise, questions about Environment and Communication are under the Environment quality criterion in UNE 66181:2012. Therefore, the concepts Resources and Environment appear twice in the right column of Table 5.

We performed a t-test to check the mean difference between the predictive quality and the quality observed in the surveys to students. The null hypothesis in all cases is based on equality of means with a significance level of 0.05. Table 6
                         shows the results on the 30 virtual training courses under study.

Overall, 20 quality criteria have been correctly evaluated by LOMPAD-Q with a p-value higher than 0.05, leading to the conclusion that LOMPAD-Q tool provides partially successful results for each quality criterion. Therefore, we observe differences concerning what quality might mean depending on the educational level under study.

The first thing that attracts attention on a detailed analysis of the t-test is that LOMPAD-Q has not been successful in assessing the Employability criterion at all educational levels. The reason for this fact may reside in the question included in the survey: difficulties in understanding the Level of recognition of training for employability might have represent a barrier for the criterion.

There are significant differences (t
                        =2.834, p
                        <0.05) between surveys and the results of automatic evaluation with LOMPAD-Q in the Contents quality criterion concerning Child Education. Favorably, the automated quality assessment has been adequate on the other criteria as indicated in UNE 66181:2012.

In the field of Primary Education, we can assume equality of means in all criteria except in Tutoring (t
                        =5.559, p
                        <0.05) and Communication (t
                        =−9.262, p
                        <0.05), hence at this educational level, the usefulness of LOMPAD-Q is again partially successful. In this stage of education, the involvement of the teacher is a key element in the individualized learning. However, the automatic assessment provided higher values in Tutoring and Communication, and this fact could generate expectations to students that will not be met later during the course.

Equality of means is assumed in all criteria of Secondary Education except in Contents (t
                        =3.66, p
                        <0.05) and Environment (t
                        =5.884, p
                        <0.05): LOMPAD-Q evaluated them highly due to their objective characteristics, but they were not able to identify the need of trainers to have a high-quality educational environment with contents that can be applied directly in classroom. Quality assessments in the other parameters have met the expectations of students.

At the University level, LOMPAD-Q obtains the worst results of the study. However, the tool has provided successful results in the quality evaluation concerning Practice (t
                        =−2.176, p
                        >0.05) and Tutoring (t
                        =2.197, p
                        >0.05) dimensions.

It can be assumed equality of means in all criteria under Vocational Training except in Environment (t
                        =4.151, p
                        <0.05) and Communication (t
                        =−16.107, p
                        <0.05). Therefore, LOMPAD-Q has properly approached quality in this educational level. However, the learning environment and communication systems are more subjective than what LOMPAD-Q is able to assess.

In conclusion, LOMPAD-Q tool provides estimated values for several quality dimensions, but we must use the results of the automatic quality evaluation according to personal interests of users, taking into account the strengths and weaknesses of LOMPAD-Q depending on the educational level.


                        Fig. 5
                         shows the histogram of the effort for cataloging virtual training with LQM. The profiles of the people who have contributed to the cataloging process vary from people not usually involved in education or those that have been students in virtual training courses to people who have been tutors of virtual training courses. We performed a chi-square test to evaluate the effort of cataloging with LQM, checking if there is any relationship between effort and the profile of the cataloguers: student and effort (χ2(df=3
                        N
                        =21)=2.217, p
                        >0.05), tutor and effort (χ2(df=6
                        N
                        =21)=8.203, p
                        >0.05). In both cases, the outcome of the test indicates that there is independence between effort and profile.

The average effort of cataloging courses is x
                        =3.4286 (sd=1.02817) and lies between the values of moderate effort and big effort. However, the average global assessment of courses by students is x
                        =3.6017 (sd=0.2252), i.e., lies between the values of high and very high. When comparing both values, we conclude that we must make a significant effort in using the LQM metadata to carry out the automated quality assessment of courses, but once the assessment is done, it would be a useful criterion to help students to choose highly rated quality courses.


                        Table 7
                         summarizes the main results extracted from our research.

Tools for quality assessment can use different criteria for assessing the quality of virtual training. In our study, the main difference is that LORI and LOEM consider fewer but more general quality criteria than UNE 66181:2012 and ECBCheck. Quality criteria addressed by UNE 66181:2012 and ECBCheck are more objective and they get similar results in their quality assessments in practice. Thus, we can find a valid variety of possibilities for evaluating the quality of LO.

LQM provides an effective metadata schema for the classification and retrieval of LO. The results showed that quality assessments when cataloging with LQM get similar results when different cataloguers are involved. However, when analyzing qualitatively the results of the LQM records, there are significant differences in the quality of the registered metadata. This causes that the LOMPAD-Q tool does not always generate the same automatic results of assessment for the same case. The reason is that the metadata schema LQM is extensive and it is not very intuitive. In fact, guidelines have been used in the test. Therefore, LQM is not flawless as optimum results would be mainly achieved with experienced cataloguers. These experts are capable of minimizing effort of cataloging after a short training period, making this activity efficient enough to allow automatic evaluation of LO quality.

Quality evaluation with LQM supported by LOMPAD-Q gets good results when analyzing the quality of virtual training according to the Practice and Methodology parameters but results are poorer for the other parameters. This could suggest that LQM is not reliable as a basis for a quality assessment. However, differences between the automated quality assessment and the survey results can be explained after a deeper analysis. The underlying fact is the tendency of students to rate their tutor's contribution with high scores. UNE 66181:2012 criteria are very strict when evaluating quality of contents and the same happens with the evaluation of the environment. Impact is probably not a really useful quality criterion since Employability, which is a subcriterion of Impact, depends on external factors rather than on the perception of the impact of training. Impact is ranked with low scores in surveys because the LQM parameter Employability is not a good quality estimator: although employability depends on the acquired skills, it is stronger linked to the personal abilities of the student. Students may feel unattended in a virtual training course; hence they rate communication systems with lower values than what would be expected. Again the shortcomings of the virtual training compared with the face-to-face learning motivate lower values in evaluation by students.

The effort of cataloging LO with LQM was ranked as medium-high according to the survey results. However, the effort required by other quality assessment tools, such as ECBCheck, LORI, or LOEM, is also relevant. But the effort required by LQM can be minimized if we perform the automated quality assessment of the LO. Our summary is that using LQM metadata together with LOMPAD-Q for quality assessment is more effective than efficient.

A shortcoming of this work is the need to manually fill in the metadata parameters while ensuring their quality and completeness [64]. Thoroughness in the task of preparing metadata is a very relevant requirement to prevent the existence of ambiguity in the data elements, thus ensuring consistency and accuracy of information. The extension in IEEE LOM created by LQM increases the complexity of the cataloging process of LO.

As a consequence of the results, we propose new lines for future work. One would focus on developing new resources for metrics management: LOMPAD-Q tool could be extended with new functionality to create, store, and manage quality metrics. LOMPAD-Q could also be extended to allow packaging of learning units (UoL) with new metadata to show their quality. UoL are defined in IMS Learning Design Information Model (IMS-LD)
                        3
                     
                     
                        3
                        
                           http://www.imsglobal.org/learningdesign/ldv1p0/imsld_infov1p0.html.
                      metadata. Currently, RELOAD or LAMS are the main tools used to manage metadata of UoL. LOMPAD-Q, therefore, might support IMS-LD in a future version.

Additionally, we should mention we have not addressed accessibility, since this characteristic represents a very broad topic that would require a specifically dedicated study. In fact, there is only a metadata item in LQM concerning adaptation information; however, ISO/IEC 24751 standard [65] establishes dozens of them [66,67]. Therefore, LQM should be integrated with this standard as a future work: metadata item 4.8.1 Adaptation should be defined as a new data type to support ISO/IEC 24751 contents. Further research should be focused on adaptability: e.g., an adaptable learning management system should store different versions of a resource to provide the profile of the resource best adapted to the student preferences. The Accessibility dimension of LQM should be increased in order to add detailed description of the learning resource concerning individualized adaptability and accessibility in e-learning, education, and training. So, metadata item 4.8.1 should be redefined to be able to register this kind of digital resource description according to ISO/IEC 24751–3 [66]. Moreover, the new adaptability metadata should be defined to meet personal needs and user preferences for digital delivery, as defined in ISO/IEC 24751 [66,67]. Moreover, ATAG 2.0 [68] is a W3C specification, currently in the W3C Candidate Recommendation stage, to provide guidelines for accessible Web authoring interfaces. Hence, a new metadata item called 4.8.6 Web Authoring should also be added to register if the LO meets the specified level (A, AA, AAA) of ATAG 2.0 in case it includes authoring tools such as editor, forum, wiki, etc.

Results recommend further effort in research to achieve a simplification of quality criteria as a way to improve the usefulness of quality evaluation of LO. This effort should address a parallel improvement of quality assessment with LQM and LOMPAD-Q: devising an automated process of plain text for extracting information related to quality is a promising way of mitigating manual intervention while reducing deviations in quality assessments with LOMPAD-Q. Another goal would be the development of an automated process to complete the LQM metadata to reduce the effort of cataloging LO with LQM. Moreover, LOMPAD-Q should be extended to provide the ability of assessing quality of LO already cataloged with LQM according to other quality evaluation criteria.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

LQM is a metadata schema that complements the IEEE LOM data elements. LQM can be used as a framework for storing objective qualitative information related to quality of virtual training. Section 3.2 shows the completeness of the LQM metadata schema to support quality information of LO. LQM provides a rich metadata schema for storing information on the quality of the learning objects, which will be helpful for sorting and recovery of learning objects. In fact, LQM metadata has been contrasted with several quality evaluation models.

The process of quality assessment according to UNE 66181:2012 is a valid and standardized model that guarantees consistency in the evaluation process. However, it must be taken into consideration that there are a remarkable number of common elements for evaluating the quality of LO among the different assessment quality methods.

LOMPAD-Q is a cataloging tool that supports the LQM metadata schema. LOMPAD-Q additionally implements an automated quality assessment of LO cataloged with LQM according to the criteria of the UNE 66181:2012 standard. As a result, LQM metadata schema contains data elements that are useful for an assessment of the quality of LO, which leads us to conclude the suitability of quality assessment using metadata elements. The conclusions of these results show that quality can be expressed by LOMPAD-Q in very different ways depending on the educational level to which they apply.

Results show that metadata of LO provide partial information about its quality, while LQM substantially complements this kind of information. Thanks to LQM and LOMPAD-Q, it is possible to identify the quality of LO in various dimensions. Some dimensions have a strong influence, while others have a weaker influence. It can be concluded that it is feasible to use quality metrics in the search for LO when LO are provided with useful metadata.

Establishing relationships between metadata and quality of LO is a key point for improving the reuse of resources. Additionally, interoperability can be achieved through the use of standards. Therefore, LQM is a metadata solution that extends IEEE LOM and represents an opportunity to automatically evaluate quality with LOMPAD-Q. However, evaluation of quality of LO is still far from being solved due to the diversity of methodologies and possibilities. As a very relevant issue, proposals have to carefully consider the impact of user preferences. In fact, the quality of an LO is still in a high percentage dependent on subjectivity: users decide at a later time after using a resource whether an LO has met their learning expectations. This is the true meaning of quality concerning learning resources in virtual education.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This work is partially supported by the European Commission through the ALFA III–ESVI-AL project.


                     
                        
                           Table 8
                           
                              Mapping UNE 66181:2012 with LQM.
                           
                           
                              
                              
                              
                                 
                                    UNE 66181:2012
                                    LQM items
                                 
                              
                              
                                 
                                    Minimum general information
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Name
                                    1.2 Title
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Objectives
                                    5.10 Description
                                 
                                 
                                    9.1 Purpose=educational objective AND 9.2 Taxon Path
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Training type
                                    5.17 Type
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Demand
                                    1.9 Demand
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Previous training
                                    5.5 Intended end user role
                                 
                                 
                                    5.10 Description
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Dedication
                                    5.9 Typical learning time
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Hardware
                                    4.4 Requirement
                                 
                                 
                                    4.6 Other platform requirements
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Software
                                    4.4 Requirement
                                 
                                 
                                    4.6 Other platform requirements
                                 
                                 
                                    Recognition of training for employability
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Level 1
                                    Always true
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Level 2
                                    1.10.1 Type=attendance
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Level 3
                                    1.10.1 Type=completion
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Level 4
                                    1.10.3 Validity=recognized
                                 
                                 
                                    5.15.1 Type=post-course
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Level 5
                                    1.10.3Validity=international
                                 
                                 
                                    Didactic instructional design
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Level 1
                                    1.4 Description=not empty
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Level 2
                                    9.1 Purpose=educational objective AND 9.2 Taxon Path
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Level 3
                                    5.16 Learning Method=not empty
                                 
                                 
                                    5.12.1 Features=final evaluation
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Level 4
                                    5.2 Learning Resource Type=experiment
                                 
                                 
                                    1.8 Aggregation Level=2,3 OR 4 AND 1.7 Structure=collection, networked OR hierarchical
                                 
                                 
                                    5.12.1 Features=initial evaluation
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Level 5
                                    9.1 Purpose=competency AND 9.2 Taxon Path
                                 
                                 
                                    5.16 Learning Method=project-based learning OR case-based learning OR problem-based learning
                                 
                                 
                                    5.15.1 Type=post-course
                                 
                                 
                                    Training resources and learning activities
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Level 1
                                    5.1 Interactivity Type=expositive
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Level 2
                                    5.3 Interactivity Level=medium, high OR very high
                                 
                                 
                                    5.12.1 Features=self-assessment
                                 
                                 
                                    5.10 Description=not empty
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Level 3
                                    5.16 Learning Method=project-based learning OR case-based learning OR problem-based learning
                                 
                                 
                                    5.12.1 Features=teaching guide
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Level 4
                                    5.2 Learning Resource Type=more than one
                                 
                                 
                                    5.16 Learning Method=project-based learning OR case-based learning OR problem-based learning
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Level 5
                                    5.15.1 Type=synchronous sessions
                                 
                                 
                                    5.12.2 Communication=repository
                                 
                                 
                                    Tutoring
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Level 1
                                    Always true
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Level 2
                                    5.15.1 Type=consultation
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Level 3
                                    5.15.2 Response Time=not empty
                                 
                                 
                                    5.15.1 Type=progress monitoring
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Level 4
                                    5.15.1 Type=learning monitoring
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Level 5
                                    5.15.1 Type=personalized
                                 
                                 
                                    5.15.1 Type=synchronous sessions
                                 
                                 
                                    Technological and digital environment
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Level 1
                                    4.4 Requirement=not empty OR 4.6 Other Platform Requirements=not empty
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Level 2
                                    5.12.2Communication=not empty
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Level 3
                                    5.12.1 Features=integrated
                                 
                                 
                                    5.12.1 Features=FAQ OR help
                                 
                                 
                                    5.12.1 Features=search engine
                                 
                                 
                                    1.7 Structure=networked OR hierarchical OR linear
                                 
                                 
                                    5.14 Usability=not empty
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Level 4
                                    5.12.1 Features=reports
                                 
                                 
                                    5.12.1 Features=persistency
                                 
                                 
                                    5.12.2 Communication=repository
                                 
                                 
                                    5.12.2 Communication=forum
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Level 5
                                    5.12.1 Features=progress
                                 
                                 
                                    5.12.1 Features=reuse
                                 
                                 
                                    5.12.1 Features=customizable
                                 
                                 
                                    5.12.2 Communication=social
                                 
                                 
                                    Hardware accessibility
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Level 1
                                    Always true
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Level 2
                                    5.13.1 Adaptation=not empty
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Level 3
                                    5.13.2 Help=hardware
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Level 4
                                    5.13.3 Hardware=1
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Level 5
                                    5.13.3 Hardware=2
                                 
                                 
                                    Software accessibility
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Level 1
                                    Always true
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Level 2
                                    5.13.1 Adaptation=not empty
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Level 3
                                    5.13.2 Help=environment
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Level 4
                                    5.13.4 Software=set of numbers defined in UNE 66181:2012
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Level 5
                                    5.13.4 Software=set of numbers defined in UNE 66181:2012
                                 
                                 
                                    Web accessibility
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Level 1
                                    Always true
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Level 2
                                    5.13.1 Adaptation=not empty
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Level 3
                                    5.13.2 Help=environment
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Level 4
                                    5.13.5 Web=A
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Level 5
                                    5.13.5 Web=AA
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Table 9
                           
                              Mapping reusability factors with LQM.
                           
                           
                              
                              
                              
                              
                                 
                                    Reusability metrics
                                    Reusability factors
                                    LQM items
                                 
                              
                              
                                 
                                    Cohesion
                                    Self-contained
                                    1.7 Structure
                                 
                                 
                                    Modular
                                    1.8 Aggregation level
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    5.4 Semantic density
                                 
                                 
                                    7 Relation
                                 
                                 
                                    9.1 Educational objective
                                 
                                 
                                    Size
                                    Properly grained
                                    4.2 Size
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    4.7 Duration
                                 
                                 
                                    5.2 Resource type
                                 
                                 
                                    5.9 Typical learning time
                                 
                                 
                                    Educational portability
                                    Generic
                                    1.3 Language
                                 
                                 
                                    Different educational levels
                                    5.6 Context
                                 
                                 
                                    Different academic disciplines
                                    5.7 Typical age range
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    9 Classification
                                 
                                 
                                    Technological portability
                                    Hardware dependencies
                                    4.1 Format
                                 
                                 
                                    Software dependencies
                                    4.4 Requirements
                                 
                                 
                                    Format dependencies
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Table 10
                           
                              Mapping LORI with LQM.
                           
                           
                              
                              
                              
                                 
                                    LORI dimensions
                                    LQM items
                                 
                              
                              
                                 
                                    Content quality
                                    1.10.2 Entity=not empty
                                 
                                 
                                    5.4 Semantic Density=medium
                                 
                                 
                                    5.8 Difficulty=medium
                                 
                                 
                                    Learning goal alignment
                                    9.1 Purpose=educational objective AND 9.2 Taxon Path
                                 
                                 
                                    Feedback and adaptation
                                    8.3 Description=not empty
                                 
                                 
                                    5.12.1 Features=SC
                                 
                                 
                                    Motivation
                                    5.12.1 Features=progress AND integrated
                                 
                                 
                                    5.12.2 Communication=not empty
                                 
                                 
                                    5.1 Interactivity Type=mixed
                                 
                                 
                                    5.8 Difficulty=medium
                                 
                                 
                                    5.15.1 Type=personalized
                                 
                                 
                                    Presentation design
                                    5.12.1 Features=customizable, integrated, progress AND FAQ
                                 
                                 
                                    Interaction usability
                                    5.1 Interactivity Type=not empty
                                 
                                 
                                    5.2 Learning Resource Type=not empty
                                 
                                 
                                    5.3 Interactivity Level=not empty
                                 
                                 
                                    5.10 Description=not empty
                                 
                                 
                                    5.12.1 Features=not empty
                                 
                                 
                                    5.12.2 Communication=not empty
                                 
                                 
                                    5.14.1 General=not empty
                                 
                                 
                                    5.14.2 Web=not empty
                                 
                                 
                                    Accessibility
                                    5.13 Accessibility=not empty
                                 
                                 
                                    Reusability
                                    5.5 Intended End User Role=not empty
                                 
                                 
                                    5.6 Context=not empty
                                 
                                 
                                    5.7 Typical Age Range=not empty
                                 
                                 
                                    Standards compliance
                                    9 Classification=used for identifying standards
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Table 11
                           
                              Mapping ECBCheck with LQM.
                           
                           
                              
                              
                              
                                 
                                    ECBCheck criteria and subcriteria
                                    LQM items
                                 
                              
                              
                                 
                                    Information about the program
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       General description, objectives and program organization
                                    1.4 Description
                                 
                                 
                                    5.10 Description
                                 
                                 
                                    9.1 Purpose=educational objective OR competency
                                 
                                 
                                    2.3.2 Entity
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Organizational and technical requirements
                                    4.4 Requirement
                                 
                                 
                                    4.6 Other Platform Requirements
                                 
                                 
                                    Target group orientation
                                    5.5 Intended End User Role
                                 
                                 
                                    5.9 Typical Learning Time
                                 
                                 
                                    5.4 Semantic Density
                                 
                                 
                                    5.15.1 Type=personalized
                                 
                                 
                                    5.12.1 Features=SC
                                 
                                 
                                    Quality of the content
                                    1.8 Aggregation Level=3 OR 4
                                 
                                 
                                    1.7 Structure=collection, networked OR hierarchical
                                 
                                 
                                    5.4 Semantic Density=medium
                                 
                                 
                                    5.8 Difficulty=medium
                                 
                                 
                                    Program/course design
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Learning design and methodology
                                    5.17 Type
                                 
                                 
                                    5.16 Learning Method=not empty
                                 
                                 
                                    5.12.2 Communication=social
                                 
                                 
                                    5.16 Learning Method=project-based learning OR case-based learning OR problem-based learning
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Motivation/participation
                                    5.1 Interactivity Type
                                 
                                 
                                    5.3 Interactivity Level
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Learning materials
                                    5.2 Learning Resource Type=experiment
                                 
                                 
                                    9.1 Purpose=educational objective OR competency
                                 
                                 
                                    5.12.1 Features=glossary
                                 
                                 
                                    5.12.1 Features=teaching guide
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       E-Tutoring
                                    5.15 Tutoring
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Collaborative learning
                                    5.12.2 Communication=forum OR social
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Assignments and learning progress
                                    5.10 Description=not empty
                                 
                                 
                                    5.12.1 Features=teaching guide
                                 
                                 
                                    5.12.1 Features=progress
                                 
                                 
                                    5.15.1 Type=personalized
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Assessment and tests
                                    5.12.1 Features=self-assessment
                                 
                                 
                                    5.15.2 Response Time=not empty
                                 
                                 
                                    Media design
                                    5.13 Accessibility
                                 
                                 
                                    5.14 Usability
                                 
                                 
                                    5.12.1 Features=progress
                                 
                                 
                                    Technology
                                    4.1 Format
                                 
                                 
                                    4.2 Size
                                 
                                 
                                    4.4 Requirement
                                 
                                 
                                    4.6 Other Platform Requirements
                                 
                                 
                                    Evaluation and review
                                    5.12.1 Features=final evaluation
                                 
                                 
                                    5.12.1 Features=SC
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Table 12
                           
                              Mapping LOEM with LQM.
                           
                           
                              
                              
                              
                              
                                 
                                    LOEM dimensions
                                    LOEM subcategories
                                    LQM items
                                 
                              
                              
                                 
                                    Interactivity
                                    Meaningful interactions
                                    5.3 Interactivity Level=not empty
                                 
                                 
                                    Overall control
                                    5.12.2 Communication=not empty
                                 
                                 
                                    Multimedia adds learning value
                                    4.1 Format=”video/ mpeg”
                                 
                                 
                                    Design
                                    Consistency
                                    5.12.1 Features=persistency
                                 
                                 
                                    Layout
                                    5.12.1 Features=integrated
                                 
                                 
                                    Labeling
                                    5.12.1 Features=customizable
                                 
                                 
                                    Readability
                                    5.13.5 Web=A
                                 
                                 
                                    Engagement
                                    Quality of feedback
                                    5.15 Tutoring=not empty
                                 
                                 
                                    Attractive
                                    5.12.1 Features=progress
                                 
                                 
                                    Graphics
                                    5.12.1 Features=reports
                                 
                                 
                                    Amount of multimedia
                                    5.1 Interactivity Type=mixed
                                 
                                 
                                    Motivating
                                    5.2 Learning Resource Type=graph
                                 
                                 
                                    5.1 Interactivity Type=expositive AND 4.1 Format=”video/ mpeg”
                                 
                                 
                                    1.4 Description=not empty
                                 
                                 
                                    9.1 Purpose=educational objective OR competency
                                 
                                 
                                    Usability
                                    Natural to use
                                    5.8 Difficulty=medium
                                 
                                 
                                    Orientation
                                    5.12.1 Features=persistency OR progress
                                 
                                 
                                    Navigational cues
                                    5.12.1 Features=help
                                 
                                 
                                    Instructions
                                    5.10 Description=not empty
                                 
                                 
                                    Appropriate language level
                                    5.12.1 Features=teaching guide
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                    5.4 Semantic Density=medium
                                 
                                 
                                    5.14.1 General=not empty
                                 
                                 
                                    5.14.2 Web=not empty
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

