@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Cyber security readiness in the South Australian Government

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Interviews with 17 participants from 11 South Australian (SA) government entities


                        
                        
                           
                           Identification of key areas for SA government's ISMS implementation


                        
                        
                           
                           Identification of key areas for SA government's classification of data


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Cyber security

Information security management framework (ISMF)

Information security management system (ISMS)

South Australian Government

Whole of government approach

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  In this paper, we conducted a series of face-to-face interviews with 17 participants from 11 SA government entities, with the aim of validating whether existing processes and strategic direction were sufficient to satisfactorily achieve the implementation of an ISMS and classification of data for the respective SA government entities. Based on our interviews and review of ISMS associated reviews conducted within other Australian State and Territory jurisdictions, we identify key areas that the SA Government may need to consider as part of the progressive roll-out of the other phases of ISMF version 3 implementation up and to June 2017.
               
            

Cyber security is one of the highest-priority items on the global policy and national security agendas, and an increasingly challenging policy area for governments. The 2008 report of the Centre for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) Commission on Cybersecurity for the 44th Presidency reported: ‘We began with one central finding: The United States must treat cybersecurity as one of most important national security challenges it faces’ [9]. Three years later in 2011, cyber security remains one of the greatest threats identified in cyber space — ‘[t]he findings of our first report still stand: cybersecurity is now a major national security problem for the United States …. and adopting a comprehensive national security strategy that embraces both the domestic and international aspects of cybersecurity will make us more secure’ [10]. Cyber security was also identified as one of the four highest priority/tier one national security risks by UK's National Security Council in 2010 [23], and one of Australia's top tier national security priorities in the country's first National Security Strategy launched in January 2013 [7].

In order to meet future cyber security challenges, entities need to ensure that effective security controls underpin information systems and its sensitive data [41]. The review of the Australian (Federal) Government's use of information and communication technology as reported in the Sir Peter Gershon's report of 2008 recommended that agencies needed to strengthen their governance mechanisms and move closer to standardisation within specific IT architecture [18]. The security of information systems (IS) and its data is also an on-going research area and various theories have been used in IS and information security research. Within the area of behavioural IS security literature, studies have focused on the relationship and lessons learnt between IS security and the behaviour of employees (i.e. insiders) (see [37]). As explained by Choo [11] and Levi [25] using the routine activity and rational choice theory [13,17], individuals tend to maximise their utility given the situational opportunities that confront them. In an IS context, effective information security measures within the organisations limit malicious cyber activities [22,24], and both extrinsic motivators (i.e. increased severity of penalties, increased certainty of detection, and social pressures—normative beliefs) and intrinsic motivators (i.e. perceived effectiveness) can encourage compliance with organisational information security policies [20,21] through the recognition of lesson learnt, and the strengthening of governance mechanisms and the locating of specific controls as close to the data as possible (which may assist in improving efficiency and effectiveness of compliance measures). Stronger controls around the classifications of information data will also reduce the potential for information to be compromised.

Various Australian government jurisdictions have gradually been strengthening their information security controls through the implementation of their own versions of an information security management system (ISMS) as a means to safeguard information. This will eventually establish a consolidated common security control position across Australia based upon the standard ‘AS/NZS ISO/IEC 27001:2006 Information technology — Security techniques — Information security management systems — Requirements’ (will be referred to AS 27001 in the remainder of this paper) [29].

The South Australian Government (SA Government) has also acknowledged that mounting evidence within Australia (as provided by the Australian Government Defence Signals Directorate) and from overseas jurisdictions suggests that the government is being targeted from various threat vectors and that these risks are on the rise. The SA Government has subsequently implemented an initiative for all their agencies, commissions, corporations and other regulatory bodies (collectively referred to as SA government entities or entities) to develop an ISMS and classify information data.

In this paper, we interviewed 17 participants across 11 SA government entities to assess how the SA Government and its entities have approached the implementation of an ISMS and classified data based upon assessed sensitivity (including in accordance with SA whole of government mandated strategic direction). The study has also compared the published compliance reviews from other Australian jurisdiction Auditor-Generals. This sought to leverage from these reports and discuss the benefits, consequences and challenges that the SA Government would need to address in order to ensure that the data is adequately protected from internal and external vulnerabilities. Our study examines the adequacy of the proposed SA Government process through its guidance and implementation by entities of government, and whether a standardised approach which centred upon AS 27001 has been consistently conveyed and applied by respective government entities. Our findings will assist the SA community to determine if their information data is adequately safeguarded and the implementation of the ISMS and classification of data are progressed in an effective and efficient manner.

The rest of this paper is organised as follows: Section 2 describes the research methodology and participant demographics. Section 3 discusses the findings from our interviews. Section 4 presents the collective observations from ISMS associated reviews conducted within other Australian State and Territory jurisdictions. The last section concludes the paper.

Within the SA Government, there are numerous agencies, commissions, corporations and other regulatory bodies established in accordance with the Public Sector and other enabling legislations. These government entities vary in complexity based upon their operational size, uniqueness of business, nature and coverage. From an ICT perspective, the entities vary from having simple to complex computer systems. Whilst the simple ICT systems support singular environments, the complex entities comprise varying departmental portfolio and complex relational functions which have a direct reference to the critical informational data held that are seen as critical to both SA Government and the respective individual entities.

At a whole of government strategic directional level, it was identified that 40 key entities exist that potentially retain critical/important informational data. Our research has sought to incorporate a cross section of government entities. Hence, we approached 14 SA government entities to participate, but 3 entities either declined the invitation or were unavailable due to the narrow timeframe in which the study was conducted. Of the 11 entities that participated in the research, nine contained elements that were unique to that entity alone and included complex functionality such as treasury, transportation, water, agricultural/horticulture, education and legal considerations. A total of 17 participants — four agency security executives (ASE), 11 information technology security advisors (ITSA) and two whole of government strategic advisors — from these 11 entities, participated in a series of interviews. The roles of ASE, ITSA and the whole-of-government strategic advisor, in accordance with the SA Government ISMF Guideline 13 [33] are as follows:
                        
                           •
                           The role of the ASE is a position of trust assigned to overview security performance outcomes and operations and support stated executive outcomes and performance requirements specific to the ISMS through their involvement in security management commitments, Agency Security Plan, Consolidation of control documentation and overall ISO certification assessment for each respective SA government entity.

The ITSA is involved at most stages of the ISMS development in an advisory capacity and is to review and provide commentary and advice on risk assessments that are undertaken by various parts of the business.

The whole of government strategic direction analysts have prepared a suite of high level guidelines for entity use which strive to make reference to South Australian legislative and the SA Government's ISMF, International Standards, and best practices. Also these analysts seek to relate with entities on areas of general uncertainty of an IT nature. It is intended that entities will use this information to develop measures that will assist in mitigating identified risk(s).

In May 2012, as a pre-curser to the interviews with participants, we obtained a listing of entity nominated ASE and the ITSAs from the SA Government. This listing identified that a number of positions had been vacant for an extended period of time (ranging from six to 12months). In some instances, the SA Government's recent restructure/reshuffle which occurred in late 2011 had contributed to the movement of certain government staff that had yet to be replaced. Failure to initiate replacements for the ISMS project based upon specifically assigned staff may restrict the development of an ISMS for that entity in accordance with set June 2013 milestone.

This potential delay may also be further accentuated where an ASE position remains unfilled prohibiting an entity's ITSA to progress the project. This may contribute to a lack of direction and seniority to make appropriate project based decisions. As at May 2012, 10 positions associated with the implementation of the ISMS and classification of data across SA government entities remained vacant.

As part of the research, each of the participants was provided with a series of open-ended questionnaires. These questions, developed in accordance to the SA Government ISMF guideline 13 [33], require participants to provide their interpretation as to how the project was progressing. In several questions, participants were required to rate their experiences on a scale of 1 to 5. The interviews were audio-recorded in order to ensure accurate interpretation and reduce the potential for a bias assessment of the interview responses. The interviews incorporated key project staff and sought to gain a realistic representation of how the implementation of the ISMS and classification of data were progressing. This was to assess the adequacy of the entity's ISMS implementation progress and identify any potential vulnerability(ies).

@&#DISCUSSIONS@&#

Whilst it has been confirmed that all participating entities have adopted the SA Government ISMF, our study found significant directional changes in the security control approach for all SA government entities. With the introduction of the revised ISMF version 3 in 2011, participating entities have acknowledged that the change from ISMF version 2 and its alignment with AS 27001 have been quite resource intensive and represented in some instances quite a cultural change from prior practices.

The participating entities' main observation is that with the introduction of the ISMF version 3, entities have been required to realign all past security control work specific to the initial attempt at developing a non ISO ISMS. This need for realignment in some instances has seen prior work as being wasted and initially had attracted a negative reaction. Some entities rather than realign previously performed work have chosen to restart from the beginning which is contrary to the general principles of efficient and effective working practices.

The following observations outline the specific areas that have been directly attributed to the implementation and overall classification of data as part of the general transition project.

The ISMS aims to identify and manage policies, procedures and directions. The ISMS is implemented in order to provide an environment that is aware, predictable, sound and appropriately protected and secured from threats and risks to its information management assets [6]. An effectively implemented ISMS should (1) allow the organisation to safeguard and monitor access to information, (2) facilitate the organisation to operate at the optimal level and (3) recover from a wide range of malicious cyber activities when they succeed [6,16].

In the context of the implementation of the ISMS across the entities that participated in the study, it was found that only two entities had reportedly reached a position whereby the ISMS was fully implemented. Of the remaining nine entities, one entity was still yet to commence implementation of the ISMS. This is against a background where the implementation of the ISMS has been encouraged within the SA Government ISMF since its inception in April 2003. Up until now the implementation of the ISMS has not been mandatory but rather encouraged and recommended should the agency decide to implement.

In 2011, the implementation of the ISMF version 3, stipulated that adoption of the framework, implementation of an ISMS and development of security controls were no longer optional but mandated (see [31]). The first phase of the transition is for entities to either establish an ISMS for information assets or establish an undertaking that emphasises the areas that are critical or highly sensitive to the business. This is anticipated to be in place by June 2013. Again entities are provided with an option whereby the project is mandated but the completion of the first phase milestone is not set in stone but rather anticipated. The consequence of allowing entities with certain degrees of implementation options leading up to June 2013 may increase the potential for entities to not meet the first phase milestone deadline.

Also the progressive roll-out of the other phases allows entities to gradually expand coverage up and to June 2017 in anticipation that all ICT assets will be incorporated into the scope of the new ISMS. This timeframe will assist in covering any transition slippage. If slippage was to occur leading up to June 2013 due to the early stage of the project, this could be interpreted as a consequence of limited or inadequate proactive project management and potential deficiencies in the project's top-down leadership approach and planning.

To maintain effective project governance there is a need to underpin project success and results in efficient and timely project decision making. Project governance provides an opportunity to identify a single point of accountability that is service delivery focused and separates the project from the organisational governance structure in order that separate stakeholder management and project decision making can be maintained (Garland 2008). The SA Government requires that each entity establish an appropriate governance programme that will assist in the effective and efficient running of the business. SA Government ISMF has stipulated that SA government entities must establish governance of cyber security. It aims to demonstrate a level of commitment from the highest levels of the organisation, specific to a culture of security and appropriate information handling that is based upon information classification. There is intent that a governance group must establish, maintain, review and refine strategy, policy and objectives for ICT security within the SA government entity. By maintaining a comprehensive governance regime, entities will be better positioned to demonstrate a higher level of resilience to risk. When applied to the implementation of the ISMS there is an expectation that appropriate direction, commitment and support by senior management are available and conveyed in a clear and transparent fashion. It is this governance support structure that will assist in the successful ISMS deployment [15].

11 of the 15 ASE and ITSA participants in eight entities believed that deficiencies existed with potential governance structure associated with the implementation of the ISMS in their entities. Also senior management was not sufficiently engaged at this stage with the project. The participants believed that their entities were approximately 65% of optimum and the level of general governance could be improved. It is important that ITSA has sufficient guidance from senior management, and unfortunately it appeared that such meeting between ASE and ITSA was either not currently occurring or is spasmodic. The participants believed that their senior management was not as responsive in dealing with crisis, lacked clear direction and had yet to develop programmes that would adequately address the protection of sensitive data from internal and external threats. The consequence of inadequate responsiveness within leadership may suggest that they were fearful of a crisis and do not provide clear direction as supported by project personnel when required.

Contained within the whole of government ISMF guideline 10 (see [32]) there is a reference that the ASE appointed by way of the Protective Security Management Framework (PSMF) and Internal Audit have a role in keeping the Chief Executive informed of cyber security compliance progress on a regular basis. Without sufficient general governance, the reporting and tracking of the progress of the project and key development considerations could potentially be delayed. As such deficiencies in general senior management guidance and governance may place undue milestone pressures on entities and project staff trying to meet set transition goals.

Risk assessments aim to identify, prioritize, and quantify risk to organisational operations, and organisational assets, resulting from the loss of confidentiality, integrity, or availability of information or information systems. This subsequently seeks to reflect the potential adverse impacts that may occur to organisational operations, information assets, and the operation or use of information systems [42].

As stipulated in the SA Government (PSMF), the Chief Executive of an entity is accountable for the development and management of an Entity's Security Plan which must be developed to manage the entity's security risks and should be based on a security policy that supports the Agency's goals and resources. The security risks are to be managed in accordance with AS/NZS ISO 31000:2009 [30] and the principles of the SA Government Risk Management Policy Statement. SA government entities are required to develop a single risk assessment mechanism that is used for multiple purposes within an entity and its importance cannot be understated.

13 participants reportedly had established risk assessments within their entities. Of these risk assessments, the participating entities acknowledged the importance of the risk assessment process but confirmed that not all assessments incorporate information asset and data as a key consideration. This is currently being readdressed in order to realign and comply with ISMS requirements. The ITSA participants acknowledged that currently some of the entity risk assessments under review were being realigned following the implementation of the SA Government ISMF. This will incorporate additional security considerations as part of the baseline for the ISMS and classification of data. The remaining three participants confirmed that their entities are in the context of developing a risk assessment framework specific to their entity to assist in the development and implementation of the ISMS.

Further when assessing the respective responses from the respective ASE and ITSA, one ASE participant was reportedly unaware or uncertain as to whether the risk assessment specific to the implementation of the ISMS were currently in place. A potential consequence of entities failing to incorporate information data security elements within their wider agency risk management plan may result in the entity not being able to manage risk in a coordinated, consistent and comprehensive manner [44].

The importance of developing a clear and concise strategic direction associated with the implementation of the ISMS comes down to a simple process that is understandable to all stakeholders across government. The key areas to consider include simplicity, adaptability, and speed of planning, communication, competencies, and general implementation. Confusing strategies and tactics all too often keep organisations from properly implementing an effective information protection strategy [11,28].

Whilst the implementation of government guidelines on cyber security and the implementation of the ISMS and classification of data have been initiated at a whole of government level, the responsibility for the implementation of that project rests with the SA government entities that are the data business owners. To assist SA government entities in this endeavour, a series of guidelines were prepared as a means to assist and give some level of guidance.

Close to half of the participants (eight out of 17) suggested that current directions by way of guidelines, general procedures and policies were not clear and concise. The study also found that the majority of uncertainty resides with the ITSA who have the role of managing the security of information and ICT systems in an advisory capacity to business data owners. This uncertainty has resulted in a high level of anxiety across government as entities attempt to address these areas of confusion/uncertainty.

It is interesting to note that the general statement at the back of each guideline stipulates that the guidelines do not aim to provide the reader with all of the responsibilities and obligations associated with set scenarios. Also the guidelines were intended to be merely a good practice guideline that SA government entities will need to use and consider. Indirectly there is the inference that it is the entities that must identify the most appropriate means as it is their data and that each agency is unique in the way that it deals with its operational business. This may have resulted in inconsistencies in the way that SA government entities have gone about implementing the ISMS and classifying information data.

AS 27001 recognises the importance of information security documentation for the management and operation of all information processing. The intent of the security documentation is to assist in outlining the operational procedures, whilst emphasising the importance of specific key security controls. These elements of protection strive to segregate duties, delegation and general risk considerations which should be available and directed to all users who may require assistance. SA Government ISMF identifies the minimum controls required by all SA government entities regardless of the scope of their ISMS implementation(s). This set of information security control policies and procedures effectively establishes the cyber security baseline driven by business requirements and objectives across government ICT services and operations. This also assists in developing a statement of applicability consistent with AS 27001, which intends to map security control procedure documentation against set controls for their operating environment that encompasses critical ICT information assets and associated activities.

The participants acknowledged that the majority of entities are currently realigning their procedures to ensure that the coverage is adequate and comprehensive. Whilst three participating entities have established adequate documentation to comply with AS 27001 requirements, seven entities have acknowledged that following the upgrade to the mandated ISMF version 3 security controls, they are still progressing the development of security control documentation which also needs to gain senior management endorsement as to its adequacy. The remaining entity has not yet commenced documenting the security controls necessary to meet the requirements as part of the statement of applicability and overall certification as part of the AS 27001.

In the context of validation at the ASE and ITSA ISMS project implementation level, the 16 participants confirmed that the majority of documentation and supporting procedures were going through an extensive level of realignment. It is intended that this documentation will stipulate procedures, risk of non-compliance, level of responsibility and frequency at which the procedure needs to be subject to further review.

The current lack of reporting may establish areas of bias in the planning process whereby strategy makers and strategic implementers from both sides point fingers at each other as to the cause for implementation failure if it was to arise. By ensuring that strategic data is appropriate controlled and reported may reduce the potential for blind spots developing within the final strategic plan. Within each SA government entity, there is an expectation that executive management shall ensure that there is clear direction and visible management support for information and asset security initiatives with each entity.

The majority of the participants (14) have confirmed at an organisation level that no reporting to the whole of government strategic unit level presently occurs or has been requested from SA government entities. Whilst some entities have acknowledged that they are frequently relating with whole of government strategic advisors (one participant), the remaining two participants were unsure/unaware as to whether their entity is providing some information at a whole of government level.

The collective responses from ASE and ITSA participants indicated that reporting beyond the entity does not occur. Whilst ITSA have regular forum meetings whereby matters are generally discussed, there is no specific information provided or collected at the whole of government level. This would provide staff at the whole of government level with an appreciation as to the overall level of entity progress occurring across the whole of government since the initiative is a mandated transition venture within the SA Government. Consequently, by not involving the whole of government in the monitoring process restricts the government from gaining an effective prospective as to how the project is tracking in its entirety. Without that high level perspective, there is no appreciation as to how this initiative is progressing from a state position [14].

To assist entities in implementing the classification of sensitive data, the whole of government strategic direction unit of government has developed a general high level guideline to assists agencies. The intent of this guideline as stipulated in the guideline is to facilitate agency migration of existing information assets to the new dissemination and/or protective security markings as described in the current ISMF version 3. This guideline is to also map into the government's previously mentioned key ISMF Guideline steps. It is also intended that these guidelines will assist agencies in implementing and transitioning sensitive information data in accordance with the AS 27001.

Our study found that of the 11 participating entities, only two entities had established procedures that would satisfactorily comply with established ISMF security control requirements. The remaining nine participants were still either introducing or realigning existing procedures in order to comply with ISMF version 3 since its introduction in 2011. Whilst these nine participants are currently implementing suitable processes, the participants have suggested that they are seeking greater guidelines in this area in order to satisfactorily apply the classification across all entity data. It was suggested that perhaps additional workshops and/or one on one sessions through the whole of government strategy direction unit could be of assistance. This use of increased assistance and awareness will assist in gaining greater consistency across government.

Our study has also identified that the development of mechanisms to increase information data awareness may have a two-fold effect — it may assist in (1) increasing the overall entity receptiveness to operational change based upon changes in organisational culture and value; and (2) creating an enhanced relationship between the data owner and project staff as they strive and become more aware of the importance of the data that they are seeking to protect on behalf of the entity. Efficient and effective implementation of security measures within organisational structures reduces the situational opportunities and associated risks [22,34]. Failure to consistently apply the classification of data process will increase the potential for data to be misclassified based upon individual interpretations. Also it increases the potential for disharmony between data owners who may not agree to the level of classification that has been applied to their sensitive asset.

In order to establish suitable resourcing requirements for the implementation of an ISMS, SA government entities are required to plan and allocate adequate staff [2]. To assist in this matter the development of a resource strategy plan strives to assist in creating the foundation upon which project resourcing requirements are based. A framework should be established that provides effective information security governance whereby adequate decision makers with a current, accurate and sufficient understanding of the threat environment should be established. This will be based upon a risk-based construct in relation to information security which is passed and confirmed with security data owners and stakeholders. The strategic framework should also include such elements as retention (where applicable) which should be regularly revisited to ascertain whether resources allocated to the project and time allowed are adequate [2].

At the time of the formulation of the ISMS project with SA, a cabinet submission was prepared and sought approval for the project to commence. Within that submission there was an expectation at the entity level that adequate additional staffing provisions would be made available to entities to assist in the ISMS implementation. Now that the project is underway, the majority of participating entities have confirmed that no addition resourcing for this project has been provided. Rather the project is to be accommodated from within their existing entity budget. Within the study, 14 participants indicated that no additional resourcing provisions were made available to entities as a way to assist with the implementation of the ISMS and the classification of data. In addition, these 14 participants acknowledged that there was an expectation that these extra duties would be added onto their current duties. The remaining three respondents indicated that whilst direct funding was not made available to the entity from a whole of government level, specific entities have been in the fortunate position of having some additional funds directed to extra staffing and/or external expertise contracting.

Failing to provide adequate direction and staffing may result in deficiencies in the entities' capability to achieve effective and efficient management of the ISMS projects so as to meet key implementation milestones. As previously mentioned, this project comprises three phases of two years each. Each progressive phase is intended to build upon the success of the previous development. Difficulties may arise where additional workload expectations exceed individual/entity capabilities. Senior management need to increase their current level of engagement with the project so as to ensure that effective entity monitoring and progress are maintained. This will also allow suitable responsiveness to matters as they arise.

Security is only as strong as its weakest link, and although technical solutions can provide effective protection against security threats, it alone cannot provide a comprehensive solution [12]. Mishra and Dhillon [26] contended that ‘incidents of governance failures to prevent security breaches due to employees within the organization are indicators of the failure of information systems security governance programmes’ and the importance of user awareness training has been emphasised by researchers such as Mitnick [27]. It is, therefore, critical that organisations (including government entities) ensure that their employees are sufficiently aware of the supporting policies and procedures that underpin information data and its overall sensitivity, as well as ‘maintain[ing] current knowledge of the latest cybercrime activities and the best cybercrime prevention measures available’ ([12]: 5). However, only six participants believed that the level of awareness training provided by a whole of government strategic business units was adequate and sufficient so as to adequately implement the ISMS at that point in time. A further six participants acknowledged that increased awareness training was required so as to assist entities in the implementation of the ISMS and classification of data as they further progressed the project at an agency level; and the remaining participant believed that the level of training was inadequate and needed to be provided in greater detail. In general the participants believe that training areas of a more technical level were specifically required in areas associated with risk management, security documentation and classification of data; and they were concerned that there interpretation of set requirements could be seen as inconsistent with that of other entities.

AS 27001 accreditation is generally regarded as the process by which formal recognition and acceptance of specific residual security risks are appropriate for the classification of information data. This accreditation provides entities with the level of assurance that either sufficient security measures have been put in place or that deficiencies in such measures have been accepted by the appropriate accreditation entity. As part of the mandated SA Government ISMS initiative, government entities must develop or have in place an ISMS (processes, systems, and geographic locations) that is documented, mapped and aligned to controls as part of the ISMS Statement of Applicability process. For entities that choose not to pursue full certification, they must satisfy themselves through a comprehensive risk assessment that information security measures are adequate and fully documented.

Surprisingly only two participants indicated that their entities had established certification in accordance with AS 27001, whilst eight entities were still undecided as to whether they would seek certification through their senior management. One participant indicated that his (remaining) entity would not be seeking certification in accordance with AS 27001. The main argument surrounding the certification of the project focuses on the fact that entities at this point in time could not justify the certification in accordance with their entities' operational needs based upon future levels of cost and resources that would be required to regularly maintain the certification once the entity was compliant.

Whilst the above discussion has explored various security control project considerations at a government level, the lessons learnt from the study would also be relevant and of assistance to non-government entities in Australia and overseas.

Our study has identified that the State of South Australia is aiming to move towards aligning itself with the international standard. Whilst prior lessons learnt from other jurisdiction security reviews have identified similarities weaknesses surrounding the implementation and management of IT security controls and the classification of data, this State has failed to remediate the reoccurrence of similar security risks.

Following each interstate security initiative, the Auditor-General in each of those respective Australian jurisdictions performed a compliance review to determine the adequacy of the process undertaken. The key observations raised by the respective Auditor-General offices have identified a number of matters of a similar nature (see Table 1
                     ). Whilst the initial observation as part of our study covered the period 2010 to 2012, the assessment of subsequent security review outcomes has been extended through to the end of 2013 (see Table 2
                     ). These additional reports have further identified that security observations raised as part of this study are still continuing to reoccur a number of years after the initial study was performed.

The following is a high level summary of the reviews undertaken and key observations identified across a number of Australian Government jurisdictions.

More recently a number of IT specific reviews associated with interstate government jurisdictions were published. These reviews identified that certain matters previously identified in prior years were continuing to reoccur. Similar to the above table the following is a summary of some of those subsequent reviews and their respective observations.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

With the implementation of the ISMS and classification of data initiative, the participants in our study acknowledged that with the development of a robust information security programme a number of positive outcomes within SA government entities have occurred. The SA government initiative has aligned the State of South Australia with the Commonwealth and other Australian State and Territory jurisdictions. It has been acknowledged that this will assist as they collectively seek to combat cyber threats on a daily basis through the identification of security vulnerabilities. This will also ensure that newly established principles will also remain consistent with existing laws, regulations, and international standards. Further the initiative has sought greater state entity ownership as a means to identify and protect sensitive data held under its control.

Our study has identified that whilst the State of South Australia is aligning its position with that of other interstate jurisdictions, it has not sufficiently used these prior lessons learnt to restrict its reoccurrence with this States initiative. These reviews collectively have identified weaknesses surrounding a lack of clear and concise ICT strategy direction and strong senior management commitment and leadership, need for the development and on-going management of robust risk based practices, inability to assess the level of assurance and confidentiality relating to sensitive information, inadequacy in information security policies and procedures, lack of consistent and coordinated information security practices specific to key security infrastructure, lack of general self-awareness and information security training, and lack of monitoring of agencies progress towards compliance and certification. When comparing the above observations with matters specific to SA Government's ISMS implementation, we can also see some similarities. This would suggest that the SA Government's approach to mitigating specific risks based upon lessons learnt from prior experiences of other Australian jurisdictions could have been increased or more comprehensive.

Our study has also identified instances where senior management and associated project personnel may need to increase the level of engagement and internal reporting associated with this project. This may also extend to general areas of project governance and its integration into the entity corporate strategic direction. The importance of engaging senior management in organisational security is not new and has been studied since the 1980's (see [19,34]). At this point in time a large proportion of SA government entities undertaking the implementation of the ISMS and classification of data have not yet determined their strategic position as to whether they intend to seek ISO certification. By failing to strategically declare whether the entity is seeking certification may submit unclear messages to project staff as to the entity's commitment to this endeavour. At a whole of government level there are also opportunities to provide greater involvement through on-going monitoring of the level of progress associated with this mandated state government initiative. The participants have also suggested that an increased level of guidance at a whole of government level may further assist in providing a clearer and more concise direction. This may incorporate the development of key project template documentation surrounding risk assessment, general security documentation and further explanation and direction relating to the general classification of data. This may also contribute and assist in developing adequate awareness of the level of information data held and its significance to respective entities. Further this increased appreciation of the value of information data to an entity will assist senior management in future strategic directional decisions throughout government.

It was further identified that whilst each entity was assigned specific project officers to assist in the management of the project, with staff movements within government some of project roles have been left unattended for extended periods of time (e.g. greater than six months). This aspect and the fact that limited entity resources have been assigned for the effective and efficient completion of the mandated project may contribute to missing key project milestones.

In summary, key areas that SA government entities may need to consider as part of the implementation of the ISMS and classification of data are:
                        
                           •
                           Increased levels of engagement and general project governance by senior management.

Further development as part of the on-going awareness training pitched at multiple levels throughout SA government entities.

Continues review of project resourcing levels to ensure that key project milestones are achieved.

Increased monitoring of SA government entities' progress at a whole of government.

Increased development and management of robust risk based practices and assessments, classification of data and security documentation that are more standardised across SA government entities.

Continued review of the project scope to ensure that expectations are appropriate and achievable in accordance with AS 27001.

Evaluating the security of ISMF version 3 is beyond the scope of this study, although this could be a future research topic.

Whilst this study has been applied against a government entity, the general observations, risks and consideration points identified and commented upon could also be applied against most non-government entities in Australia and other developed countries that are attempting to implement a similar initiative. By embracing the above considerations identified as part of lessons learnt, entities will be better positions strategically to avoid and remediate common areas of weaknesses.

The views and opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors alone and not the South Australian Government, and organisations with whom the authors are or have been associated/supported. This project has been approved by the University's Human Research Ethics Committee. We would like to thank our colleagues including the participants for assisting and participating in this project; and the three anonymous reviewers for providing constructive feedback. Despite their invaluable assistance, any errors remaining in this paper are solely attributed to the authors.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

