@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Information privacy policies: The effects of policy characteristics and online experience

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           This study proposes that privacy policies’ characteristics significantly affect perceptions of importance and relevance.


                        
                        
                           
                           This study used an experiment procedure using two respondent groups based on sensitivity of information asked.


                        
                        
                           
                           The clarity of the policy has the strongest influence on importance.


                        
                        
                           
                           Visibility has the strongest influence on relevance.


                        
                        
                           
                           Respondents faced with high information sensitivity conditions perceived higher importance and relevance.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Information privacy policy

Policy length

Policy visibility

Policy specificity

Online experience

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Careful design of information privacy policies is one significant means to induce providing personal information. This research takes three design elements – length, visibility, and specificity – and tests their effectiveness to address information sensitivity, measuring perceived importance and relevance of the policy to decisions to share personal information. The experiment results show that visibility and specificity takes priority. Furthermore, high information sensitivity conditions induce higher perceptions of importance and relevance. Research implications suggest that managers should consider maximizing the benefits of these policy characteristics to induce consumers to read the policy and make it a significant consideration in sharing personal information.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Privacy concerns continue to be a struggle, especially in e-commerce settings where some personal information must be shared to do business [1]. Much of the discussion on information privacy pertains to organizations ensuring that the collected customer information are properly stored, analyzed, and used [2–5]. Developing clear and concrete information privacy policies is one important alternative to make this assurance [4,6,7]. However, moment-to-moment privacy concerns are contextual cues [8] and usually based on different individual behaviors [9], bearing little connection to the trade-offs of providing information [10,11]. This emphasizes the increasing difficulty of designing privacy policies and regulations [9].

This research focuses further on one specific function of privacy assurance: the information privacy policies published by the organization on its website. This is an ongoing issue of interest because of the fact that to use a website, users must agree to the information privacy policy [12,13] and provide some personal input [9], regardless if the website is a traditional e-commerce website or a breakthrough social media website. This research insists that observing consumers' behavioral responses in real online settings is a very important aspect of privacy research [2,14,15] to specify and develop user preferences [4,10,16], which can be framed via these privacy policies [1]. There is much to be said on what the consumers should do to ensure that their privacy is indeed protected because of the fragmented nature of information privacy protection issues [5,7,16]. In other words, if there is so much pressure for the organizations to come up with clear and concrete information privacy policies, then consumers should be able to reciprocate that effort by reading and understanding these policies. Reading and understanding these policies would also evaluate whether or not the organization is actually satisfying consumer privacy concerns. Therefore, this research would examine some factors that influence consumers actually reading and actually understanding these policies [10,11], and furthermore, how can these factors interact with one another. This would be beneficial to the organization to strategize how to actually acquire more value from such policies. Even if it is integrated in the design of the website [3], actually encouraging consumers to read through them is still a great challenge.

One of the biggest concerns is that even top-ranked Web site privacy policies are long and hard to understand, making it is less likely that consumers will read such policies [1,17,18], and develop favorable attitudes in online, foregoing opportunities to address privacy concerns and build trust. Furthermore, significant limitations hound this kind of trust-building practice, such as managing a dilemma of adopting either an “all-or-nothing” approach or a highly diversified disclosure approach tailored to different levels of trust [16], and coping with few opportunities to exert greater control over data exchanges [7]. Worse, people do not always act consistently with their stated privacy preferences [10,19].

This study shows how individual perceptions of information sensitivity affect perceptions on the importance of having a privacy policy. Furthermore, policy characteristics such as length, visibility, and specificity affect perceptions on the importance and relevance of having a privacy policy. The length of the policy affects its relevance, while its visibility and specificity affects both its importance and relevance. Additionally, there is an interaction effect of information sensitivity on the policy's visibility towards perceptions on the importance of having a privacy policy. With these results, this study contributes to the literature in two major ways. The first is by emphasizing the fact that aside from its actual content, the different methods in which a privacy policy is designed and communicated is also of equal importance. Furthermore, how to these different methods can potentially interact with one another is an additional contribution. This study also suggests which method should be prioritized, which is its visibility in this particular case. The second contribution stems from the characteristics of the sample used, which presents a relatively unique and largely unexplored context but has one of the highest degrees of online presence and use.

A key managerial issue is the manner in which consumers are informed of such policies [20,21]. In the case of privacy policies, characteristics such as message format and complexity [1,22,23], and the means of disseminating these policies [6] can influence consumers' overall perceptions on the privacy policy. Furthermore, having accurate information encourages actions consistent with the individual's or the society's best interests [11]. In other words, no matter the content of the policy itself, which is more or less standardized these days [3,5,16], the manner in which this content is delivered is of more importance [12]. Given these issues, the following research questions are thus proposed:
                           
                              1)
                              Do online consumers really read a website's published or posted information privacy policies?

What factors would encourage or discourage consumers to read and understand these information privacy policies?

@&#LITERATURE REVIEW@&#

Self-disclosure theory posits that consumers' willingness to disclose personal information is based on their assessments of the costs, risks, and benefits [24], prompting them to look for such indicators. Information privacy policies provide one such indicator [6,25] to allow enterprises and consumers to communicate and negotiate privacy practices [5]. But social contract theory further posits that the individuals involved lack the information, time, and emotional strength to make judgments consistent with their preferences [26]. Therefore, based on information theory, the amount of information exposed to the customer must be considered to avoid information processing overload, which can lead to unfavorable consequences [27,28], especially in the presence of information asymmetry [19]. Additionally, based on signaling theory, effective messages should be simple, easy to understand, and realistic [22]. These four theories serve as the theoretical foundation for the research model which will be discussed later.

Another example of such signals and cues are trust marks [20], communicating impressions of capability, credibility, benevolence, and integrity. The ability to transfer unambiguous and relevant information through such channels enhances favorable perceptions on privacy disclosures [23,29].

Contexts control customer behavior more than demographics [8,10]. Depending on the context, consumers rely on several signals presented by the company [20,25]. In the context of this research, these hosts of signals are the firms' information privacy policies, which can come in a variety of ways and means. These can be a high-level strategic abstract of the policy, a mid-level issue specific set of guidelines, and/or a low-level set of implementation details [2,7]. Given this variety, privacy policy characteristics such as amount of information [30], information formats [25] such as length, comprehensiveness, complexity, accessibility, readability [1,31], consistency, and accuracy [32], and information richness [30] can influence people's perceptions and behavioral intentions [12]. Furthermore, the means of communicating and disseminating these policies can also influence perceptions and behavioral intentions [15,33,34]. This simply means that different facets of the privacy policy will hold different appeals to different people [2,16]. Therefore, companies should treat their policies in the similar way as with their products and services [35].

One major concern here is the customer's perceptions on information sensitivity, which influences perceptions on privacy policies [36,37]. Requests for certain types of information certainly affects perceptions [13], as consumers are more comfortable disclosing demographic and lifestyle information, which have been deemed as less sensitive information, than purchase-related and personal identifying information, which are more sensitive [38,39]. Also, the more sensitive customers will be more discriminating and less trusting and will therefore pay more attention towards an organization's information privacy policies [39–41], seeing that they understand the necessity of sharing such information, but are still hesitant to fully disclose what is needed [13].

External variables such as brand awareness and brand loyalty can have some confounding effects in the relationships between and amongst the information privacy policy, its length and level of complexity, the level of privacy riskiness, trust perceptions, and information security perceptions [11,21]. Trust also depends on the situation [8,21,23]. Typically, normal interactions induce greater trust [7,8].

What can further confound this situation are personal factors such as prior experience, levels of reading comprehension, trust and privacy concerns, demographics, and presence of alternative signals [18,21]. Therefore, there is now an environment where the interactions amongst the prevailing context, personal preferences, and privacy policy characteristics that exists and needs to be examined further.

The most important thing is that a good policy should translate management expectations into clear, specific, and measureable objectives [7,25,31]. By closing tying the message with consumer demographics [4,5], the organization is able to exert a persuasive effect, resulting to favorable perceptions and attitudes [42,43]. In other words, the message must be relevant to increase consumers' perceived importance of the message [11,44]. Furthermore, relevance will also encourage greater involvement and motivation to process the message [45,46]. These in turn, will also encourage favorable perceptions and attitudes.

Overall, the relationship between the level of accurate information and the observed behavior is a complex one [10,11] because there may be several factors that actually confound this direct relationship [11]. Therefore, it is critical that the analysis of this relationship must still be within the context being examined.

To reiterate, the overarching theoretical foundation framing the research model is based on self-disclosure theory [24] and social contract theory [26], with the privacy policy serving as the indicator to assess costs, risks, and benefits to address the lack of information needed to make decisions. Defining the scope of this study, depending on the individual's level of information sensitivity, there will be different levels of perceptions [13], in this case on importance and relevance of the information privacy policies. This will be based on the characteristics of the information privacy policy in terms of its length according to information theory [27,28], its amount of visibility, and its level of specificity, both according to signaling theory [22], within the organization's website [1,47,48].

To reflect the possible effects of the different characteristics of an organization's information privacy policies, and to address the second research question, the following hypotheses, based on information richness [25], message format and complexity [23], and means to promote the policies [9,17,22,35] are defined as follows:
                           H1a
                           Shorter information privacy policies will more positively influence customer's perceived level of importance placed on the information privacy policy.

Shorter information privacy policies will more positively influence customers' perceived level of relevance placed on the information privacy policy.

More visible information privacy policies will more positively influence customers' perceived level of importance placed on the information privacy policy.

More visible information privacy policies will more positively influence customers' perceived level of relevance placed on the information privacy policy.

More specific information privacy policies will more positively influence customers' perceived level of importance placed on the information privacy policy.

More specific information privacy policies will more positively influence customers' perceived level of relevance placed on the information privacy policy.

To reflect the expected significant differences of consumers' perceptions under the different levels of information sensitivity [6,13,14,29], the following hypotheses are defined as follows:
                           H4a
                           There will be a significant difference in the perceptions of importance between consumers with a higher level of information sensitivity than those with lower level of information sensitivity.

There will be a significant difference in the perceptions of relevance between consumers with a higher level of information sensitivity than those with lower level of information sensitivity.

Lastly, to reflect the influence of perceived importance on perceived relevance of the message [10,31,42,43], and to answer the first research question, the following hypothesis is thus proposed as well:
                           H5
                           Perceptions of importance positively influence perceptions of relevance of an information privacy policy.

This study administered a field experiment. The dependent variables are the level of perceived importance (PIIPP) and the level of perceived relevance (PRIIP) of the information privacy policy, which are indicative of consumers reading and understanding information privacy policy given some perceptions stemming from their privacy issues [42,43]. Overall, this study used three 2×2 factorial design field experiments (information sensitivity×length; information sensitivity×visibility; information sensitivity×specificity). SPSS 16 was used for the data analysis and hypotheses testing. Below (Table 1
                        ) is the tabular representation of the experiment design.

The target respondents were asked to view a hypothetical website offering electronic gadgets such as laptops and mobile phones, packages and promos, and after sales services, and go through a set of instructions to familiarize them with its features. The respondents were assigned to one of two groups. One group was asked low sensitive information and the other high sensitive information. Low sensitive information included name, mailing address, gender, and email address while high sensitive information added phone numbers, complete birth date, and some questions regarding high-tech products and services proficiency [38,39].

They were instructed to read through a website's privacy policy, which essentially had the same content and meaning. The participants had to find the link to the privacy policy within the website by themselves. The three aforementioned characteristics were manipulated, making a total of twelve experiment groups. A questionnaire was administered after the completion of the field experiment to evaluate the importance and relevance of the read information privacy policy based on their experiences with the experiment.

The length of the information privacy policy was either long or short [31]. For the visibility of the policy, either the link to the policy is a picture found on the top portion of the web page (high visibility), or a text link found on the bottom portion of the web page (low visibility) [9,22,25]. For the specificity of the policy, it was either be in plain, readable English using more common terms (more specific) or in ambiguous, technical, or legalese terms (less specific) [23].

For the two dependent variables – customer's level of perceived importance and level of perceived relevance on the organization's information privacy policies – covered in this study, measurement items were adopted from previously developed and validated items [31,36,39,40,42] using a seven-point Likert scale.

A total of 480 participants were invited via email and online personal messages, referring to a database of a top business college in Manila, Philippines, with 300 usable responses returned (62.5% response rate). Each experiment group had 25 usable responses. The Philippines was selected as the sample data pool to address concerns regarding the lack of Asian contexts in online behavior research [3,45], and that standards and principles for information privacy policy developments are mostly U.S.-based [3]. Furthermore, the Philippines has a significantly large information and telecommunications market forecasted at US$4 billion and 7.6 million Internet users in 2011 [49], and a relatively unique environment compared to its Asian neighbors, with a confusing mix of Eastern and Western orientations [50], providing for a very interesting and rich scenario for IS research. All the analysis for this study used SPSS 16 statistical software.

For the respondent demographics, 91% were between 18 to 24years old. 50% were employed, while the other 50% were students. 32% were still in their undergraduate degrees, while 53% finished undergraduate education. 15% were taking further studies (either masters or doctorate degrees). As for their online experiences, these are summarized as follows (Table 2
                        ):

As shown, most respondents have at least seven years of Internet browsing and email usage experience, but they have at most only three years of Internet shopping experience. However, it can also be seen that most respondents have three to ten years of social media usage experience. All in all, the sample displayed a reasonable and significant online experience enough for the purposes of this study, consistent with previous similar studies [3,34,45,46,51].

The following table (Table 3
                        ) shows the descriptive statistics and the validity and reliability results. Note that the seemingly high standard deviation values are due to the different manipulations made, where each experimental group is expected to have significantly different results when participants answer the survey questionnaire.

As the manipulations of the independent variables were done based on past research, manipulation checks were made for confirmation and validation. This is a requirement for experimental research to determine if indeed the manipulations made are effective enough to induce the desired significant differences. Participants were asked to rate the privacy policy that were read based on their perceptions on length (e.g. did you think the policy was too long), visibility (e.g. was the link to the policy easy to find), and specificity (e.g. did you understand the policy), all using a seven-point Likert scale question items, after the experiment. Paired-sample t-tests using SPSS 16 statistical software were then performed on their responses to determine if the manipulations had enough significant difference for the experiment. For the high sensitivity group, the following results are: t(Length)=5.286 (0.000); t(Visibility)=6.272 (0.000); t(Clarity)=7.478 (0.000). For the low sensitivity group, the following results are: t(Length)=2.106 (0.040); t(Visibility)=16.123 (0.000); t(Clarity)=7.277 (0.000). All of these results indicate significant differences in the manipulations made for the experiment. This means that the manipulations on each of the independent variables on length, visibility, and clarity were deemed by the respondents are significant enough. For example, what the manipulations considered as a short information privacy policy was indeed considered short by the respondents and what was long was indeed considered long.

General Linear Modeling (GLM) using SPSS statistical software was used to test this study's Hypotheses 1 to 4. The following MANOVA tables summarize statistical results found in this study (Table 4
                        ).

As for the direct effects, the results show that information sensitivity, when taken into consideration with privacy policy characteristics, has some significant influence on perceptions of importance but not relevance of the privacy policy. Length is shown here to be not significant on perceptions of importance, failing to support H1a, but on relevance, supporting H1b. But the most interesting finding here is that visibility and specificity have the most significant direct influence on both importance and relevance perceptions, supporting H2a, H2b, and H3a, and H3b. This implies that amongst all three characteristics of the privacy policy included in this study, visibility and specificity are the ones that consumers apparently care about the most. In other words, they do not care much about the length, as long as once they can find it and after reading it, it is very clear to them. As for the interaction effects, the results suggest that there is a significant interaction between information sensitivity and visibility on perceived importance of the information privacy policy. This is important since their respective direct effects are also significant. This implies that considering different levels of information sensitivity, visibility has a significant effect on consumers evaluating the importance of the privacy policy. More importantly, this particular result shows that the interaction is more significant than the individual direct effects.

The following tables show the differences between the perceptions of importance and relevance given the considerations on information sensitivity vis-à-vis the different privacy policy features as manipulated in this research (Table 5
                        ).

Further testing H1a and H1b, these results show that, except for perceptions on importance under high sensitivity conditions, shorter privacy policies induced more positive perceptions on their importance and relevance from the users. This is true regardless of the type of personal information being asked. These results imply that in general, shorter privacy policies do indeed encourage more favorable perceptions on their importance and relevance than compared to longer ones [31]. This therefore reinforces the previous results of failing to support H1a and providing full support for H1b. This makes it crucial for policy makers to consider the length of the policy while developing it for the organization to post and communicate (Table 6
                        ).

Further testing H2a and H2b, these results imply that regardless of the type of personal information being asked from the customers, highly visible privacy policies are indeed more helpful to encourage more favorable perceptions of their importance and relevance compared to policies that are harder to find within a website, consistent with previous studies on the matter [17]. This provides further support for H2a and H2b. This implies that the location of the link to the privacy policy, especially within an organization's homepage, is also of utmost importance if it wants to earn favorable perceptions.

This table (Table 7
                        ) further analyzes H3a and H3b. As also seen here, regardless of the type of personal information being asked, more specific privacy policies did induce more favorable perceptions on their importance and relevance compared to less specific ones, further supporting H3a and H3b. This implies that individuals would prefer to read through privacy policies that contain more specific terms conveyed in plain English, rather than in complicated and legalese terms, consistent with previous literature criticizing on how difficult it is to understand privacy policies using the latter [17,23]. Therefore, policy makers should be conscious about the terms that they use when developing privacy policies.

Finally, the study also found significant differences between the high information sensitivity and the low information sensitivity conditions. For the perceived importance, the results are as follows: M(high)
                        =3.705, M(low)
                        =4.060, t(PIIPP)
                        =2.354 (0.019). Interestingly enough, the low information sensitivity condition yielded a more favorable perception of importance. As for the perceived relevance, the results show that: M(high)
                        =5.193, M(low)
                        =4.953, t(PRIIP)
                        =2.063 (0.040), indicating that the high information sensitivity condition showed a more favorable perception on relevance, supporting both H4a and H4b.

Furthermore, linear regression using SPSS 16 statistical software was used to test for H5. Results show that perceptions of importance do significantly influence perceptions of relevance of information privacy policies (R2
                        =0.372, Adj. R2
                        =0.353, F=19.111 (0.000); β(PIIPP)
                        =0.416, t(PIIPP)
                        =7.965 (0.000)), supporting H5. However, controlling for online experience, regression results also show that Internet browsing experience negatively influence perceptions of relevance (β(IBE)
                        =−0.406, t(IBE)
                        =5.433 (0.000)). This prompted the research to explore the possibility of testing for moderating effects of online experience. This yielded that email usage experience (β(PIIPP×EUE)
                        =0.138, t(PIIPP×EUE)
                        =2.216 (0.027)) and online shopping experience (β(PIIPP×OSE)
                        =−0.220, t(PIIPP×OSE)
                        =4.044 (0.000)) are significant moderators. Interestingly, these results suggest that email usage experience is a positive moderator while online shopping experience is a negative moderator. Hence, this further implies that depending on how online experience is approached and addressed, this may also cause some more confounding effects on the process of inducing favorable behaviors (Table 8
                        ).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

@&#DISCUSSIONS@&#

The results presented some very interesting findings about the effects of the context or situation and the features of the information privacy policy. In detail, the specificity of the privacy policy is the one that has the most significant effect on consumers' perceptions of its importance in deciding to share personal information, more than visibility and length. But as far as perceptions of relevance are concerned, visibility plays the most significant role, followed by length, and then specificity. This may answer specifically why privacy policies are valued by consumers [14,38,52]. Especially since most consumers are ordinary individuals with little or no legal and or technical experience [20,52], being very clear about the contents of the privacy policy would indeed be very helpful to them [23,29,31]. Being specific also helps to address concerns regarding information overload [27,28] and individuals' processing limitations [19]. All in all, the results imply that these three factors do play significant roles in inducing perceptions of importance and relevance towards privacy policies. This emphasizes the idea that a total solution for privacy provisions must combine laws and regulations, markets and consumer insights, and technology [53].

An interesting finding here is the significant interaction effects of sensitivity and visibility towards perceptions of importance of the privacy policies. This is an important finding, since their respective individual direct effects has also been found to be significant. This is one observable example of an instance regarding possible interactions due to personal and contextual considerations [21,45,46], and of different facets of the privacy policy affect different people in different ways [2,16], in this case specifically regarding people's different perceptions on information sensitivity [29,36,37]. This implies that indeed, information sensitivity encourages people to be more discriminating [18,39] and therefore be more mindful of the presence of the privacy policy within a website, which in this case explains why only the interaction between sensitivity and visibility was found to be significant. In other words, because information sensitivity becomes such a critical issue, this made people expect that in order to emphasize the importance of the privacy policy, it should be easily seen within the website that they are navigating, or at least the link to the privacy policy should be easily seen. This further emphasizes the importance of expecting a number of interaction effects that can occur, especially in an online environment.

Furthermore, as mentioned earlier, one more reason for such interesting results here may be attributed to the varying degrees of online experience of the respondents [18,23,52]. Since even past literature has not been very clear on this matter, it is an interesting notion to see how such factors play a further role, either as a direct or interacting effect. Experience can still play a seemingly confusing role in the application of that knowledge depending on the situation at hand. Similar to the effects of prior experience [34,45,46], such considerations lead to more skepticism and more scrutiny, leading to some mixed reactions and behaviors depending on the situation. In this case, the results show that Internet browsing experience plays a significant role in the scrutiny of information privacy policies.

This study adds to the literature by exploring and combining some factors that influence consumers to fully read and understand published or uploaded information privacy policies. Aside from complying with external pressures [3,5,33,54], this study examines if these organizations foster the appropriate environment based on the policy characteristics of length, visibility, and specificity for their customers to read and understand such policies, which are equally important factors aside from the actual content [13]. Referring back to social contract theory, the obligation of the organization does not end when they their information privacy policies are made known to the general public. Organizations should make sure that these policies and statements are actually communicated properly to their customers. Another contribution of this study is the integration of three policy characteristics into one study, potentially looking out for possible interaction effects. Previous research have examined these factors separately [1], but as what this study has shown, interactions from individuals' personal dispositions and policy characteristics exist, and can influence perceptions of importance and relevance of the privacy policy itself, shedding more light on how both demographics [45,46] and contexts [10] can separately and jointly influence behavior. This study further contributes by proposing some suggestions on improving the policy's length, visibility, and specificity, and furthermore, amongst these three characteristics, which one to prioritize first. Again, while the content itself is important [12], the manner in which these policies are communicated to the consumers are at least equally important, probably even more. In this case, the visibility, clarity, and specificity of the privacy policy is of utmost importance. These results strongly suggest that heavily considering consumer behavior in developing privacy policies [4,9,16,53] is indeed a must.

Future research may extend the scope of these two dependent variables further. Higher levels of perceived importance and perceived relevance will lead to higher levels of trust [1], and in turn, higher levels of trust will therefore lead to more willingness to disclose personal information [6,30,33,34]. Therefore, there are several unexplored implications of making the information privacy policies a very relevant and very important component of the consumers' decision making process to disclose personal information.

Another contribution is the use of a different context to collect data. As previously mentioned, there has been a dearth of studies pertaining to the contexts outside the United States [3,45]. The Philippine society provides a mix of Eastern and Western influences, hereby providing a relatively new approach to explain some phenomena from both influences [50]. This study provides a relatively new position to study an existing phenomenon from a different context that exudes both Eastern and Western influences, hereby emphasizing further the influences of both demographics and contexts on behavior.

This study reinforces the notion that the applicability of theory significantly depends on the context, may it be environmental or individual [3,10,14]. As for the environmental context, it presents some avenue to operate theoretical frameworks based on social contract theory, information processing theory, and signaling theory by suggesting which features of a particular piece of message – in this case of an information privacy policy – are the most significant to influence the desired behaviors. Previous studies have mentioned the importance of such characteristics to improve the effectiveness of the privacy policy. This study adds to the literature by identifying which amongst such features are significantly more important than others. This finding also reinforces communications-based theories regarding the importance of conveying a message very clearly [23,25,31].

Furthermore, as for the individual context, perceptions under conditions of varying information sensitivity and online experience are also important considerations in the application of such theories. In this case, this study also adds to the literature by highlighting the significance of information sensitivity and online experience to the interactions occur when consumers evaluate the importance and relevance of a privacy policy.

The most significant managerial implication here is it highlights which characteristics of an information privacy policy are the most significant to induce the desired behavior. In this case, companies should, first and foremost, be very clear on what the policy communicates [31]. In other words, making the privacy policy clear – that is, using simple, everyday language instead of legalese terms – should be a priority. They must keep in mind that not all consumers have the capacity to read and understand complex messages [5,16,19,53]. This study further suggests that visibility is also a major concern after clarity. Obviously, concerns about visibility occur after the privacy policy has been crafted. Managers should therefore be also concerned if their supposedly very clear privacy policies, or at least the links to these privacy policies, are easily found within their websites, especially if they are asking for highly sensitive information.

Furthermore, issues about consumers' online experience must also be taken into consideration. Depending on how online experience can be leveraged, this can have some confounding effects on an organization's efforts to induce some favorable perceptions [45,46,54]. Further considerations regarding on how organizations should relate to more experienced and less experienced customers should also be a part on how managers and policy makers develop their privacy policies.

As with any other experimental study, the limitation here is the number of variables that can be accommodated. Theoretically, all characteristics of a message should be considered on how they influence the desired behavior, both as individual and interaction effects [20,31,52]. But practically, such a comprehensive scope will be difficult for an experiment in social science research. Therefore, future research can consider different combinations of privacy policy characteristics and how do they work under conditions of information sensitivity.

As also mentioned in the study, aside from information sensitivity, personal dispositions [13] such as computer and online self-efficacy and experiences may also interact with privacy policy characteristics to influence the desired behavior. As such, future research can also consider such effects to determine the most prevalent factors that can influence the importance and relevance of privacy policies.

Lastly, limitation issues on the sample are also acknowledged. Although most MIS research have used younger generation of samples because of they are supposedly more technologically knowledgeable, adept, and experienced [45,46,51], it is always the case where generalizability towards a broader age range may be questioned. As always, the application of this research's framework in other contexts (e.g. other demographic, social, and cultural groups) provides opportunities to improve the generalizability of this research's findings and implications.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

