@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Continuance intention of E-portfolio system: A confirmatory and multigroup invariance analysis of technology acceptance model

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           This study explains individuals’ intention of E-portfolio information platforms usage.


                        
                        
                           
                           This study performs the invariance analysis to understand the moderation of different subgroups in TAM.


                        
                        
                           
                           This study proposes an empirical case of verification process for TAM’s invariance testing.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Technology Acceptance Model

E-portfolio

Invariance Analysis

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The technology acceptance model (TAM) has been applied in various fields to study a wide range of information technologies. Although TAM has been developed in this research stream in Taiwan, TAM's issues of measurement have received scant attention. A robust model must perform measurement invariance across different respondent subgroups to ensure that various sample profiles have the same relationship. A survey of regarding E-portfolio system reuse intention was constructed, resulting in 360 valid responses across subgroups differing in gender, grade, and levels of willingness to share, to examine the measurement invariance of TAM. The results empirically support the validity of our TAM instrument for evaluating E-portfolio reuse intentions behavior. These findings suggest that men and women, differing grades, levels of willingness to share conceptualize the TAM construct in similarly. The implications of these results enable us to understand TAM's validity in E-portfolio acceptance research.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Currently colleges and universities are facing lots of problems, including ill designed curricula that do not meet demands from the job market. There is also lots of pressure from society on colleges or universities to provide an education that results in guaranteed employment, especially given the soaring price of higher education. Currently, a number of academic institutions are facing the problem of grade inflation. Therefore, academic educational institutions are looking for alternative ways to provide an education that attracts students in a highly competitive world [49].

In recent years, instructors have more interest in integrating Internet based technologies into their classroom as part of the learning environment. The electronic portfolio (E-portfolio) system has the potential to change the nature of learning environments and the ways in which student learning is promoted through different modes of learning [6]. E-portfolio allows information related to learning to be stored, accessed, updated, and presented in various electronic formats as a record or evidence of student learning and achievement [11,22]. E-portfolio also represents an assessment measure with strong potential for providing feedback about student performance to improve curricula and pedagogy, determining individual students' mastery of learning and providing feedback for improvement, and actively involving students in the assessment process. Knight et al. [31] examined the relationship between E-portfolio participation and student success. The results showed that undergraduate students with E-portfolio artifacts had significantly higher grade point averages, credit hours earned, and retention rates than a matched set of students without E-portfolio artifacts.

Recording the various activities, in which students participate to establish E-portfolio can help graduates market themselves to employers and successfully join the workforce. Students benefit from performing career planning at earlier stages, which may become a crucial indicator of professional attitude and ability judgments in the future. More recently, universities and colleges in Taiwan have begun paying increased attention to the establishment and use of E-portfolio, integrating career portfolios and student career planning, learning development, and ability certification. These portfolios have been converted to electronic form and are stored in online school databases. However, whether E-portfolio platforms can reflect students' learning processes, help learners assess learning results, or facilitate learning to enhance their employability is determined by whether students consistently use these platforms to enrich their learning results.

The application of E-portfolio to learning records establishes a novel category of information technology for students. Most theories related to IT behavior emphasize the acceptance, use, or continuing use of technology. Among these theories, the technology acceptance model (TAM), introduced by Davis in 1989, is the most commonly used (e.g. [5,27,32,54,12,13,43–45,47,51]). Compared to studies on other information systems, student users' behavior toward E-portfolios have not been assessed and thoroughly understood [44]. This study uses TAM to test the behavior intension of college students regarding the continued use of E-portfolio.

In addition to focusing on the continuance use of E-portfolio, this study also measured the invariance of different groups. Lai & Li [32] stated that, although most studies related to TAM involve empirical investigations and have excellent explaining power, whether TAM is appropriate for a group depends on the invariance testing of the group. Shroff et al. [44] pointed out that the significance of the relationships among TAM variables might be affected by different demographic variables in the survey. Lu and Chiou [39] indicated that different demographic variables caused differences in e-learning satisfaction.


                     Lai & Li [32] suggested that an ideal theoretical model consists of identical relationship structures in the observed data among the various groups. In addition to examining the application of TAM for the behavioral intention of university and college students regarding E-portfolio use, this study utilizes gender, grade level, and level of willingness to share as variables to measure invariance. Because gender and age are the most frequently used variables in invariance studies, they were included in this study. Willingness to share E-portfolio represents the attention that the participants gave to E-portfolio and their degree of self-confidence, which play crucial roles in students' use of E-portfolio. Thus, this study attempted to re-examine and use several moderators to understand the E-portfolio's adoption and related issues.

@&#LITERATURE REVIEW@&#

TAM is based primarily on the theory of reasoned action (TRA) and has been modified to model users' acceptance of information systems. TAM comprises the construct of (1) perceived usefulness (PU) defined as the performance and future benefits derived from the subjective use of a technology; greater perceived PU on the part of a user for a technology to produce more positive attitudes toward the adoption of the technology. Within TAM, PU influences users' acceptance of information systems either directly or indirectly through their attitudes. Armatas et al. [4] noted that, in the learning process, learners are motivated to adopt technologies if they perceive that computer technologies enhance their learning. E-portfolio systematically records learning processes, aiding students' progress and making their planning more efficient; (2) perceived ease-of-use (PEOU) is defined as the degree to which users perceive that a technology is easy to use. The more users believe a technology is easy to use, the more positive their attitudes toward the adoption of the technology. The PEOU of E-portfolio systems can enhance their effectiveness during the learning period; (3) attitude toward use (ATT), which Ajzen [1] defines as “the positive or negative thoughts, feelings, and perceptions toward imminent or desired behavior”; (4) continuance intention (CI), which Bhattacherjee [8] suggested that CI is employed to measure the “explicit strength of a user in performing a continuance intention toward information system/information technology.” Most studies show that TAM has an excellent predictive capacity in assessing the adoption of IT platforms for facilitating teaching and learning.

Many studies show that TAM has a crucial role in studies related to IT usage by students [19,34,37,53], and demonstrate that the PEOU and PU of technology applications affect students' learning efficacy and attitude. In addition, PEOU and PU are important factors that influence whether learners continue learning in the long term [42,58,33,44,47,48,50,51,57]. PEOU and PU impact not only on attitude, behavior intention, continuance learning, and IT usage but also learning satisfaction [3,19,23,37,46]. In summary, TAM is an adequate model in predicting student IT usage and learning satisfaction.

Although numerous studies have used TAM as a theoretical framework to examine learning and teaching platform usage behaviors and TAM's excellent explaining power, [34,53] pointed out that PEOU was not a good predictor for the student intention to use a learning-management system (LMS). Shroff et al. [44] used TAM to predict student behavior of using E-portfolio system. They found that PEOU significantly affects ATT and PU. However, PU did not significantly impact ATT, nor did ATT to the user behavior of E-portfolio. Shroff et al. [44] considered that individual characteristics may have a significant influence on instructors to adopt E-portfolio.

In the study of e-learning user behavior, individual characteristics, especially gender differences, were always been concerned. For example, male students have better computer proficiency, more positive attitude, higher user intention and satisfaction toward e-learning than female students [35,39]. Gonzalez-Gomez et al. [25] investigated 1185 students on their e-learning satisfaction. They found that female students are more satisfied than male students with the e-learning subjects, and female students assign more importance to the planning of learning. These studies in e-learning showed different conclusions indicating relationships among variables might be affected by gender differences.

To learn more about the prediction power of TAM to user behavior of E-portfolio and to understand the influence of different demographic variables on the stability of the research model, this study employs empirical data to examine the invariance of TAM among groups, testing whether variations across groups that are divided by gender, grade level, and willingness to share platform content influence TAM.

Invariance analyses typically have two purposes. The first is to test whether the sample members possess conceptual disagreement with the measurement questions. The second is whether the sample members have psychometrical disagreement regarding the questions. Conceptual disagreement refers to various groups who differ in their understanding of a certain construct, causing them to produce inconsistent factor weighting or loading because of differing results. Conceptual disagreement chiefly results from differences in background or experience. Psychometrical disagreement involves various groups of subjects having a unified view of the explanation of a construct, but producing differences among groups due to measurement methods (errors in random sampling) [32]. This study tests whether discrepancies arise in TAM scales due to conceptual or psychometrical disagreement among groups.

Most invariance studies have consisted of researchers developing research models that are based on theory and performing survey research based on the variables in the model. The subsequent research results show whether the variable models introduced by the researchers are a good fit and whether the relationships between the variables are consistent with the research hypotheses. A particularly critical issue is whether every survey respondent shares the same understanding of the survey's meaning. Cross-group invariance testing is highly crucial. If the analysis results of a survey do not exhibit cross-group invariance, then it is difficult for researchers to confirm that their tools can be generalized to other samples.

Gender always plays an important role in the acceptance of online services. Researchers (e.g., [25,35,39,59,60]) show that the feelings of male about IT have traditionally been more favorable than that of females. In addition, a few researches have validated the TAM with demographic factors, such as gender and age ([24,29,61]). Gefen & Straub [24] used gender as a grouping variable to examine e-mail usage perception and behavior. Their results showed that men and women have differing explanatory powers in TAM. Karahanna et al. [29] used gender and age as demographic variables for comparisons between groups to test the invariance of TAM, showing that various groups exhibit varying effects in TAM testing. Although they found that these factors would have varied effects on decision process, Lai & Li [32] believed that these results were caused by the instrument itself, so they use TAM instrument to go through an invariance test. They found that the TAM construct was invariant for their sample across different gender, age and IT competence subgroups. These results demonstrate that the TAM scale they developed to elucidate the usage behavior of online banking was a good fit. As a result, we also use gender, age to make sure that different sample profiles would have the same effect on E-portfolio system continuously use. But we use grade replace age, because E-portfolio regards of college students' academic careers. In addition, we consulted three supervisors and career counselors who were responsible for promoting the adoption of E-portfolio, they considered that willingness to share plays a major role in the continuously using of E-portfolio. Because the more the students are willing to share their E-portfolio, the more frequency they use. The analysis results of a survey indicating cross-group invariance indicate the persuasiveness of the research results.

The framework of this study employed the TAM constructs proposed by Davis [17] to examine the CIs of university and college students in the sustained use of E-portfolio platforms. PEOU and PU influence ATT, which affects CI. PEOU influences PU. In addition to influencing CI through ATT, PU directly affects CI. The research framework of this study is shown in Fig. 1
                        . The research hypotheses of this study are listed in Table 1
                        .

This study combined the definitions of various scholars for the variable definitions and examined the relevant literature, providing a basis for the definitions of the variables in this study. These definitions were used in conjunction with the operating definitions developed in relevant studies and were developed by referencing reliable, valid surveys used by multiple scholars. Likert seven-point scales were used for the research variables in this study. The primary operating definitions and survey sources for this study were Chen & Chen (2009) [36,62]. The survey content included four elements: (1) PEOU; (2) PU; (3) ATT; and (4) CI. Table 2
                         shows the measurement items for research variables.

To ensure the reliability of the scales when developing the survey, this study first referred to surveys used in related studies. After developing the initial draft of the survey, three supervisors and career counselors who were responsible for promoting the adoption of E-portfolio edited the survey. The participants of this study were selected from among the students of several universities based on convenience philosophy. The participants had to be users of E-portfolio. Due to easy access to this group of population, the sample was taken from among these students.

This study distributed 400 surveys and 360 valid surveys were retrieved for an effective retrieval rate of 90%. Among the research sample, there were 224 women and 136 men. For grade level, there were 75 first-year students; 120 second-year students; 79 third-year students; and 86 fourth-year students. Regarding willingness to share platform content, 143 were willing to share, whereas 217 were not.

According to the suggestions of Chen & Huang [14], when performing invariance testing for a model, it is necessary to confirm that the model is valid before using it to develop baseline models for group invariance. This study performed testing for confirmatory factor analysis (CFA), goodness-of-fit for the overall model, convergent validity, discriminant validity, and cross-validation to confirm the final TAM model. Then, the final TAM model was used as a starting point for the invariance testing. Implementation of the statistical approach is enabled by the Amos 20 computer program [2].

Two methods for invariance testing have been used. The first is the unconstrained model that uses the parameters between factors for comparison between groups. A greater mean difference between groups indicates a lack of invariance in the model. The second was proposed by Marsh & Hocevar [40], who used modified indexes of a fully constrained model to determine whether a model possessed invariance. Greater modification indexes indicate a lack of invariance. These methods are flawed because they only compare the mean difference or modification indexes, meaning that they are overly reliant on a single standard.

Byrne et al. [10] suggested using the chi-square and goodness-of-fit indicators calculated from CFA for determination. This method involves converting an unconstrained model to a constrained model by adding conditions and, subsequently, establishing the parameters of the constrained model as equal to those of the unconstrained model. The differences between the models can be compared, including the factor loadings, variance, covariance, and residuals.

According to Byrne [9], a poor goodness-of-fit, as determined using CFA, indicates that there is no need for continuing the between-group invariance analysis. However, passing a CFA goodness-of-fit test means that the invariance analysis should be performed for the entire model. An invariance analysis is performed by comparing the constrained model against an unconstrained model. A significant difference indicates that at least one variable in the model has failed the invariance test. When a variable fails the invariance test, the overall model must first freely estimate that variable, changing to a partially constrained model. The changes in the chi-square values for the partially constrained model and the unconstrained model can be compared and tested for significance. A significant result indicates that the model has failed the invariance test.

This study performed an invariance study of a structural model. Based on the suggestions of Byrne [9], the study adopted the following analyses: (1) configural invariance; (2) factor loadings invariance; (3) variance/covariance invariance; (4) structural residual invariance; and (5) measurement residual invariance. If invariance is not established, then the invariant settings are canceled for the variant elements to enable the re-estimation of the invariance. This process is repeated until all invariance analyses are completed.

This study performed CFA for PU, PEOU, ATT, and CI. Factors with standardized factor loadings of less than 0.6 were excluded [16]. The composite reliability should be greater than 0.7, and the extracted variance should ideally be greater than 0.5 [21]. This study sought to preserve 3–4 questions on each construct [7]. The research model's correlation matrix is presented in Table 3
                        . The estimated model parameter values, composite reliability, and extracted variance from the analysis results are shown in Table 4
                        . A measurement item is deleted if its corrected item-to-total correlation is below 0.5. Consequently, two items including PU1 and ATT1 were eliminated at this stage.


                        Table 5
                         shows that the goodness-of-fit indicators for this study reached the threshold values, indicating an adequate goodness-of-fit. The proposed model established in this study is thus acceptable.

This study utilized bootstrapping to calculate the 95% confidence interval for correlation coefficients between constructs; discriminant validity exists if 1 is not included [52]. According to other scholars' [26] suggestions on estimating path coefficients bootstrapping requires at least 250 iterations. When performing bootstrap processes, this study performed 1000 rounds of repeated sampling. The results shown in Table 6
                         indicate that the 95% confidence intervals for the correlation coefficients between constructs do not include 1, whether based on the bias-corrected or percentile methods. As such, it can be concluded that the constructs of this study possess discriminant validity.

This study used SPSS software to separate the original sample randomly into two groups, each approximating a 50% proportion. Following the random allocation, the two groups, respectively, constituted 170 (47.2%) and 190 (52.7%) samples. Next, the framework diagrams for the data groups were rendered in Amos for multi-group comparison. The results of the comparison are shown in Table 7
                        . If the difference in the value of the chi-square was insignificant, then there was functionally no difference between the two groups. Cheung & Rensvold [15] suggested that a difference in chi-square values only indicates inequality in the invariance settings and may not influence the assessments of the model, they proposed practical significance. For example, the absolute value of ΔCFI≦0.01 indicates no practical difference in the nested structure models. In addition, Little [38] suggested that the absolute value of ΔTLI≦0.05 indicates no difference between the nested structure models. The ΔCFI and ΔTLI from this study were below the standards suggested by these studies, indicating that the groups met the requirements for random grouping and that the model had significant stability. These results indicate that the study possesses good cross-validation standards.

This study used gender, grade level, and willingness to share platform content as the grouping variables. The results are shown in Table 8
                        . From the perspective of statistical significance, the groups were congruent to each other for the standardized factor loading, structural weights, and structural covariance, indicating no differences between the models for each group. These results are consistent with the moderate test proposed by Jöreskog [28]. Residual congruence is a stringent test. Kline [30] suggested that the standards imposed by stringent tests are excessively strict and unnecessary. In addition, for practical significance, the goodness-of-fit indicators ΔCFI and ΔTLI for all of the models did not meet standards suggested by [15,38]. The models for gender, grade level, and willingness to share passed the invariance test.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

For the past years, many studies using the TAM as a research framework have been conducted and many of these aforementioned researches included the samples across genders and ages. However, few have included multi-group invariance analysis to ensure that the measurement items used in their studies were equivalent so that the meaningful comparisons across different demographic variables could be made. Further, the few studies that have tested the TAM for invariance mainly focused on the single-sample studies that did not include samples from different demographic variables. By testing the measurement and structural invariance across three different samples, this study contributes to more understanding of the efficacy of ATT, PU, and PEOU in predicting the continuance intention of E-Portfolio. We found that the majority of the TAM studies proved to be reliable on the use of single samples and did not consider demographic variables differences.

This study has proven that TAM has good predicting power in explaining continuance behavior of using E-portfolio system. It is consistent with most of the finding in the research in the IT and IS fields [42,58,33,44,47,48,50,51,57]. In addition, this study also verify whether TAM would be affected by gender, grade level, or willingness to share. This study result indicated that gender, grade level, and willingness to share have all passed the invariance tests and which is similar to previous research ([24,29,32,61]), but different from [25,44].

The contribution of this study is to provide a verification process for model invariance testing. Through this process, it can be clarified that the relationships among variables would not be influenced by demographic variables in user behavior of E-portfolio system. Therefore, TAM could be applied in many different scenarios. The original scale for this study was a confirmatory model that included four latent factors. However, the original model had weak construct validity, necessitating modification. Following modification, the number of questions was reduced from 18 to 15. The corrected model had strong goodness-of-fit. The establishment of the base model was completed following confirmatory factor analysis, construct validity, and cross-validation testing. This study used the base model as an unconstrained model, after which an invariance analysis was performed for gender, grade level, and willingness to share.

Among the six groups of invariance hypotheses, this study observed that the measurement models for the variable responses were equivalent regarding gender, grade level, and willingness to share. The results indicated that the same model could achieve a strong goodness-of-fit across various genders, grade levels, and levels of willingness to share. In addition, for the factor loading and structural weights, the factor loading invariance indicated that the relationships between the observed variables and latent variables enjoyed cross-group invariance. The structural path invariance indicated that PU, PEOU, and ATT had the same degrees of influence on continuance intention across various groups. That is, TAM had the same degree of validity across different groups.

The invariance in the factor variance and covariance elucidated the relationships among the four TAM factors for various groups. To test for factor variance and covariance invariance, the variances and covariance of each of the four factors in TAM model were constrained to be equal. If the factor variances are invariance, this result means a homogeneity of latent variables may exist in the groups. On the other hand, if the factor covariances are invariance, it means that the same correlations between factors may exist in the groups. Variance congruence indicated that the groups were consistent in their ATTs regarding the four TAM variables. Invariance in the covariance indicated that the interrelations among PU, PEOU, ATT, and CI were consistent across groups.

Finally, the three groups did not pass the stringent tests of structural residuals and measurement residuals, but did pass the practical testing standards. By performing a series of invariance analyses, this study produced results that demonstrated that a comparison of groups based on gender, grade level, and willingness to share can reveal whether the groupings can pass invariance testing for the factor loading and covariance of the latent variables. The stability of the relationships among the TAM variables, including PU, PEOU, ATT, and continued usage behavior, was not influenced by gender, age, and willingness to share. Test participants across the different groups did not differ regarding the measured questions, either conceptually or psychometrically. These results verify the appropriateness of applying TAM to E-portfolio information platforms and indicate that test participants do not need to be separated based gender, grade level, and willingness to share.

Despite the careful study design, this research has certain limitations that may offer the possibilities for future research directions. First, this study used a single survey to collect the measures that may have the potentiality of common method bias (CMB). Although we adopted the Harman one-factor examination in the measurement model setting and the result confirmed that CMB is unlikely in the analyzed data, the CMB issue may still exist. We need more detailed evidence to evaluate the existence of CMB. Secondly, given the theoretical focus of this study on TAM, this study did not consider other constructs. Future researchers should try to ameliorate the theoretical imperfection of TAM by integrating other relevant variables for conducting further empirical examinations. Lastly, we conducted this study as the cross-sectional design. An individual's intention to use E-portfolio system may be deemed as the improving process, so longitudinal studies may be needed in this research area.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

