@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Assessment of surveys for the management of hospital clinical pharmacy services

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           OrdEval analysis of surveys allows evaluation of dependent ordinal features.


                        
                        
                           
                           Approach identifies feature thresholds where user satisfaction changes.


                        
                        
                           
                           We present a novel application to management of clinical pharmacy.


                        
                        
                           
                           Approach identifies three types of competences: basic, performance, and excitement.


                        
                        
                           
                           Findings are relevant to human resources management in hospitals, survey design, and survey applications.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Survey analysis

Kano model

OrdEval algorithm

Human resource management

Clinical pharmacy

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               Summary
               
                  Objective
                  Survey data sets are important sources of data, and their successful exploitation is of key importance for informed policy decision-making. We present how a survey analysis approach initially developed for customer satisfaction research in marketing can be adapted for an introduction of clinical pharmacy services into a hospital.
               
               
                  Methods and material
                  We use a data mining analytical approach to extract relevant managerial consequences. We evaluate the importance of competences for users of a clinical pharmacy with the OrdEval algorithm and determine their nature according to the users’ expectations. For this, we need substantially fewer questions than are required by the Kano approach.
               
               
                  Results
                  From 52 clinical pharmacy activities we were able to identify seven activities with a substantial negative impact (i.e., negative reinforcement) on the overall satisfaction of clinical pharmacy services, and two activities with a strong positive impact (upward reinforcement). Using analysis of individual feature values, we identified six performance, 10 excitement, and one basic clinical pharmacists’ activity.
               
               
                  Conclusions
                  We show how the OrdEval algorithm can exploit the information hidden in the ordering of class and attribute values, and their inherent correlation using a small sample of highly relevant respondents. The visualization of the outputs turns out highly useful in our clinical pharmacy research case study.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

In spite of a plethora of new information sources available, surveys are still the most important and frequently used tool for managers and decision makers when investigating alternative outcomes and possible strategies before making important decisions. Any progress made in this standard tool which would allow better insight into the information gathered is therefore an important contribution, not only to the field of data analytics, but also to the applicative fields using the surveys.

Clinical pharmacy is a relatively new discipline in the pharmacy profession. It is patient—rather than drug-oriented, and aims to improve the quality of drug therapy. An acceptance of clinical pharmacists in hospital wards depends on how well their activities meet the needs and expectations of physicians and nurses. Physicians’ perceptions of the importance of clinical pharmacy activities differ substantially from pharmacists’ perceptions [1]. Therefore, it is necessary to recognize the most important clinical pharmacy activities from the perspective of its users, namely physicians and nurses’.

According to the behavioural decision theory and total quality management approach of Kano [2,3], the analysis of customer needs is a three-phase process: (1) understanding customer preferences, (2) requirement prioritization, and (3) requirement classification. The Kano model is widely used in several industries as an effective tool to understand the first phase, namely customer preferences. Kano proposed a two-dimensional system for quality management (expectations vs. satisfaction), where he identified three levels of customer expectations. Satisfying basic expectations keeps customers satisfied, while not meeting their expectations makes them dissatisfied. These kinds of expectations are denoted dissatisfiers or basic, or must be expectations. The second type of expectations make customer satisfied/dissatisfied depending on the quality/quantity of performance that is why they are called ‘performance expectations.’ ‘Customers’ expectations of the third type are hidden, unconscious expectations. Satisfying those makes a customer delighted. These are delighters or excitement expectations.

In connection with his theory of two-dimensional quality—the customer satisfaction relationship, Kano proposed the structure of the survey questionnaire to categorize the quality attributes. For each product's feature a pair of questions must be formulated, to which the customer can answer in one of five different ways [3]. The first question is concerned with the reaction of the customer if the product has that feature (functional form of the question); and the second is concerned with his reaction if the product does not have that feature (dysfunctional form of the question). Using Kano's model, quality attributes that have the greatest influence on customer satisfaction can therefore be identified. On the other hand, the questionnaire, proposed by Kano, can be very long when many features are explored, which can result in a lower response rate.

As an alternative, we present a case study how a survey analysis approach called ‘OrdEval,’ initially developed for customer satisfaction research in marketing, can be adapted to a completely different problem, namely the introduction of clinical pharmacy services into a hospital. The approach is based on the evaluation of ordinal attributes, i.e. survey questions and their relation to the expected outcome. By taking the ordinal nature of many surveys’ questions into account the approach allows a sort of what-if analysis. Conditional probabilities of the expected outcome are computed, where the condition is upon changes in outcomes of survey questions. An example of the output would be a probability of a more successful service introduction if certain features of the service are better communicated to the users. As human resources are limited, such knowledge is valuable for efficient allocation of the resources. The approach also allows categorization of the clinical pharmacy activities, according to the Kano model. The motivation and contribution of this paper is to: demonstrate how OrdEval works in a medical management context, how its output can be visualized and adapted to include information relevant for decision markers, and to provide new insights into clinical pharmacy services, which are used as our application topic.

As our study is interdisciplinary and composed from machine learning and clinical pharmacy, we would like to warn the readers about the terminology used, which might be typical for one area and unusual for the other. Attribute or feature is a property of an object or person. Research objects in our study are clinical pharmacy activities and pharmacists’ competences. Clinical pharmacy activities are specific professional activities of pharmacists that comprise clinical pharmacy services in a health care setting. Competences are knowledge and skills of pharmacists, acquired through formal and informal study and training programmes.

The paper is divided into six sections. In Section 2, we discuss related work. In Section 3, we present a clinical pharmacy study, and the survey we designed to measure the expectations of doctors, nurses, and pharmacists. In Section 4, we describe the OrdEval approach to evaluate attributes and the way the attributes can be interpreted. In Section 5, we present the results of our analysis with an emphasis on the methodological contributions of OrdEval. In Section 6, we conclude with an overview of the contributions and plans for further work. Appendix A contains the survey questions used and some basic statistics of the collected data set.

@&#RELATED WORK@&#

The presented work is unique in its use of OrdEval method in medical HR management, but in a broader context it can be related to customer satisfaction analysis in marketing, introduction of clinical pharmacy to hospital, applications of Kano model, and factor analysis via feature evaluation in the context of machine learning. We briefly review the relevant contributions from these areas starting with the motivation for our study.

As good interprofessional collaboration between pharmacists and physicians and between pharmacists and nurses can lead to substantial decrease of medication errors [4–10] our goal was to introduce clinical pharmacy service to a large hospital and improve the interprofessional collaboration. Different approaches have been studied to improve this collaboration, among which satisfaction is of particular interest [11–15].

A typical approach in practical marketing research of customer (dis)satisfaction is to deﬁne a number of features of the product/service and then to conduct a survey on a representative sample of customers where the customers rate their satisfaction with each of the features and also express their overall (dis)satisfaction. The goal of this feature analysis in marketing research is manifold: (1) identify features which influence the overall (dis)satisfaction most; (2) identify type of features (basic, performance, excitement), (3) identify those attribute values (thresholds) which have positive/negative impact on overall satisfaction; (4) identify typical behavior patterns of attribute values (upward reinforcement, downward reinforcement, anchoring, compensation). Initially, the effects of the attribute-level performance on consumer (dis)satisfaction were assumed linear and symmetric, see for example [16,17]. Some marketing scholars have questioned this assumption on the basis of economic and psychological theory as well as on a better empirical insight in the satisfaction response function [18]. Robnik-Šikonja and Vanhoof [19] offered as a solution to several of the above stated goals with OrdEval algorithm and showed its use on a business to business (B2B) and business to customer (B2C) customer satisfaction problem. Later the approach was successfully applied in country of origin analysis [20], hearing aid selection [21], and supplier selection in public sector [22]. In contrast to these applications of OrdEval in marketing context, our work introduces OrdEval to the HR management and to the medical domain, where the goals stated above are also highly relevant.

Introduction of clinical pharmacy services was evaluated in [1,14,23–34], but studies exploring the stakeholders’ needs, expectations, and perceptions of clinical pharmacy services before their introduction are rare [35]. Only a few studies investigated the perception of clinical pharmacy services by all three professional groups involved—pharmacists, physicians and nurses [1,32,33]. Dussart et al. [32] investigated satisfaction with one particular pharmacist's service, i.e., individualized dispensing system. Gillespie et al. 
                     [14] conducted three different surveys, each designed for one profession. In our research the survey was conducted before the clinical pharmacy service was introduced, it includes the vast majority of all clinical pharmacy activities and the same questionnaire was used for all three professional groups.

Kano model is widely used in many different industries, like technical products, mass-market services, sports products, information systems, customer services [36], as well as in health care services [37–40], but it has not been used before for the evaluation of clinical pharmacy services.

Kano's unique approach in satisfaction measurement is his assumption that customers’ satisfaction is not necessary proportional to how functional the product or service is. When applying Kano model, different instruments have been used to assess the quality of attributes [36]. According to the Kano methodology, a questionnaire consists of sets of functional/dysfunctional questions for each attribute, which requires the number of questions to be double the number of attributes. Other measurement tools include critical incident technique (CIT), regression analysis with dummy variables/penalty-reward contrast analysis, and importance-grid analysis. Different types of regression analyses are used to assess different Kano quality elements, but almost all authors use multiple regression with dummy variables [36]. Using OrdEval algorithm [19] to evaluate attribute quality, we could construct simpler and substantially shorter questionnaire (one question per attribute). Our questionnaire can also serve for other analytical approaches.

In machine learning attribute (feature) evaluation is an important task applied to a number of problems like feature subset selection, selection of relevant attributes in decision tree and rule learning, feature weighting, etc. Several feature evaluation approaches were applied also in medical contexts, for example [41] used ReliefF algorithm to evaluate prognostic factors in chronic wound healing with electrical stimulation and [42] used decision trees to determine risk factors for hypertension. On gene data sets in bioinformatics feature evaluation is an essential tool to find gene interactions [43]. Our analysis uses OrdEval algorithm, which is specialized for analysis of ordinal, possibly interacting features. Different to ReliefF and other feature evaluation measures it analyses each feature value separately and takes into account asymmetric effect an increase or decrease of feature value may have on the overall satisfaction.

In a large hospital there are several departments where a considerable number of medications are used; therefore, we can expect a clinical pharmacy service to be valuable. To plan its introduction, the management of the University Medical Centre (UMC) Ljubljana started a systematic study with the aim to use resources rationally, and introduce clinical pharmacy primarily to departments where they would have the maximal effect.

First, a detailed list of possible clinical pharmacy activities was prepared based on a comprehensive literature search. The list was used to construct a survey questionnaire with the Likert measurement scale to conduct a descriptive observational attitude study of physicians’ and nurses’ opinions on the importance of each of the listed activities and competences of clinical pharmacists.

The questionnaire is composed of three types of questions. The first part (17 questions, Table A1 in Appendix A) contains clinical pharmacy activities pertaining to the hospital system. The second part (19 questions, Table A2 in Appendix A) contains activities directly connected to the care of individual patients. The third part (16 questions, Table A3 in Appendix A) deals with clinical pharmacist's competences. The questionnaire also asks for demographic data (question 1 which is not listed asks for age, gender, profession, and affiliation). The participants had to choose the level of agreement on the Likert scale from 1 (I totally disagree) to 5 (I totally agree) with each of the listed affirmative statements in parts one and two of the questionnaire, while indicating the importance (from least important—1 to very important 5) of a particular competence in the third part. The questionnaire was first tested on a group of pharmacists to check the scope of selected clinical pharmacy activities. In the second step it was validated by a group of experts: a physician, a non-hospital pharmacist, and an independent human resource manager.

We decided to perform the study on the whole population of the middle management staff because we expected their opinion to have a higher managerial impact than a general medical and nursing staff population. The questionnaire was sent to 43 physicians – medical directors or heads of departments – and to their head nurses. They were allowed to share the questionnaire with their colleagues (lower level management staff) for their judgment. A total of 40 physicians from 27 clinics/clinical departments, and 42 nurses from 26 clinics/clinical departments filled in the questionnaire. The questionnaire was also sent by e-mail to all pharmacists employed in the hospital pharmacy at the time of the study. The pharmacists were instructed to answer the questionnaire only if they are interested in performing the clinical pharmacy services. Out of a total of 27 pharmacists, 13 filled in the questionnaire. We are aware that the collected data set is rather small, but taking into account the position and professional competences of the respondents we believe that it allows relevant conclusions with the applied analytical methods.

The survey results were collected in tabular form, together with the demographic data of each respondent: profession (physician, nurse or pharmacist), name of the clinic/clinical department, age, and gender. Table 1
                      presents the summary of the collected data: number of respondents (column labeled N), completion rates, and mean scores for each of the three groups of questions (the pharmacists’ role in the hospital system, the pharmacists’ role in connection with patient care and the pharmacists’ competences) separately for each participating professional group. The survey questions together with detailed statistics for each question are contained in Appendix A (Tables A1–A3). The completion rate is calculated as the ratio between the number of answers to the particular statement/question and the number of all participants in the survey. The overall completion rates for all questions were >80%.

In the second stage of research we established a collaboration of clinical pharmacists in certain wards and provided a selected range of clinical pharmacy activities. We selected activities favored by physicians and nurses for which pharmacists felt they are competent to provide them.

For the wards cooperating with a clinical pharmacist, an overall satisfaction score and the influence of each activity on the total satisfaction with the cooperation, was estimated based on an expert opinion of the head of the pharmacy, who followed the activities of clinical pharmacists and time they spent on wards, and who also discussed the influence of activities and the overall satisfaction with the heads of the departments. The scores obtained in this way might be subjective but are relatively unbiased concerning different hospital wards and allow the presented analytical approach.

Machine learning and data mining are used extensively in medicine and pharmacology. In a recent review [44] medical data mining was divided into six medical tasks (screening, diagnosis, treatment, prognosis, monitoring, and management) and for each task five data mining approaches are studied (classification, regression, clustering, association, and hybrid). Our work could be classified as a management task, but the methodology presented is aimed towards decision support, which is also frequently used in pharmacology, e.g. [45]. Our approach is based on evaluation of ordinal features. This is different from classical and modern approaches to the evaluation of services, and also different from classical analyses of surveys in medical decision support, e.g. [46].

We first present the Kano model of customer satisfaction followed by the machine learning approach for evaluation of ordered features, which allows us to determine the types of features without using Kano's methodology.

Based on the Kano model of customer satisfaction we aim to classify clinical pharmacy activities into three categories, namely basic, performance, and excitement activities. Not meeting the expectations of basic activities would cause dissatisfaction with the newly introduced clinical pharmacy service. The influence of performance activities on the total value of clinical pharmacy is approximately linear. Excitement activities have a positive impact on the overall satisfaction with clinical pharmacy services when provided, but do not affect satisfaction when not provided, and can therefore present an opportunity to increase overall satisfaction [47]. Fig. 1
                         presents attributes’ (i.e. activities’) characteristics according to the Kano model.

Basic activities are taken for granted by users. A high score in these features does not significantly increase overall satisfaction, while a low score usually causes dissatisfaction; an example of such a feature would be the ability to provide information about accessibility of medications, which is taken for granted and will not increase satisfaction, but will almost certainly cause dissatisfaction if not provided by clinical pharmacists. Performance activities are important features not taken for granted; they usually have a positive correlation with overall satisfaction: the higher the score, the bigger the effect on overall satisfaction. An example would be personal involvement and effort of personnel, which will correlate positively with the satisfaction of the users. Excitement activities usually describe properties of product/service which are normally not very important to the users, but can cause excitement (and a boost in satisfaction for at least some users) if the score is very high. An example would be participation in clinical studies which will be an important feature for some physicians and nurses.

Feature (attribute) evaluation is an important component of many machine learning tasks, e.g. feature subset selection, constructive induction, decision, and regression tree learning. Scores assigned to attributes during evaluation also provide important information to the domain expert trying to get some insight into the problem domain. We are interested in a subclass of feature evaluation, namely the evaluation of conditionally strongly dependent ordinal attributes where each of the individual attribute's values may depend on other attributes in a different way. The problem of feature (attribute) evaluation has received significant attention in literature. There are several measures for the evaluation of attributes’ quality. For classification problems the most popular are e.g. Gini index [48], gain ratio [49], MDL [50], and ReliefF [51]. The first three are impurity-based, and measure quality of attribute according to the purity of class value distribution after the split on the values of that attribute. They evaluate each attribute separately, are not aware of the ordering of the attribute's values, and cannot provide useful information for each individual value of the attribute. ReliefF, on the other hand, is context-sensitive (by measuring how the attribute separates similar instances), and could be adapted to handle ordered attributes (by changing the definition of its similarity measure), but cannot provide information for each value separately and does not differentiate between the positive and negative changes of the attribute and their impact on the class value.

The goal of feature analysis in our research is manifold: (1) identify features which present the most important competences and influence the overall (dis)satisfaction most; (2) identify types of features; based on total quality management [2,3] we want to differentiate between three types of important features: basic features, performance features, and excitement features; and (3) identify those attribute values (thresholds) where there is a breaking point between a positive/negative impact on the overall satisfaction.

There are many different feature evaluation algorithms in data mining which can evaluate, rank, and/or select the most informative features (goal 1). Other goals (2 and 3) are tackled by the OrdEval algorithm, but remain mostly untouched by other work in machine learning and data mining.

The OrdEval algorithm [19,20] is an analytical tool for evaluation of the importance and impact of various factors in the given survey. In the analysis of customer satisfaction data for a particular product/service, OrdEval can determine the importance of each product's feature on overall customer satisfaction, and can also indicate the thresholds where satisfaction with the individual feature starts having a strong positive or negative impact on overall satisfaction. The output of OrdEval are probabilistic factors indicating the probability that an increase/decrease in the individual feature or feature's value will have an impact on the dependent variable. The intuition behind this approach is to approximate the inner workings of the decision process, taking place in each individual respondent, which forms a relationship between the features and the response. If such introspection would be possible, one could observe a causal effect the change of a feature's value has on the response value. By measuring such an effect, we could reason about the importance of the feature's values and the type of the feature. In addition, we could determine which values are thresholds for a change of behavior. The OrdEval algorithm uses the data sample and approximates this reasoning. For each respondent it selects the respondents most similar to it, and makes an inference based on them. For example, to evaluate the effect an increase in a certain feature value would have on overall satisfaction, the algorithm computes the probability for such an effect from similar respondents with an increased value of that feature. To get statistically valid and practically interesting results, the overall process is repeated for a large enough number of respondents, and weighted with a large enough number of similar respondents.

The OrdEval algorithm can be used for analysis of any data where the dependent variable has ordered values, meaning that it is also suitable for surveys where answers are given in a graded manner. The methodology uses conditional probabilities called ‘reinforcement factors,’ as they approximate the upward and downward reinforcement effect the particular feature value has on the dependent attribute. For each value of the feature we obtain estimates of two conditional probabilities: the probability that the response value increases given the increase of the feature value (upward reinforcement), and the probability that the response value decreases given the decrease of the feature value (downward reinforcement). To take the context of other features into account, these probabilities are computed in a local context, from the most similar instances. The visualization of these factors with box-plots gives clear clues about the role of each feature, the importance of each value, and the threshold values. To understand the idea of the OrdEval algorithm, the feature should not be treated as a whole. Rather, we shall observe the effect a single value of the feature may have.

For each reinforcement factor we compute confidence intervals. Since we cannot assume any parametric distribution and have to take the context of a similar respondent into account we construct bootstrap estimates and form confidence intervals based on them [52]. We plot obtained random reinforcement factors based on bootstrap sampling with a box-and-whiskers plot: the box is constructed from the 1st and 3rd quartile, the middle line is the median, while the whiskers are 100α/2 and 100(1−
                        α)/2 percentiles (e.g. 2.5 and 97.5 percentiles) giving the borders of confidence interval (e.g., 95% confidence interval). The box-and-whiskers showing confidence intervals are placed above the box-plots showing reinforcement factors [19].

We use the OrdEval algorithm for evaluating the importance of each clinical pharmacy activity and its influence on the overall satisfaction with clinical pharmacy services. The algorithm deals independently with each value giving an insight into its positive or negative influence, the strength of the influence, and the information whether the influence is significant or not.

Missing values frequently occur in survey data. To handle this practical issue OrdEval relies on their probabilistic treatment, namely the missing values are estimated from their class-conditional probabilities, similarly to the method used in the ReliefF algorithm [51].

The aim of the data analysis was to discover the most influential clinical pharmacy activities regarding the total satisfaction with clinical pharmacy service as a whole. The OrdEval algorithm was used for processing the survey data.

Using the OrdEval algorithm we performed two analyses: (1) An analysis and a visualization of the results for each attribute (question), taking into account the joint effect of all the answers to a particular question, and (2) The effect of individual value of each attribute, i.e. the importance of features and their values. This allowed us to determine the type of each feature according to the Kano model.

Attribute importance scores (reinforcement factors) computed by the OrdEval algorithm and their visualization produced by the R CORElearn package [56] are presented in Fig. 2
                        . The length of each bar reflects a probabilistic score of the influence of a particular attribute (question) on the overall satisfaction value. The bars to the right of the middle line represent positive influence, which means that in the case of increasing a value of a particular question would result in an increase in overall satisfaction. The opposite holds for the bars left of the middle line: decreasing the value of a particular question would decrease the overall satisfaction value. The box and whiskers plot bars denote the interquartile range (box) and the borders (whiskers) of confidence interval of each reinforcement factor. Reinforcement factors (left and right bars) reaching beyond the box-and-whiskers contain statistically significant information [19]. The box and whiskers plots therefore convey rough information about expected distribution of the answers. They help in fast visual identification of the type of attributes according to the Kano model (basic, performance, or excitement).

We can notice a statistically significant influence in only one question (the length of the bar reaching beyond the box-and-whiskers–denoted with a rectangular shape in Fig. 2). In the case of the decreasing value of question 38, the overall satisfaction value would decrease. We assume that lower statistical significance for other questions is partly a result of a relatively small sample. Therefore, we decided to comment on the results for all questions with substantial influence (the longest bars) reaching at least beyond the box (third quartile), which means that the probability of a non-random effect lies within the fourth quartile (denoted with an oval shape in Fig. 2).

We can see that questions 21 and 38 have the longest bars on both sides from the middle line, which means that changing the value for these questions upwards or downwards would increase/decrease the overall satisfaction.

For questions 14, 17, 26, 28, and 33 we can notice a substantial length of the left bars, which means that decreasing the value of a particular question would decrease overall satisfaction, while increasing the value would not influence overall satisfaction.

Among all of the questions, question 38 has the most noticeable positive and negative impacts. It pertains to the provision of all kind of information about medicines. The provision of objective, high quality information about medicines is one of the most frequent activities of clinical pharmacists and has been previously identified as successful [23,23].

The OrdEval algorithm also enables feature value level detailed data analysis and visualization. Taking into account value changes of features, we computed and visualized all the questions and their reinforcement factors for each value. The length of the bars reflects the probability of changes in feature values. For each value a 95% confidence interval is computed using the bootstrap method, and visualized with a box-and-whiskers plot above the corresponding bar.

When comparing the graph for all attribute values (Fig. 2) and the graphs for separate attribute values (Figs. 3 and 4
                        
                        ), the latter are less reliable because there are fewer answers for individual values, and some values were never given. The bars reaching beyond the box-and-whiskers plot depict statistically significant reinforcement factors for each upwards or downwards value change. Besides seven statistically significant results, we also analyze the questions with a reinforcement factor within the fourth quartile (the bar reaching at least beyond the third quartile box) with a reinforcement factor of at least 0.6. This choice results from the number of questions satisfying different thresholds given in Table 2
                         and rational use of resources (identified relevant questions/attributes require allocation of personnel and services). We assumed that questions with reinforcement factors lower than 0.6 have insufficient influence. This arbitrarily, yet reasonable choice, resulted in a smaller number of important results, which we comment on below.

We identified six questions, 9, 19, 21, 26, 33, and 38, where decreasing their value could decrease overall satisfaction, and increasing their value would increase overall satisfaction. These questions therefore act as performance attributes. These questions and visualizations of their reinforcement factors are shown in Fig. 3.

Questions 33 and 38 pertain to the competences of pharmacists rather than their activities. The performance of an activity has direct impact on its quality, and consequently on the satisfaction. However, performance is a function of competence. The more developed the competence the better is the performance of the activity in question. Consequently, reinforcement factors for questions concerning competences indicate an indirect, rather than direct, influence on satisfaction.

The knowledge of the role the activities (and competences) play in overall satisfaction is useful information for directing clinical pharmacists’ activities. On the wards where the cooperation of clinical pharmacists is established, pharmacists mostly perform the activities described with questions 9, 19, 21, 26, and 38. Based on informal contacts with medical and nursing staff, we realized that satisfaction with the clinical pharmacist strongly depends on the quantity of the service, namely on the amount of time and work the pharmacist is able to dedicate to clinical pharmacy services in the ward. Some of the ward chief physicians expressed this very clearly saying they didn’t want clinical pharmacy to be a boutique service for selected patients, but they would rather want this service for all patients.

In Fig. 3 a statistically significant influence of decreasing the value from 2 to 1 for question 19 can be noticed. On the basis of the results obtained with the OrdEval algorithm one can assume that this activity is a basic one. Taking into account the mean scores of physicians and nurses in the survey (Table 2: 3.5 and 2.9, respectively), this indicates their relatively low expectations and, moreover the pharmacists’ mean score for this question (4.8), we can anticipate that the decrease from 2 to 1 is not really likely to happen. In that case the upwards reinforcement factor for changing the value from 3 to 4 is also interesting, although it is not statistically significant. For that reason we included question 19 into the performance attributes group. Taking a medication history at admission was shown to be one of the most valuable activities of clinical pharmacists [53–55]. The same reasoning and large differences in the perception between physicians and nurses on one side, and pharmacists on the other side, also applies to the questions 9 and 21 where we can notice a statistically significant effect when decreasing the value from 3 to 2, but also when increasing the value from 3 to 4. Question 38 is also interesting because the mean scores of pharmacists were lower than the mean scores of physicians and nurses, which indicate high expectations of the latter and the relatively low self-confidence of pharmacists. OrdEval visualization shows that decreasing the value from 5 to 4 for this question could decrease satisfaction. From a managerial point of view this activity requires special attention.

In the visualization of the results for questions 14, 15, 16, 17, 32, 35, 36, 41, 44, and 46, we notice a substantial asymmetry of the reinforcement factors in an upwards direction. In the case of an increase of a value for these questions, the overall satisfaction value would increase. Activities captured by these questions therefore belong to a group of excitement attributes. Their descriptions and visualizations are shown in Fig. 4.

Questions 35 and 36 describe pharmacists’ authority (what are they allowed to do) and questions 41, 44, and 46 describe their competences (what are they able to do). These factors have an indirect impact on satisfaction. Anyway, the results of the OrdEval algorithm give us important information for the planning and direction of clinical pharmacy services. We can expect an increase in overall satisfaction if scores for these questions increase. According to the results, the question 17 is an excitement attribute. The high mean scores of physicians (4.8) and nurses (4.5) indicate the considerable importance of this activity. The OrdEval algorithm shows an opportunity to increase the overall satisfaction value when increasing the performance in this activity. The reinforcement factors for other questions in the excitement group are high as well and are useful in planning activities. Although statistically not significant (possibly due to a small sample), they show the activities with a potential to increase overall satisfaction.

Besides question 19, which was previously described (in the group of performance activities), the only question with a substantial downwards reinforcement factor is question 11. Decreasing the value from 3 to 2 has considerable impact on overall satisfaction (Fig. 5
                        ). Consequently, we consider this activity to be of a basic type.

The detailed value-based analysis reveals almost the same set of important questions as when considering all values. The only exception is question 28, which shows too low impact (reinforcement <0.6) in detailed analysis. The most important finding of the two levels of the analysis is that in some questions the direction of influence is changed when examining detailed results. For example, questions 14 and 17 would be in the basic group of attributes when considering average over all values, while value level analysis shows their excitement nature.

We notice that for some questions the reinforcement factors are low (value <0.4), and some values do not even occur in the visualization of the collected answers (Fig. 2, questions 7, 8, and 2, 4, 5 respectively). Some of these questions are similar and it would be reasonable to merge them.

Furthermore, in some cases we noticed that overall satisfaction with clinical pharmacists depends not only on the services they provide, but also on their personality traits (e.g. where a proactive approach is desired). In future evaluations the personal characteristics of pharmacists shall be considered as well.

There are at least two notable advantages of using the OrdEval for managerial analysis. First, it provides a visualization supporting the decision making process, and second, its two-level nature enables a detailed insight into the direction and strength of the influence of particular values.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

We adapted a general methodology for analysis of ordered data to the specifics of human resources management in hospitals. We were able to obtain useful, managerially relevant information from a relatively small population of highly relevant respondents. We showed how the OrdEval algorithm exploits the information hidden in the ordering of class and attribute values. It is able to handle each value of the attribute separately. It is robust to noise and missing values. The output can be effectively visualized and complemented with confidence intervals. The visualizations turned out useful in our clinical pharmacy research case study.

Contrary to other survey analysis algorithms, using the OrdEval algorithm results in better insight into the opportunities to influence the satisfaction with clinical pharmacy services. OrdEval served as a tool that revealed the crucial attributes which decrease/increase the overall satisfaction value. We were able to detect the basic, performance, and excitement attributes expressed in our survey questions, which is important for planning and management of clinical pharmacy service in the clinical departments of the hospital.

When compared to the questionnaire structure proposed by Kano, our questionnaire contained only one question per feature (instead of two). Using the OrdEval algorithm we identified the attributes that have the greatest influence on customer satisfaction, but kept the questionnaire short.

Survey data sets are important sources of data and their successful analysis is of key importance for informed decision making. We showed that the OrdEval can be efficient in this respect.

While we had good reasons to limit the size of the data set to the most important decision makers, though it would be reasonable to take a larger sample from an analytical point of view. A future survey involving all the physicians and nurses would be highly welcome and would allow construction of a prediction model.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

Andreja Čufar was supported by the University of Ljubljana innovative scheme for PhD study. Aleš Mrhar and Marko Robnik-Šikonja were supported by the Slovenian Research Agency (ARRS) through research programmes P1-0189 (B) and P2-0209, respectively. The research leading to these results has also received funding from the European Union Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement no. 604102 (HBP) (Marko Robnik-Šikonja).


                     Tables A1–A3
                     
                     
                     .

@&#REFERENCES@&#

