@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Predicting the risk of exacerbation in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease using home telehealth measurement data

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Home telehealth data are predictors of possible exacerbation events in COPD patient.


                        
                        
                           
                           The developed algorithm could be used as a real-time exacerbation event detector.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Home telehealth system

Classification and regression tree

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Background
                  The use of telehealth technologies to remotely monitor patients suffering chronic diseases may enable preemptive treatment of worsening health conditions before a significant deterioration in the subject's health status occurs, requiring hospital admission.
               
               
                  Objective
                  The objective of this study was to develop and validate a classification algorithm for the early identification of patients, with a background of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), who appear to be at high risk of an imminent exacerbation event. The algorithm attempts to predict the patient's condition one day in advance, based on a comparison of their current physiological measurements against the distribution of their measurements over the previous month.
               
               
                  Method
                  The proposed algorithm, which uses a classification and regression tree (CART), has been validated using telehealth measurement data recorded from patients with moderate/severe COPD living at home. The data were collected from February 2007 to January 2008, using a telehealth home monitoring unit.
               
               
                  Results
                  The CART algorithm can classify home telehealth measurement data into either a ‘low risk’ or ‘high risk’ category with 71.8% accuracy, 80.4% specificity and 61.1% sensitivity. The algorithm was able to detect a ‘high risk’ condition one day prior to patients actually being observed as having a worsening in their COPD condition, as defined by symptom and medication records.
               
               
                  Conclusion
                  The CART analyses have shown that features extracted from three types of physiological measurements; forced expiratory volume in 1s (FEV1), arterial oxygen saturation (SPO2) and weight have the most predictive power in stratifying the patients condition. This CART algorithm for early detection could trigger the initiation of timely treatment, thereby potentially reducing exacerbation severity and recovery time and improving the patient's health. This study highlights the potential usefulness of automated analysis of home telehealth data in the early detection of exacerbation events among COPD patients.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is characterized by incompletely reversible airflow obstruction. Patients with COPD may experience exacerbations of their disease, which are associated with significant morbidity and mortality as well as reduced quality of life [1]. An acute exacerbation of COPD has been described as an acute worsening of respiratory symptoms associated with a variable degree of physiological deterioration [2]. Exacerbations of COPD typically require a patient to seek medical assistance or to change his or her treatment and are one of the most common medical conditions requiring hospital admission [3].

Lung Foundation Australia reported annual health system costs of more than $750 million in the management of COPD in Australia in 2008, with hospital admission being the largest contributor [4]. Higher rates of hospitalization and length of stay occur among patients with COPD when there is delay in treatment of an exacerbation episode [5]. Unfortunately, recognition of the start of an exacerbation is not a straightforward task, but early detection may result in reductions in both exacerbation recovery time and risk of hospitalization [5–7].

A study conducted by Trappenburg et al. used a clinical COPD questionnaire as a tool to detect exacerbation events. The patients in the study were asked to answer the self-administered questionnaire weekly, for six consecutive weeks. The study concluded that the questionnaire assessment method can detect exacerbations. However, the method was not designed for real-time exacerbation detection [8].

As a means of detecting exacerbation earlier, and at the resolution of a single day, it has been proposed that patients with COPD might use a home telehealth service daily to evaluate their health status [7]. Existing home telehealth services offer a range of vital sign monitoring modalities, for measurements including lung function, pulse oximetry, weight and temperature [9]. The resulting longitudinal physiological records could prove useful in determining the stability of a COPD patient and in predicting an exacerbation event, which is significant enough to require hospital admission, before it occurs.

Although spirometry is key in diagnosing COPD, data are sparse with respect to changes in lung function parameters during acute exacerbations, which are usually diagnosed on clinical grounds. However, Parker et al. described worsening airflow obstruction and hyperinflation in a group of 20 individuals with moderate exacerbations of their COPD, when compared to test results obtained at recovery, some two months after the event [10]. Seemungal and colleagues described small changes in peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR), forced expiratory volume in 1s (FEV1) and forced vital capacity (FVC) at exacerbation onset, with median time to recovery of PEFR (6 days) being similar to that of symptomatic recovery (7 days) [2].

Worsening hypoxaemia in acute exacerbations probably results from worsening ventilation–perfusion mismatching, possibly with modest increases in shunt fraction. Estimation of arterial oxygen saturation using pulse oximetry (SpO2) may be a useful parameter to monitor at home.

Other parameters such as fever, respiratory rate and heart rate, may also be useful signs to monitor in patients at risk of exacerbation of COPD. One study showed that more than one-third of exacerbations requiring hospitalization were associated with fever [11]. Heart rate and respiratory rate are reported to increase with the severity of COPD exacerbation [12]. A range of spirometric indices and vital signs were used in this study to identify possible exacerbation episodes amongst COPD patients.

This paper outlines the development of an algorithm to predict the onset of exacerbations in patients with COPD. The measurement data employed in the validation of this algorithm were collected from a previously reported home telehealth study [13]. During the study, patients with COPD performed their measurements using a home monitoring device that automatically returned acquired data to a remote database for analysis. These data were used to design a classification and regression tree (CART) classifier model to predict exacerbation events. The long-term aim is for this algorithm to be embedded in a decision support system for real-time remote management of COPD patients, using a home telehealth service.

@&#METHODOLOGY@&#

The home telehealth database employed in the development of the algorithm consists of data from twenty-one patients with moderate-to-severe COPD (six males, fifteen females, aged 71±10 years (mean±SD)). Data were acquired between February 2007 and January 2008, using a home monitoring unit (TeleMedCare Health Monitor: TMC-Home, TeleMedCare Pty. Ltd., Sydney, Australia) placed in the patients’ homes. The database was generated from a randomized controlled study comparing standard best practice care (SBPC) with SBPC plus remote monitoring-triggered intervention. Only data collected from the intervention group were used here. The study was conducted within the catchment area of Austin Hospital in the state of Victoria, Australia. The participant inclusion criteria were: (i) English fluency; (ii) finger dexterity to use a keyboard and mouse; (iii) willingness to use a computer in health self-management; (iv) living independently; (v) no major motor deficit that could prevent use of the home monitoring device; (vi) able to give informed consent; (vii) confirmed moderate/severe COPD; and, (viii) at least one hospital presentation in the last 12 months. Exclusion criteria were: (i) significant co-morbidities (e.g., cancer, renal failure); (ii) documented cognitive impairment; and, (iii) participation in another trial [13]. Each patient was asked to complete physiological measurements and questionnaires on a daily basis using the TMC-Home device, i.e., to measure blood pressure, lung function, pulse oximetry, body temperature and body weight. The questionnaire delivered by the TMC-Home device queried the patients on their respiratory symptoms and general feeling of wellbeing. Moreover, medication information relating to patient respiratory management was recorded in order to acquire a history of medication changes throughout the monitoring period.

During the data collection period, the patients could start, increase, or decrease their respiratory medication intake according to predefined actions included in their normal medication plan, or as instructed by healthcare professionals during the trial. Patients could consult healthcare staff via a telephone or by attending a health clinic. Consent for the execution of the aforementioned data collection was granted by the Austin Health Human Research Ethics Committee.

In order to construct a classification model to identify the prodromal stage of an exacerbation event, a reference standard containing each subject's health status was constructed. This reference standard was used in the training phase of the classifier design to fine-tune the performance of the classifier, before independent validation was performed. The process of generating the reference standard is described below.

The reference standard development was adapted from the definition of COPD exacerbation provided by the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) strategy document and literature [14,15]. In the symptom questionnaires, patients were asked if there had been any changes in their symptoms, namely: increase in sputum amount; change in sputum colour or consistency; or, worsening breathlessness. Similarly, in the daily medication questionnaires, patients were asked if they had increased their dosage, or had started the use of a respiratory medication on that day. Examples of the questions asked are shown in Appendix A.

Worsening in any one of the symptoms that warranted an increased dosage, or initiating the usage of a respiratory medication, indicated that the patient may have undergone an exacerbation episode on that particular day [14,16]. The three symptoms used below in the definition of risk of exacerbation for this study are:
                              
                                 •
                                 an increase in sputum volume;

an increase in breathlessness; and,

a darkening in sputum colour.

Henceforth, one of two categorization labels (high risk or low risk of developing an exacerbation) was assigned to the patient's health condition on each day for which there was a documented worsening in their health condition, based on the rules below.

Patients were categorized as being at a high risk of exacerbation if:
                              
                                 (i)
                                 they had any two of the three symptoms, and had started oral corticosteroids and/or antibiotics on the same day, and this day was not within two weeks of the previous exacerbation,

or,

they had any one of the three symptoms, and had increased their rescue inhaler use on the same day, and this day was not within two weeks of the previous high risk of exacerbation.

Otherwise, patients were categorized as low risk of exacerbation if they had only one of the three symptoms, and:
                              
                                 (i)
                                 this symptom was occurring for the first time,

or,

this symptom occurred within two weeks after the patient was previously defined as being at high risk of exacerbation,

or,

this symptom occurred within two weeks after a worsening of the same symptom.

No categorization label was assigned to any days which do not meet abovementioned criteria; patients were assumed to have usual health condition, but no classification of wellbeing is attempted for these days.

This health status reference standard was later used in the algorithm development and validation processes.

Since the home telehealth data acquisition protocol was performed in an unsupervised environment, data quality may affect the classifier performance. Therefore, the data were manually inspected for outliers; defined as data points that lie very far from the median of the corresponding variable for each patient. To determine the allowable range, first some statistical characteristics of the data were obtained; namely, the median (50th percentile), and the lower (25th percentile) and upper (75th percentile) quartiles. Secondly, lower and upper thresholds were calculated as the 25th percentile minus 1.5 times the interquartile range, and the 75th percentile plus the 1.5 times the interquartile range, respectively. Any data values outside these limits were considered as possible outliers [17]. Next, if the possible outlier point was derived from a raw waveform signal (such as SpO2 from a photoplethysmograph signal, for example), the signal was retrieved and examined visually. Outlier data which were deemed by a human observer to have come from signals corrupted by movement artefact and noise were excluded from further analysis. Alternatively, if the possible outlier value was not derived from a waveform (such as weight or temperature), the values were physiologically validated; that is, only potential outliers still falling within the range of what is physiologically likely were included in the analysis.

The six selected physiological measurement parameters were: FEV1, SpO2, respiratory rate, heart rate, temperature and weight. The selection was based on clinical practice, COPD guidelines and other clinical literature [11,14,16,18–22].

Four additional types of features were calculated from the longitudinal records for the six abovementioned physiological parameters: the distribution mean and standard deviation, the percentage change of the parameter from the distribution mean; and the standard score (also known as the z-score), which is the deviation of the parameter from the distribution mean as a fraction of the distribution standard deviation.

The calculation of the distribution mean and standard deviation of each physiological parameter value was evaluated from a one month epoch of data prior to the current day under investigation. The percentage changes and the z-score were then calculated using the physiological parameter values on the day prior to the day in question, relative to the baseline mean and standard deviation over the previous month; that is, use today's measurement relative to the previous month to predict tomorrow's condition. The five features, which are the actual parameter value, the distribution mean, the standard deviation, the percentage changes and the z-score, are later passed as input to the classifier model to predict incipient exacerbations.

An illustrative example of the timeline used for the calculation of these five features on a given day is shown in Figs. 1 and 2
                              
                               shows examples of time series plots for some of the features and symptoms from a subject.

A CART is a nonparametric classifier model which uses a tree structure, formed using a set of if-then-else logical conditions, to assign an unknown vector of feature values (or predictors) to a predefined class, or category. The training of the CART involves examining the feature variables, finding those features that are most predictive, and applying specific cut thresholds to each feature variable so as to accurately split the data into ‘high risk’ and ‘low risk’ classes.

At this stage, five types of features are extracted from each physiological parameter. The five types of features are: the raw parameter value (after outlier removal); the distribution mean from the last month; the standard deviation from the last month; the percentage change of the current day's data relative to the last month; and the z-score value for the current day relative to the last month. Hence, there are 30 features extracted from the six physiological parameters listed earlier.

Two types of classification have been performed: (1) single feature (univariate) classification to investigate the individual predictive power of each feature alone, and; (2) multiple feature (multivariate) classification to evaluate the collective predictive power of all features (or a subset of those features).

From the available training set, let us say that it contains N observations of the class variable y, where y
                           ∈{0, 1} represents the categories of ‘low risk’ and ‘high risk’, respectively. An observation represents a particular day under investigation for which it must be decided if an onset of exacerbation is imminent.

Univariate classification is performed to investigate the predictive power of each feature independently [23]. For this classification, each observation of y is associated with a single feature, x
                              
                                 i
                              , where i
                              ∈{1, 2, …, 30} denotes each of the 30 candidate features.

Multivariate classification evaluates the pooled predictive power of a vector of features, x. Thus, each of the N instances is denoted by the 2-tuple, (y, x), where x
                              =(x
                              1, x
                              2, …, x
                              30) is the vector containing all the 30 features.

The training of the CART begins with a single root node containing all N instances. The node is then split using a single predictor to create two leaf nodes; for multivariate classification, all predictors are evaluated at various threshold values to find which predictor (and corresponding threshold) should be used, so as to reduce a chosen global measure of impurity for the tree by the greatest margin [24]; a completely pure node contains only instances from one class. The splitting process is repeated for all existing leaf nodes, until all leaf nodes reside no greater than some predefined depth from the root node [25,26]. The tree depth is defined as the maximum number of branches (a branch joins two nodes) on the path from any leaf node to the root node.

Once the tree has been constructed, its performance is evaluated using leave-one-out cross validation (LOOCV). The cross validation process, used to estimate the expected generalized classification performance, is described as follows. Using data from twenty subjects (from the twenty-one available subjects), the CART is trained. The data from the remaining subject is later introduced for testing. This is repeated twenty-one times, removing a different subject from the training set each time. The reported results are calculated from the combined (accumulated) outputs from each of the twenty-one LOOCV runs.

To avoid overtraining the CART, which will invariably occur if the tree is grown to its maximal depth, the optimal depth of the CART is first estimated. This optimum tree depth is estimated prior to training the CART within the primary cross validation loop, described above.

To estimate the optimum tree depth, the set of training instance pairs (y, x) (from twenty of the subjects in the primary cross validation loop) are randomly divided into ten further subgroups. Nine of these subgroups are used to build the CART, using the method outlined above. Once the CART is trained using these nine subgroups, the remaining group is introduced for testing. This is repeated ten times, removing a different subgroup for testing each time. The error rate of each of the ten subgroups, given an allowable tree depth, is calculated. This is repeated for all possible tree depth values, reducing the depth of the tree on each repetition. The tree depth which gives the maximum averaged Cohen's kappa (κ) value (averaged across the ten subgroup repetitions) is chosen as the optimum depth [27]. Finally, the tree is trained again using this optimal tree depth, using training data from all ten subgroups combined (that is, data from all twenty subjects in the primary cross validation loop). The withheld subject from the primary cross validation loop is now introduced for testing. This process, as described in the previous section, is repeated twenty-one times, each time removing a different subject's data. Obviously, for each cross validation repetition, a different tree structure, with a different optimal depth may be generated; however, only the aggregated performance results are presented later.

The CART models were developed using MATLAB version R2010a. The performances of these models were evaluated by comparing the classification output with the health status reference standard. Treating a correctly identified ‘high risk’ status as a true positive, the CART classifier's sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value (PPV), negative predictive value (NPV), accuracy, and Cohen's κ value (level of agreement between the reference and the CART output) were calculated.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Twenty-one subjects were enrolled in the trial for a combined total of 6542 days. They performed at least one type of measurement for 4641 days and answered questionnaires for 4230 days. 1211 out of 4230 days were determined to show a worsening in symptoms concomitant with changes in respiratory medication records. Of these 1211 records, 215 days of measurement data were deemed to contain outliers and were thus excluded from the analysis, leaving a total of 996 useable training days/instances. Based on the health status reference standard, patients were labelled as having a high risk of exacerbation for 90 days out of 996 and patients were labelled as having low risk for 112 days; giving a total of 202 labelled days. Table 1
                         shows the subjects’ baseline data, the number of days during which each subject participated in the trial, the number of days each subject used the home monitoring unit, and the number of days labelled as high risk and low risk of exacerbations.


                        Table 2
                         shows the total number of instances of each parameter value for all twenty one subjects and the number of outlying instances excluded.

Nine of the 30 univariate classifier models gave κ values greater than 0.1 (estimated using cross validation). Table 3
                            lists these nine features and their corresponding κ values.

The most predictive features (the feature selected for use in the root node of the CART classifier) selected when performing multivariate classification using the CART classifier were the FEV1 value, the SpO2 distribution mean, the weight distribution mean and the weight standard deviation. Fig. 3
                            shows the number of times each of these features was selected as the most predictive out of the twenty-one LOOCV runs. Table 4
                            shows the estimated optimal tree depth for each of the twenty-one LOOCV runs.

The resulting confusion matrix obtained when performing multivariate classification with the CART classifier (using LOOCV), for all 202 classified days pooled together, is presented in Table 5
                           . The CART classifier demonstrates an accuracy of 71.8%, specificity of 80.4%, sensitivity of 61.1%, PPV of 71.4%, NPV of 72.0% and a moderate κ value of 0.42. An example of a multivariate CART from one of the LOOCV runs (with Subject 2 withheld for later testing) is illustrated in Appendix B.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

A CART classifier model was used to retrospectively identify exacerbation events in COPD subjects undergoing home telehealth monitoring. Simple statistical features were used to perform a classification of health status.

Marin et al. used a Cox regression model and BODE index to predict future risk of exacerbation [28]. However, their technique does not generate decision rules which are important at the point of care in a home telehealth scenario. Alternatively, we believe a decision tree classifier is an appropriate way to make the automated decision/recommendation easy for a health practitioner to interpret [29,30].

The patients with COPD in this study were recruited only from northeast Melbourne, Australia, and hence may not be representative of the general COPD population. The initial number of patients agreeing to perform daily home telehealth measurement was twenty-two, of whom one did not perform her physiological measurement recordings. Therefore, only data from twenty-one patients were available for analysis.

Since the data were collected from chronically ill patients, it is unreasonable to expect these patients to perform all types of measurements every day. Thus, it is assumed that the patient has attempted to make a daily home telehealth measurement when he/she performed at least one type of measurement.

For days that contained patient measurement data, the symptoms and medication records were distributed unevenly, with Subject 2 recording the highest number of days (370 days) and Subject 9 the lowest number of days (40 days) with data.

Based on Table 1, the subject who made the most measurements was a 74 year old female with very severe COPD. The subjects with the most days at risk of exacerbation were a 76 year old male and a 75 year old female. Even though the total number of days with data for all twenty-one patients was 4641, patients performed some of the measurements more than once in a single day. For example, based on Table 2, all twenty-one patients performed a temperature measurement 4791 times. In addition, parameters from 150 temperature measurements were deemed to be outliers, which may explain why measurements were repeated.

Univariate CART analysis was performed to investigate the importance of each feature. From Table 3, the three highest individual κ values, from the 30 features examined, were SpO2 distribution mean (κ
                     =0.27), weight value (κ
                     =0.21) and the FEV1 standard deviation (κ
                     =0.21).

Examining the results in Table 5, from 202 days with health status reference standard label, 112 days were labelled as ‘low risk’ and the remaining 90 days were labelled as ‘high risk’. The 21 CART classifiers (from the 21 LOOCV runs) identified 55 true positive cases out of a possible 90 ‘high risk’ cases, but misclassified 35 cases as ‘low risk’, when in fact they were considered ‘high risk’ by the reference standard. Of 112 cases categorized as ‘low risk’ by the CART classifier, 90 were correctly recognized. The multivariate CART classifier achieved an accuracy of 71.8%, specificity of 80.4%, sensitivity of 61.1%, PPV of 71.4%, NPV of 72.0% and a moderate κ value of 0.42. The CART is specific in detecting patients who are in the low risk category (specificity more than 80%), but is not very sensitive in detecting high risk cases (sensitivity percentage value of 61.1%). In the future, it would be important to increase the algorithm's sensitivity to avoid late treatment of those patients who are incorrectly identified as being at low risk of exacerbation.

The CART classifier model might be improved by addressing some of the deficits of this study, which include issues around the completeness of the data. Firstly, some of the features in the data set obtained from the home telehealth database were missing, as patients only recorded approximately 71% (4641 out of 6542 days) of their scheduled physiological measurements (cf., Table 1). Currently, this problem is overcome by labelling the missing feature as unknown. The CART classifier is capable of handling missing values [31], but the incompleteness of the data and labelling can lead to poorer prediction accuracy.

The incompleteness of the measurement data will also affect the calculation of the parameter statistics, which rely on the previous month of data. Nonetheless, with 71% of all recordings actually being performed, it is not expected to dramatically influence the results presented here.

While the reference standard used here was based on the GOLD guidelines [14,15], in general it is not a trivial exercise to define the health status of a COPD sufferer. Even though the exploration of the nature of COPD exacerbation began many years ago, the pathophysiology of these episodes is still poorly understood, and it is often difficult to differentiate exacerbations from normal health conditions (poor as their normal health condition may be) in patients with COPD [32]. To improve the reference standard in future studies, data collection will include basing analysis on emergency department visit and hospital admission records.

The issue regarding small sample sizes in respiratory-related telehealth research does not only arise in this study; there are several home telehealth studies that also report small numbers of recruited patients with COPD [33–35], due to the difficulty of executing such trials. Vitacca et al. mentioned that the number of patients interested in a respiratory home telehealth study might increase if the study was conducted for a longer period of time. Such scenarios are likely due to the increasing technological awareness of patients with respiratory disease [36]. It is believed that a larger sample size will improve the robustness of the algorithm and the significance of the results obtained here [27].

Finally, the nature of unsupervised recording is also a significant challenge facing telehealth monitoring. Since motion artefact (caused by unidentified poor measurement technique in the home environment) was expected to be a confounding factor in the analysis [37], outliers produced by motion artefact were manually excluded from the dataset. However, the existence of erroneous parameter values which were not identified as outliers could still have influenced the classification performances quoted here, as they would not have been flagged for inspection and removed if necessary, and manual inspection of the raw waveforms underlying all data points is impractical. While the validation of signal quality was performed manually in this instance, recent methods have been developed to automatically identify movement artefact in physiological signals, specifically those recorded in the telehealth environment [38,39].

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

This study has illustrated that it is possible to develop a COPD exacerbation prediction algorithm using only routinely collected home telehealth measurement data. Although this analysis has some limitations, it adds to existing knowledge, being one of the first studies to use unsupervised home telehealth measurement data in the prediction of ‘high risk’ COPD exacerbation events. The algorithm is intended to be used by ambulatory care nurses who are monitoring COPD patients enrolled in services such as ambulatory standard care and ‘hospital at home’. By stratifying the patient's condition into low risk or high risk of exacerbation, the nurse can decide on the type of action required to manage each patient; to consult the patient via telephone and/or change the home management plan or visit the patient. In addition, of the six parameters that we measured we found that the most predictive power was contained within a subset of three measurements comprising body weight, SpO2 and FEV1.

Given the alarmingly high health utilization costs associated with COPD exacerbation, such studies are crucial. In order to improve the future performance and robustness of the CART algorithm, it needs to be validated with a larger and less homogeneous patient population and also in a prospective trial.

Nigel H. Lovell is a technical consultant for TeleMedCare Pty. Ltd., whose data acquisition device was used in this study.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This research is supported and funded by the University of Malaya, Malaysia (University of Malaya Research Grant: RP009C-13AET) and the Graduate School of Biomedical Engineering, UNSW Australia.

Example of questions and suggested answers in the trial symptoms questionnaire.
                        
                           
                              
                              
                              
                                 
                                    Questions
                                    Answers
                                 
                              
                              
                                 
                                    Describe your breathing today
                                    1– better than usual
                                 
                                 
                                    2 – same as usual
                                 
                                 
                                    3 – worse than usual
                                 
                                 
                                    4 – much worse than usual
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    The amount of sputum you produced today
                                    1 – none
                                 
                                 
                                    2 – some (up to a teaspoonful)
                                 
                                 
                                    3 – a little (up to a tablespoon)
                                 
                                 
                                    4 – moderate (up to an egg cupful)
                                 
                                 
                                    5 – a lot (more than an egg cupful)
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    What is the colour of your sputum today?
                                    1 – cream coloured
                                       
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    2 – pale yellow coloured
                                       
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    3 – dark yellow coloured
                                       
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    4 – green coloured
                                       
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    5 – other
                                       
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    How is your sputum consistency today
                                    0 – watery
                                 
                                 
                                    1 – creamy
                                 
                                 
                                    2 – thick
                                 
                                 
                                    3 – semi solid
                                 
                                 
                                    4 – solid (plugs)
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  


                     
                        
                     
                  

The figure is an illustration of a CART constructed from one of the LOOCV runs (where Subject 2 was withheld for testing, and training was performed using the remaining 20 subjects, resulting in this tree). The circle shape symbolizes a leaf node in the tree, which can represent either a ‘low risk’ (white circle) or ‘high risk’ (black circle) health prediction (L
                     =number of low risk cases and H
                     =number of high risk cases in each node). The alphabetic labelling of each decision node represents the corresponding feature used and the decision threshold. At each decision node, the left branch is chosen if the feature is less than the threshold value.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

