@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Assessing the feasibility of a mobile health-supported clinical decision support system for nutritional triage in oncology outpatients using Arden Syntax

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           “Assessing feasibility of a mobile health-supported clinical decision support system for nutritional triage in oncology outpatients using Arden Syntax”.


                        
                        
                           
                           A clinical decision support system using patient-generated data and data from protected clinical data domains is feasible.


                        
                        
                           
                           Such a system can be used to combine data generated by home monitoring apps with clinical data.


                        
                        
                           
                           Smartphone applications are adopted quite well by patients, and could be used to monitor nutritional status in patients, and make patients more able to cope with their disease.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Telemedicine

Mobile health

Medical oncology

Disease-related malnutrition

Nutritional status

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Background
                  Nutritional screening procedures followed by regular nutrition monitoring for oncological outpatients are no standard practice in many European hospital wards and outpatient settings. As a result, early signs of malnutrition are missed and nutritional treatment is initiated when patients have already experienced severe weight loss.
               
               
                  Objective
                  We report on a novel clinical decision support system (CDSS) for the global assessment and nutritional triage of the nutritional condition of oncology outpatients. The system combines clinical and laboratory data collected in the clinical setting with patient-generated data from a smartphone application for monitoring the patients’ nutritional status. Our objective is to assess the feasibility of a CDSS that combines the aforementioned data sources and describe its integration into a hospital information system. Furthermore, we collected patients’ opinions on the value of the system, and whether they would regard the system as a useful aid in coping with their condition.
               
               
                  Materials and methods
                  The system implements the Patient-Generated Subjective Global Assessment (PG-SGA) to monitor nutritional status in the outpatient setting. A smartphone application is used to collect patient-generated data by performing weekly mini-surveys on patients concerning their eating habits, weight, and overall well-being. Data are uploaded on completion of each mini-survey and stored on a secure server at the Medical University of Vienna (MUV). The data are then combined with relevant clinical information from the Vienna General Hospital (VGH) information system. The knowledge base for the CDSS is implemented in medical logic modules (MLMs) using Arden Syntax. A three-month pilot clinical trial was performed to test the feasibility of the system. Qualitative questionnaires were used to obtain the patients’ opinions on the usability and personal value of the system during the four-week test period.
               
               
                  Results
                  We used the existing separation between the scientific and clinical data domains in the secured network environment (SNE) at the MUV and VGH to our advantage by importing, storing, and processing both patient-generated and routine data in the scientific data domain. To limit exposure to the SNE, patient-generated data stored outside the SNE were imported to the scientific domain once a day. The CDSS created for nutritional assessment and triage comprised ten MLMs, each including either a sub-assessment or the final results of the PG-SGA. Finally, an interface created for the hospital information system showed the results directly in clinical routine. In all 22 patients completed the clinical study. The results of the questionnaires showed that 91% of the patients were generally happy with the usability of the system, 91% believed that the application was of additional value in detecting cancer-related malnutrition, and 82% found it helpful as a long-term monitoring tool.
               
               
                  Discussion and conclusion
                  Despite strict protection of the clinical data domain, a CDSS employing patient-generated data can be integrated into clinical routine. The CDSS discussed in this report combined the information entered into a smartphone application with clinical data in order to inform the physician of a patient's nutritional status and thus permit suitable and timely intervention. The initial results show that the smartphone application was well accepted by patients, who considered it useful, but not many oncological outpatients were willing to participate in the clinical study because they did not possess an Android phone or lacked smartphone expertise. Furthermore, the results indicate that patient-generated data could be employed to augment clinical data and calculate metrics such as the PG-SGA without excessive effort by using a secure intermediate location as the locus of data storage and processing.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Cancer patients are at high risk of a poor nutritional status because of their disease as well as their anti-cancer treatment. Weight loss is a common phenomenon in cancer patients [1], and is significantly related to a poor clinical outcome, poor tolerance of anti-cancer treatment, and reduced quality of life [2–4]. Finally, malnutrition is associated with high mortality [3] and greater consumption of healthcare resources due to numerous and prolonged hospital visits and stays, apart from the cost of treatment [5]. The management of malnourished patients may cost twice as much as the treatment of well-nourished patients [6].

The guidelines of the European Society for Clinical Nutrition and Metabolism clearly recommend the following investigations for cancer patients: regular screening on hospital admission, re-screening at pre-defined intervals (e.g., weekly) during a hospital stay for patients without nutritional impairment, and frequent nutritional assessments and early intervention in the event of deficiencies [2,3,7,8]. In the community setting, the guidelines recommend repeated screening of patients at moderate risk of undernutrition, with intervals ranging “from <1 month to >6 months (with dietary advice if necessary)” [8]. Patients already receiving nutrition interventions also need more frequent follow-ups.

However, the aforementioned guidelines are not always a part of overall patient care in European hospitals and outpatient facilities [9]. Therefore, early signs of malnutrition are missed and nutritional therapy is implemented rather late, when patients have already experienced significant weight loss [10]. The transition of oncological treatment from inpatient to outpatient care is an additional challenge. Currently, the majority of patients receive ambulatory cancer treatment and follow-up which, depending on their disease status and the ongoing therapy, occur at variable intervals. Some patients are seen as often as three times a week while others come in every six months. As shown by the SCRINIO working group, weight loss and a high level of nutritional risk are common among oncological outpatients [1,7].

Modern information technologies such as telecare or mobile health (mHealth) systems could be used to monitor the nutritional status and food intake of oncological outpatients, as well as identify nutritional complications. mHealth applications were found to be economical and effective in a variety of care settings [11,12], and are usually well accepted by patients and healthcare professionals [13,14]. As mobile technology is becoming more widespread, mHealth applications will be able to reach more people. This may improve the effectiveness of mobile interventions. However, as these data are patient-generated, they cannot be stored in a hospital information system (HIS). It would be necessary to establish a site of storage and safe processing for patient-generated data as well as data from clinical routine. The processed data should then be retrievable and available for use in clinical routine.

Our purpose was to create a clinical decision support system (CDSS) that would employ patient-generated data as well as data from clinical routine in order to monitor the nutritional status of oncological outpatients. To collect patient-generated data, we developed a smartphone application known as MONTE. With MONTE, oncological outpatients are monitored on a weekly basis rather than per-visit, for the purpose of initiating early nutritional interventions and reducing unnecessary hospital visits. Patient-generated data are uploaded to a remote server and imported into the secure network environment (SNE) of the Medical University of Vienna (MUV), where they are stored and combined with routine clinical data of the Vienna General Hospital (VGH). A CDSS was created that performs nutritional triage in accordance with the Patient-Generated Subjective Global Assessment (PG-SGA) [15], and was implemented in medical logic modules (MLMs) using Arden Syntax. Finally, a graphical interface was created in order to integrate the CDSS into the VGH HIS. A three-month trial was performed to test the feasibility of the integration solution and obtain the patients’ personal opinions concerning the value and usefulness of the system.

@&#BACKGROUND@&#

Three stages of nutritional deterioration have been identified in cancer patients: pre-cachexia, cachexia, and refractory cachexia [3,16].

In the pre-cachectic state, patients suffer from a chronic or recurrent inflammatory response and experience minor weight loss, most likely due to anorexia [16]. In these cases, anorexia is defined as the reduction or loss of appetite, which commonly occurs in a chronic illness [17,18].

Depending on the type and stage of cancer, compromising factors such as low food intake, the presence of systemic inflammation, and lack of response to cancer treatment, the pre-cachectic state may escalate into cancer cachexia. The latter is a multifactorial wasting syndrome identified by the ongoing loss of lean muscle mass due to a negative protein and energy balance [3]. In contrast to the symptoms in the pre-cachectic state, the outcomes in this stage cannot be fully reversed because patients become less responsive to conventional nutritional and pharmacological therapies [19,20]. Therefore, nutritional deterioration must be identified prior to the cachectic state, as interventions are most effective in this stage [4].

Finally, in advanced cancer stages or rapidly progressing cancer, cachexia may turn into clinically refractory cachexia. Weight loss is no longer manageable in this stage. Therapy interventions are then entirely focused on alleviating the symptoms of cachexia.

Given the potentially severe impact of cancer cachexia, several nutrition guidelines have been proposed for cancer patients [2,21]. About 50% of cancer patients are at risk of malnutrition [22]. Effective interventions are now available for the treatment of malnutrition, and the screening procedure, assessment, and interventions cause no harm to the patient. In order to be effective, any screening procedure must be integrated into clinical routine. Screening should be done to establish a baseline upon a patient's first visit, and should be followed by a systematic assessment and intervention, depending on the patient's clinical needs [4].

Several questionnaires have been developed for the (subjective) assessment of an individual's nutritional status. The Functional Assessment of Anorexia/Cachexia Treatment [23] is a combination of the Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness Treatment and additional questions on nutritional problems and difficulties. Another widely used questionnaire is that provided by the North Central Cancer Treatment Group [24], which also mainly addresses nutritional problems. Finally, the PG-SGA is a scoring method incorporating body weight, food intake, nutritional difficulties and activities, and therapeutic information provided by physicians [15].

The knowledge base of the CDSS discussed in this paper is modeled after the PG-SGA, a method of nutritional assessment specifically designed for cancer patients that, unlike its predecessors, incorporates a numerical scale and is thus a continuous measure rather than a categorical one. The assessment comprises a history section to be filled out by the patient. It consists of sets of questions related to a patient's physical attributes, food intake, the presence of symptoms that inhibit food intake, overall activities, and functioning. The remainder of the survey addresses the results of physical examinations and items related to objective nutritional criteria, such as disease description, metabolic demands, and a PG-SGA global assessment to be filled by the physician. All questions are scored, after which nutritional triage recommendations are proposed, ranging from no intervention (PG-SGA score 0–1) to a critical need for symptom management and nutrient intervention (PG-SGA score >8).

@&#RELATED WORK@&#

Apart from MONTE, Pt-Global is another application available for the determination of PG-SGA scores [25]. Pt-Global was primarily created for healthcare professionals, but can also be used to perform systematic screening for nutritional risk using the PG-SGA method. One major difference between Pt-Global and MONTE is that the former is used for patients during a stay or a visit in the clinical or research setting, whereas the MONTE application is used by outpatients at any given time. Furthermore, since there is no connection between the application and the HIS, automatic data collection and collation with routine medical routine data are not possible. Finally, the influence of the clinical part of the PG-SGA seems understated; the Pt-Global website states that up to 80–90% of the numerical score is patient-generated.

Apart from the Pt-Global application, no other mobile application employs the PG-SGA for nutritional assessment in cancer patients. The Dana–Farber Cancer Institute created a smartphone application that provides recipes for staying healthy or supporting treatment, and is based on direct contact with nutritionists [26]. However, this application does not monitor a patient's nutritional status and is not exclusively for cancer patients, but functions as a general tool for cancer prevention through nutrition.

Arden Syntax is a programming language for the collection, description, and exchange of medical knowledge in a machine-executable format. The first draft was issued in 1989, and a first specification was published by the American Society for Testing and Materials in 1992 [27]. The most recent version of Arden Syntax is version 2.10 [28], and is managed by Health Level Seven. An Arden Syntax knowledge base comprises one or more MLMs, whereby each MLM contains a set of logic rules needed to make a single medical decision [29].

At the VGH and MUV, the SNE may be divided into the clinical routine domain (VGH side), and the scientific domain (MUV side). Both are shielded from the wide area network by firewalls and access protocols.

In the clinical routine domain, the HIS was implemented by Siemens Health Services using the Systems, Applications and Products in Data Processing (SAP) framework. The SAP/IS-H module for administration and accounting, the SAP/i.s.h.med module for clinical operation, and custom-made extensions are all integrated into this framework [30]. These systems jointly provide an environment for the retrieval of patient data, laboratory tests, and other medical examination data, which can then be accessed through a graphical user interface known as a parametric medical document (PMD). As these PMDs are customizable and adaptable, they also permit the integration of new medical systems into clinical routine.

Support for CDSSs was one of the requested custom-made extensions, and is provided by the expert system platform (EXP). EXP supports the rapid development of expert systems through direct and secure access to clinical patient data. EXP also helps in the deployment of expert systems in clinical routine. The most recent version of EXP supports a variety of programming languages and standards, including Arden Syntax 2.10 through the use of the ArdenSuite, developed and maintained by Medexter Healthcare [31].

Communication between the clinical and scientific domain occurs through the communication server. Fig. 1
                         shows the overall infrastructure. Note that this does not comprise the entire systems architecture of the VGH, but merely those parts relevant to this report.

@&#METHODS@&#

This study was approved by the ethics committee of the MUV (approval number 1240/2012), and was performed in accordance with the 1964 Declaration of Helsinki, amended most recently in October 2013 by the 64th WMA General Assembly in Fortaleza, Brazil [32].

A clinical trial was initiated with the primary goal of measuring the feasibility of a CDSS that combines patient-generated data with data from clinical routine, and to elicit patients’ opinions on the usability and the perceived medical usefulness of the MONTE mobile application. The trial was performed from 1 August 2013 to 1 November 2013. Each patient was required to participate in the trial for at least four weeks.

During their regular visits to the outpatient clinic, the study was explained verbally to each patient, and his/her participation was requested in case he/she fulfilled the aforementioned selection criteria. Visits to the outpatient clinic are scheduled according to the patient's clinical condition. Patients in stable condition visit the outpatient clinic approximately every three months. After a patient had given his/her informed consent, the application was uploaded to the user's smartphone and a tutorial on the application was given.

To ensure the homogeneity of the study population, only patients with solid tumors (lung; ear, nose and throat; or gastrointestinal tumors) were selected. Further inclusion criteria were the following: age at least 18 years, ambulatory anti-cancer treatment as an outpatient for at least one month, access to a smartphone, a wireless Internet connection, and weekly access to weighing scales. Patients with a life expectancy of less than six months were excluded.

For the electronic assessment of a patient's nutritional status, the patient history section of the PG-SGA was implemented as a smartphone application. It permitted the patients to take the survey in parts, at their own pace.

Users are asked to verify their identity before using the application, in order to ensure access solely by registered patients. Each patient who participates in the study is registered on the MONTE application server with a username and based on this information, a password is generated. The latter and the username are used by the client for server-side patient verification. To ensure safe communication with the server, all communication is encrypted with AES-256. Once the patient has been verified by the client, he or she is asked to select a pin code which henceforth serves as the identification mechanism of the application.

After the patient's verification, the user is asked for several personal characteristics such as age and height, and is given the opportunity to configure the application to his/her needs. Two configuration parameters are available. The first states how long a user can postpone questions (up to three days), and the other specifies the time of alarm for the application. Based on these parameters and the existence of unanswered questions, the application will automatically issue an alarm at the time specified by the user and show a menu which enables the user to start the application or postpone it. If the user postpones a set of questions for longer than the set number of days, the questions will remain unanswered and a NULL value will be stored for the question in the database.

The opening screen of the application presents the user with question categories that were scheduled for the respective day and the question categories that were postponed previously (Fig. 2
                        ). The user may start the survey simply by tapping the screen. By pressing the smartphone's menu button, the user may also modify the parameters set during the first configuration. In case the user is not connected to the Internet, he/she is asked to establish a connection. If no connection is available at the time, the user may still proceed with the survey; the answers will be stored locally until an Internet connection is available.

For each scheduled question category, the user is asked whether he/she noticed any difficulties related to that category. If so, a sub-question appears where the user may select the problems or difficulties experienced over the last week and their intensity (Fig. 3
                        ). Once a category has been completed, the answers are stored locally and the user is guided to the next category. Apart from multiple choice questions, the user also has to weigh himself/herself once a week and record the result. Questions within a category cannot be skipped, nor can survey categories be interrupted or resumed. Each category must be completed fully before the user moves on. Once the survey has been completed, all answers are uploaded to the application server.

The smartphone application supports devices using Android version 2.2 (API 8) or higher. The application was implemented in Java version 1.6, using Eclipse Juno and the Android SDK Tools, revision 22.0.1. Patient data were saved locally using an SQLite database, and on the server side using Oracle via PHP scripts running on an Apache webserver. In the SNE, data were also stored using Oracle. The CDSS knowledge base was implemented with the ArdenSuite integrated development environment. For data communication between the smartphone and the MONTE server, we used JavaScript Object Notation.

We designed a questionnaire to elicit the patients’ opinions on the application after completion of the four-week clinical trial. It consisted of questions concerning the usability of the application, and the patients’ opinion regarding the contribution of the application to their overall medical treatment.

The usability section of the questionnaire comprised five yes/no questions to evaluate the appearance and tactile perception of the application, as well as its ease of use and comprehensibility. The following questions were asked in regard of usability:
                           
                              •
                              Was the font size acceptable?

Was it easy to scroll and maneuver?

Did any technical problems occur?

Were there troublesome waiting times in loading or using the application?

Was the use of the application too time-consuming?

The evaluation of perceived usefulness consisted of four yes/no questions:
                           
                              •
                              Was the application helpful in detecting cancer-associated malnutrition?

Was the application helpful for long-term monitoring of cancer-associated malnutrition?

Did the application provide better medical support by monitoring the risk of malnutrition?

Should the application be introduced in clinical routine?

@&#RESULTS@&#

The MONTE CDSS automates nutritional assessment according to the PG-SGA method, combining patient-generated data with clinical, laboratory, and diagnostic data from the clinical domain.

The CDSS knowledge base was implemented using ten MLMs that emulate the medical decision process executed manually with the PG-SGA questionnaire. An overview of the MLMs, including inputs and outputs, is shown in Table 1
                        . An MLM that determines a patient's present and relevant conditions is provided as supplementary material. Data used for calculation, classification, and trend analysis were provided as parameters. When several data elements were needed, an SQL query was performed within the MLM itself using a database connector. After calculation, the MLM results are forwarded to the calling MLM as well as the MONTE server for debugging purposes, result verification, and explanation of the results to the requesting physician. In the graphical interface, the CDSS shows scores and trends for individual PG-SGA categories, as well as the triage and classification results, which indicate the patient's level of malnourishment and the type of nutritional intervention needed.

To combine patient-generated data with those from clinical routine, we used the SNE configuration of the VGH and MUV. In the scientific domain, data from a variety of external sources can be combined with clinical data for research purposes, but clinical purposes are not excluded. As such, we used the scientific domain as the location for the MONTE clinical server.

Our integration solution works as follows. A record is generated at the time of a patient's registration, connecting the patient's application identifier to his/her unique hospital identifier. This enables correct combination of data from all data sources. Using the hospital identifier, relevant clinical data are imported from the VGH communication server and stored on the MONTE clinical server as they become available. Meanwhile, a MONTE application server was placed outside the SNE, and served as a site of temporary storage for patient-generated data transmitted from the MONTE mobile application. A synchronization protocol was created to copy data from the application server to the clinical server once a day.

After data collection, the PG-SGA category scores are calculated and the (intermediate) results are stored on the MONTE clinical server. This is followed by a trend analysis. In order to present the results directly in the hospital information system, several PMDs serve as a graphical interface to the CDSS. Fig. 4
                         shows the PMD that displays the patient history section of the PG-SGA. Apart from intermediate scores for each PG-SGA category, data trends for PG-SGA categories are also shown; these indicate developments over a longer period of time. The trends are established by comparing a weighted average of category scores (>2 weeks). In case data were not available and a score for a PG-SGA category could not be determined, the physician could enter or update data himself/herself. The system immediately saves the patient data and recalculates PG-SGA scores and trends.

A total of 175 patients were eligible for the study, of which 25 consented to participate. Non-participation was mostly due to the absence of a smartphone (74%; n
                        =111). Other reasons were lack of interest (12.7%; n
                        =19), no android-based smartphone (4.7%; n
                        =7), poor language skills (4.7%; n
                        =7), lack of time (2.7%; n
                        =4), poor health status (0.7%; n
                        =1), and the refusal to undergo additional blood sampling (0.7%; n
                        =1).

Thirteen men (52%) and twelve women (48%) signed the informed consent form. The majority of the patients had gastrointestinal cancer (n
                        =11; 44%), six had pancreatic cancer (24%), and eight had other forms of cancer (32%). Almost all patients were receiving chemotherapy (n
                        =24; 96%). Thirteen patients received a medical nutrition intervention (56%). At the time of entry in the study, the patients’ ages ranged between 37 and 77 years and their body mass index from 17.5 to 38.0kg/m2. Since their diagnosis of cancer, 20 patients had experienced unintended weight loss of at least 5% of their body weight and a mean weight loss (standard deviation) of 8.7(6.9)kg. According to the PG-SGA, 17 (68%) patients had an impaired nutritional status (one patient was malnourished and 16 were at risk of developing malnutrition). Most patients (n
                        =16; 64%) were able to take care of themselves and do light work, three patients (12%) were fully active, five (20%) had limited abilities of self-care, and one patient (4%) was entirely disabled.

Almost all patients used the application longer than the scheduled period of four weeks (n
                        =19; 76%). Three patients registered for the trial but did not participate at all (one because of poor health status and two without stating reasons). Three patients participated but did not fully complete the four-week trial (data entry: one week n
                        =1; three weeks n
                        =2). Reasons for not completing the study included infrequent or irregular use, incompatibility of the application with the patient's smartphone or tablet, and a regular stay abroad during which they did not use the Austrian smartphone. In all, 6028 questions were asked, of which 625 were not answered (response rate 89.6%). Of 22 patients who participated in the study, a weekly data completion rate of 90–100% was achieved by 15 patients, 75–90% by six patients, and 50–75% by one patient. Response rates did not decline during the study period. After four weeks, 13 patients had an impaired nutritional status (at risk or malnourished) according to the PG-SGA.

All 22 participating patients filled out the questionnaires after their four-week trial. The users were generally satisfied with the usability of the application. The majority of the patients (n
                        =21; 96%) considered the application simple or very simple to use. According to majority of patients (n
                        =20; 91%), the application was quite easy to understand and read and was not too time-consuming. The most commonly reported problems were of a technical nature (n
                        =4; 18%). Details regarding the usability of the application are shown in Table 2
                        .

Regarding the patients’ assessment of the additional value of the application in medical treatment (Table 3
                        ), the large majority (n
                        =20; 91%) rated the application as a useful tool for the detection of cancer-related malnutrition. About 82% of the patients thought it would be a useful monitoring tool in the long term and would provide personal medical support.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The present report describes a workable method of combining patient-generated data and data from clinical routine. Using Arden Syntax and the SNE of the VGH and MUV, we created a CDSS that combines data from the aforementioned data sources in order to monitor the nutritional status of oncological outpatients, and present the results directly in the HIS of the VGH. As mentioned earlier, changes in a patient's nutritional status can be easily overlooked due to lack of awareness among patients and caregivers. The addition of patient-generated data in clinical routine helps to identify changes in a patient's nutritional status at an early point in time and initiate interventions on a timely basis. This approach has been found to enhance the patients’ tolerance of treatment [33], quality of life [34], and survival [35].

For a variety of reasons, an Android smartphone application was selected as a medium for the surveys rather than other media such as desktop applications, online forms, or other operating systems like iOS, Blackberry, or a Windows phone. The primary reasons were convenience and availability. While a computer is not always available, most persons carry their phone with them. Furthermore, according to a Nielsen study in 2013 [36], about 60% of all mobile subscribers in the US own smartphones, and over a half of the smartphones run on an Android operating system.

There were several concerns about splitting the questionnaires over several days. First, the new format could invalidate the surveys. Although the presented format is different from the traditional method, the contents remain the same. Traditionally, patients are presented all questions at once and are only required to recall the previous week until the time of their hospital visit. In the new format, patients are asked a few questions each day but the questions still pertain to the preceding week. Thus, the content and construct are not invalidated, and the answers are expected to be equally reliable. Another concern was that segmentation of surveys over several days might cause fatigue. However, when a survey is partitioned into small sub-surveys that require little time to answer, the potential medical benefit appears to outweigh the burden. The high ratio of study completion, data completeness, lack of response decay, and usability feedback concerning time consumption support this claim.

Our solution for the import of patient-generated data into the scientific domain was sanctioned by the Department of IT Systems and Communication of the MUV, and was deemed sufficiently safe and secure. Storage of patient data in the scientific domain was also sanctioned by the Department of Technology and Computer Science of the VGH. By using this data pull strategy for patient-generated data, the firewall did not have to be reconfigured or compromised, but the drawback was that it could only be done once a day to minimize any risk of unauthorized access. However, as there was no need for real-time data updates or processing, the drawback did not affect the performance of the system. In theory, the solution could be transferred to any other medical solution that does not require real-time updates of patient-generated data, in any hospital that has a domain configured in a similar way as the scientific domain of the MUV.

The use of the Arden Syntax standard had several benefits. First, owing to the extensive experience of the developers of MONTE in using Arden Syntax, it could be implemented rapidly. Second, as Arden Syntax MLMs only contained logic for a single medical decision, in this case a part of the PG-SGA, nutritional experts could easily verify the correctness of these (partial) decisions or suggest changes. Third, the Arden Syntax server is maintained by a third party in close cooperation with the CDSS implementers. As such, errors could be quickly addressed and new features such as the database connector could be extensively tested and improved. Finally – a theoretical benefit as of now – the use of a standard such as Arden Syntax may well simplify the dissemination of this particular CDSS to other healthcare institutes that also incorporate Arden Syntax.

The results of the clinical study showed that oncological outpatients were positive about the mobile application in terms of its usability and personal medical value, which further supports the conclusions presented in [13], stating that patients generally find mobile applications to be usable and acceptable. Furthermore, the results also provide additional motivation for the (restricted) integration of mHealth technology in clinical routine as an additional source of data. During patient debriefing, the dietitian made notes of the patients’ verbal comments in addition to the questionnaire. These comments indicated that several patients (n
                     =8; 36%) experienced a change in their perception of nutrition, and five patients (27%) a change in their perception of their physical condition. This underlines the role of mHealth in improving self-awareness and the awareness of disease among patients.

The limitations of the study are worthy of note. First, despite the fact that 175 patients were eligible for the study, just a small number of them were willing to participate (n
                     =25; 14%). Although the ownership rate of Android smartphones was in concordance with the Nielsen study (32%), the higher age of the patient population (average of 58) hindered proficient use of the smartphone [37]. One way of reaching more patients would be a more widely supported medium, such as a web-based application. A second limitation is the lack of a standardized usability study, e.g., the International Standards Organisation 9241 usability test. As such, we could not perform a standardized and objective measurement of the application's usability. Finally, the applicability of the results to a larger setting is limited by the fact that the investigation was conducted a single-center study. The physicians and dietitians involved in the trial were positive about the medical value of the application, but its general usefulness for healthcare professionals working with cancer patients cannot be assessed at the present time. The technical solution worked for the VGH, but whether the solution is transferable to other healthcare institutions cannot be stated at the present time.

The MONTE CDSS is a part of a larger support system for patients, physicians, and nutritional experts to improve nutritional guidance and interventions for cancer patients, and raise the awareness of caregivers and patients concerning the importance of nutrition in the overall treatment of cancer. We believe that the application will be an active part of interventions for cancer-related malnutrition in the future. It will serve as a data collection tool, enabling physicians and nutrition experts to identify the patients’ need for intervention on a timely basis. In order to serve as an effective intervention tool, the application will have to be incorporated in an intervention program that addresses the self-management of disease, which includes medical, emotional, and role management [38]. It must also include the use of multimedia, interactive functions, and supportive feedback [39].

In this report, we primarily focused on technical challenges and patients’ opinions of the CDSS. However, the opinions of the medical and nutritional experts are equally, if not more, important. As it was a single-center trial with only one dietitian in charge of nutrition counseling and therapy, we could not address the views of other dietitians. Furthermore, it remains to be seen whether medical experts will consider the system necessary and whether they will find it useful in the treatment of patients. A vital part of any intervention program is collaboration with physicians and nutritional experts. Therefore, feedback concerning the application must be integrated into clinical routine. Using the available electronic patient data, we developed a CDSS for automated nutritional triage and nutritional intervention alerts, as well as a means of online collaboration between all involved parties including patients, oncologists, and nutritional experts. Although mHealth applications are usually well received by medical experts, they have rarely been integrated into clinical routine because of budget problems and their incompatibility with established workflows [40]. The system and its integration have now been developed and tested, but further studies will be necessary. These should include feedback from the clinical setting, address the limitations of this first study, compare the results of the electronic procedure with the pen-and-paper version, and focus on the opinions of medical and nutritional experts concerning the medical value and feasibility of the system in clinical routine. Several studies of this nature are being planned and will be initiated in the next few months.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

This study shows that mHealth applications are promising options for monitoring cancer-related malnutrition, and may well serve as the missing link in the early identification of change in a patient's nutritional status. Patients were positive about the experience and the application, and generally considered it easy to use and useful—both as a tool to raise their awareness of their condition and as an aid in the management of their nutrition. However, before this application can be developed into an actual tool of intervention and self-management, more patients will have to use it and medical experts will need to be convinced of its usefulness. Technical and social obstacles will have to be overcome before mHealth applications can exert a definite impact on a larger scale.

None declared.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The project outline and idea for the smartphone application were provided by KS.

JSB programmed the smartphone application and wrote the manuscript.

ChS tested the smartphone application and proposed revisions, programmed the server-side logic, the database, and the MLMs for the CDSS.

WS co-programmed the MLMs for the CDSS, and developed the PMD graphical user interfaces.

EL, MG, and KS provided medical knowledge and additional ideas for the project, tested the smartphone application and proposed revisions, and performed the clinical study.

GK, BL, and FH provided organizational support and ideas.

All of the authors had full access to the entire data of the study and take responsibility for the integrity of the data as well as the accuracy of the data analysis. All of the authors critically reviewed and approved the final manuscript. The project was funded by an unrestricted research grant by Casinos Austria and the Department of Internal Medicine I.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.artmed.2015.10.001.

The following are the supplementary data to this article:
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

