@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Evaluation of a machine learning capability for a clinical decision support system to enhance antimicrobial stewardship programs

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We used a supervised learning module to discover expert rules for a clinical decision support system to enhance antimicrobial stewardship programs.


                        
                        
                           
                           The learning module was deployed alongside the baseline system to evaluate its ability to discover rules that complement the existing rule set.


                        
                        
                           
                           Alerts from learned rules had a rate of intervention equal to that of the baseline system.


                        
                        
                           
                           The learning module extracted clinically relevant rules, some of which extend the knowledge base of the baseline system.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Evaluation

Clinical decision support system

Supervised learning

Rule induction

Antimicrobial stewardship

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Objective
                  Antimicrobial stewardship programs have been shown to limit the inappropriate use of antimicrobials. Hospitals are increasingly relying on clinical decision support systems to assist in the demanding prescription reviewing process. In previous work, we have reported on an emerging clinical decision support system for antimicrobial stewardship that can learn new rules supervised by user feedback. In this paper, we report on the evaluation of this system.
               
               
                  Methods
                  The evaluated system uses a knowledge base coupled with a supervised learning module that extracts classification rules for inappropriate antimicrobial prescriptions using past recommendations for dose and dosing frequency adjustments, discontinuation of therapy, early switch from intravenous to oral therapy, and redundant antimicrobial spectrum. Over five weeks, the learning module was deployed alongside the baseline system to prospectively evaluate its ability to discover rules that complement the existing knowledge base for identifying inappropriate prescriptions of piperacillin–tazobactam, a frequently used antimicrobial.
               
               
                  Results
                  The antimicrobial stewardship pharmacists reviewed 374 prescriptions, of which 209 (56% of 374) were identified as inappropriate leading to 43 recommendations to optimize prescriptions. The baseline system combined with the learning module triggered alerts in 270 prescriptions with a positive predictive value of identifying inappropriate prescriptions of 74%. Of these, 240 reviewed prescriptions were identified by the alerts of the baseline system with a positive predictive value of 82% and 105 reviewed prescriptions were identified by the alerts of the learning module with a positive predictive value of 62%. The combined system triggered alerts for all 43 recommendations, resulting in a rate of actionable alerts of 16% (43 recommendations of 270 reviewed alerts); the baseline system triggered alerts for 38 interventions, resulting in a rate of actionable alerts of 16% (38 of 240 reviewed alerts); and the learning module triggered alerts for 17 interventions, resulting in a rate of actionable alerts of 16% (17 of 105 reviewed alerts). The learning module triggered alerts for every inappropriate prescription missed by the knowledge base of the baseline system (n
                     =5).
               
               
                  Conclusions
                  The learning module was able to extract clinically relevant rules for multiple types of antimicrobial alerts. The learned rules were shown to extend the knowledge base of the baseline system by identifying pharmacist interventions that were missed by the baseline system. The learned rules identified inappropriate prescribing practices that were not supported by local experts and were missing from its knowledge base. However, combining the baseline system and the learning module increased the number of false positives.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Inappropriate prescribing of antimicrobials is a major clinical problem as well as a financial burden in hospitals. It has been reported that as many as 50% of antimicrobial prescriptions are unnecessary, suboptimal or inappropriate [1,2]. The challenges of antimicrobial prescribing lie in selecting the right antimicrobial therapy for the suspected pathogen and adjusting the concentrations and dosing frequency of the antimicrobial agent with an appropriate route of administration to ensure that effective levels of medication reach the site of the infection. A “one size fits all” approach is not appropriate in antimicrobial selection [3] as several host factors must be taken into account in addition to the pathogenic agent, its location and susceptibility.

Inappropriate prescribing can range from selecting an antimicrobial while another significantly less expensive but equally effective and safe alternative is available, to selecting an antimicrobial to which the causative pathogen is resistant, making the treatment ineffective and endangering the life of the patient [4]. Moreover, a selected antimicrobial therapy will be valid over a finite period of time; after selecting an initial empirical treatment, the physician must review his earlier prescription to account for newly available information [3].

Antimicrobial stewardship has been shown to improve quality of care and patient health, and to reduce unnecessary costs, by reducing inappropriate antimicrobial use [1,5–8]. A core strategy of antimicrobial stewardship is prospective audit of antimicrobial use and feedback to the prescribing physician. However, this process is labor and time intensive when performed manually [5] as it requires the review of an overwhelming amount of clinical data, which proves to be an obstacle in the current context of limited health care resources. Therefore, hospitals are increasingly relying on clinical decision support systems to assist their antimicrobial management team in analyzing relevant data and identifying patients that require reviewing [5,8–11].

Many of these clinical decision support systems for antimicrobial stewardship use knowledge bases of rules derived from published guidelines and expert opinions to detect potentially inappropriate prescriptions and generate patient-specific recommendations. However, the development and maintenance of knowledge bases for these systems is a challenging and costly process [10,12]. It is difficult to model all variables that a prescribing physician will take into account, let alone model the decision-making process. Antimicrobial prescribing is a subjective process where physicians continually rely on their experience and clinical judgment to select an effective treatment and prevent adverse events. In addition to published guidelines, hospitals have their own local therapeutic practices [13], including practices based on local incidence of pathogens and antimicrobial susceptibility profiles. These local guidelines must be taken into account when customizing a system to a new location [14].

In previous work, we presented the antimicrobial prescription surveillance system (APSS), a clinical decision support system that assists antimicrobial stewardship pharmacists in identifying and reporting potentially inappropriate prescriptions [15]. We introduced an emerging machine learning capability to enable APSS to learn new rules for identifying inappropriate prescriptions supervised by user feedback. It uses a rule induction algorithm to discover classification rules that identify temporal episode sequences that belong to the inappropriate class [15,16]. The ultimate goal of this learning capability is to allow APSS to self-reconfigure to local practices after deployment and to self-improve its knowledge base over the long term. However, this automated learning capability has not been evaluated so far in a clinical setting. In this study, we fill this gap.

Over five weeks, the learning module was deployed alongside the baseline system to prospectively evaluate its performance of the identification of inappropriate piperacillin–tazobactam prescriptions. We evaluated the clinical relevance of the learned rules and measured the precision, accuracy, and rate of actionable alerts (reviewed alerts for which a recommendation was issued) of these systems. The learning module is expected to discover practical rules whose alerts extend those of the existing knowledge base and lead to interventions.

The study was performed at the Centre hospitalier universitaire de Sherbrooke (CHUS), a 677-bed Canadian secondary – and tertiary – care hospital located at two distinct sites. The APSS, the baseline system, has been deployed at the CHUS since 2010 where it assists hospital pharmacists and infectious diseases specialists in their antimicrobial stewardship activities. The system receives clinical data from the electronic health-record system of the CHUS: QuadraMed's computerized-patient record (QCPR) [17]. The APSS collects relevant demographic, clinical, pharmacy, and laboratory data from QCPR and verifies that ongoing antimicrobial therapies remain appropriate according to contraindications conveyed by rules in its knowledge base. It is used to monitor all adult patients admitted at the CHUS who receive antimicrobials.

During this study, we evaluated the combined system presented in [15] consisting of the baseline system APSS, which uses a traditional knowledge base implemented by experts, coupled to a supervised learning module, which extracts classification rules for alerts of inappropriate prescriptions using past recommendations for dose and dosing frequency adjustments, discontinuation of therapy, early switch from intravenous to oral therapy, and spectrum redundancy.

The supervised learning module of APSS uses the learning approach described in [15,16] based on a two-step process. In the first step, it uses temporal abstraction [18] to extract a high-level description of the patient history in the form of sequences of symbolic episodes over time intervals. In the second step, it discovers rules from a labeled set of episode sequences. We approach this problem as a binary classification task, where sequences are labeled appropriate and inappropriate, and use the temporal induction of classification models (TIM) algorithm to discover rules for inappropriate sequences. The supervised learning module then uses rule matching to classify unseen prescriptions and identify potentially inappropriate sequences.

This process involves extracting a uniform and meaningful data representation from the raw clinical data of APSS. This data contains qualitative and quantitative attributes sampled with both time points (e.g., temperature) and time intervals (e.g., drug order). Quantitative thresholds are used to identify qualitative states that hold over a period of time, which we call episodes. It extracts a single sequence for each hospitalization. Within a hospitalization, the observation period is restricted to the ongoing antimicrobial of interest. It considers only data between the first (t
                           min) and last (t
                           max) administered dose. This in turn ensures a common time zero (t
                           min) between sequences. It used a temporal granularity of 1h.

We included the following attributes that are pertinent for evaluating the appropriateness of antimicrobial prescriptions: age, absolute neutrophil count (ANC) and white blood cell count (WBC) as indicators of immune system status, body mass index, blood pressure category according to systolic and diastolic pressures and cardiac frequency, prediction of creatinine clearance using the Cockcroft–Gault equation [19] as an indicator of renal function, gender, respiratory rate, temperature, and patient location.

The temporal abstraction process also extracts episodes for medications that were administered during the hospitalization, including non-monitored medications. Prescriptions are described using their medication name and the three following attributes: dose, frequency, and route of administration. For example, a prescription of oral (PO) ciprofloxacin “750mg q12h” would be described as: “ciprofloxacin route=PO”, “ciprofloxacin dose=750” and “ciprofloxacin frequency=12”. Episodes are created for these attributes with values that hold over the period of administration of the medication.

Given a labeled set of appropriate and inappropriate sequences, the TIM algorithm extracts rules for identifying inappropriate sequences. Formal definitions of labeled sequences and rules, and a description of this algorithm, were previously presented in [15,16]. The main operations of the supervised learning process are summarized here. The rule set is initialized using all of the inappropriate sequences of the training set as maximally specific rules. The antecedent of the rule is described by its episode sequence and can be interpreted as a conjunction of propositions over time intervals whose satisfaction implies membership to the inappropriate class label, its consequent. The pairwise distances between the rules and labeled sequences of the training set are computed. The rule refinement process iterates through every rule and modifies their conditions’ time intervals to increase their distance from their nearest appropriate sequence. Iterations on these locally promising modifications are performed until they no longer improve a rule.

Improvement of a rule is evaluated using the J-measure 
                           [20], which accounts for both generality, that is, the probability of occurrence of a rule, and goodness-of-fit between a posteriori belief and a priori belief about the conclusion of the rule, or, in other words, cross-entropy [20]. The J-measure has been used for measuring the interestingness of association rules [21] and for pre-pruning classification rules in rule induction algorithms [22]. Like [22], we use as working hypothesis that rules with high information content (the value of J-measure) are likely to have a high level of predictive accuracy.

Classification is performed according to rule matching and uses a distance function described in [15] that measures the similarity between the conditions of a rule, represented by episodes, and the sequences of the data set. We use a non-symmetric distance function that accounts for both temporal and non-temporal similarity between episodes. The behavior of this function is based on the working hypothesis that a sequence will fully satisfy a condition if its episodes subsume the condition over its entire time interval, that is, a sequence is perfectly similar to a rule if it subsumes all of its conditions. A sequence is covered by a rule if their distance is below a parameterized minimal distance threshold, in which case it is labeled as inappropriate.

A similar two-step process is used when classifying unseen antimicrobial prescriptions. Patients receiving monitored antimicrobials are identified. The temporal abstraction process is used to extract an episode sequence representation of their hospitalization. It is followed by a rule matching step that classifies unseen instances using the learned rules. If an episode sequence has a distance below the minimal distance threshold, it is classified as inappropriate and an alert is triggered.

We conducted a prospective observational study to evaluate the combination of the learning module and the deployed baseline system, APSS, which is used to monitor all adult patients receiving antimicrobial therapy. We evaluated their performance for identifying inappropriate prescriptions of piperacillin–tazobactam. We selected this therapeutic agent because it is well established and frequently used for a variety of empirical and specific treatments. It is the most frequently prescribed antimicrobial at the CHUS which accounts for approximately 20% of all prescribed antimicrobials, averaging 90 days of therapy per 1000 patient-days from 2012 to 2014 (unpublished results).

The evaluation consisted of a two-step process. In the first step, we used the TIM algorithm to discover classification rules for inappropriate prescriptions of piperacillin–tazobactam on a retrospective data set. The learned rules were used in the second step alongside the existing rules of the baseline system. We used the baseline system to extract a retrospective data set consisting of all adult patients (18 years of age and older) monitored by APSS who received at least one prescription of piperacillin–tazobactam between February 1, 2012 to November 30, 2012. To focus on rules for actionable alerts, we labeled sequences as inappropriate if they included an accepted pharmacist recommendation, whether or not the targeted prescription had been identified by an alert of the baseline system. We considered recommendations from the four following categories: dose and dosing frequency, discontinuation of inadequately prolonged therapy, early switch from intravenous to oral therapy, and spectrum redundancy. Sequences were labeled appropriate if they were confirmed true negatives (without alert and reviewed as appropriate) or if they included alerts rejected by either hospital pharmacists or prescribing physicians.

In the second step, we deployed the learning module with the learned rules alongside the baseline system where they were used to classify hospitalizations with an ongoing prescription of piperacillin–tazobactam. Classification was performed hourly. We used a manually defined minimal distance threshold of 0.5, below which the prescriptions of piperacillin–tazobactam were classified as inappropriate. In previous experimentations, we observed that low distance thresholds led to higher positive predictive value while high distance thresholds led to higher sensitivity. We selected a distance threshold with the right balance of both.

The evaluation period was from November 18, 2013 to December 20, 2013. We met each pharmacist individually to explain the project. We discussed the importance of reviewing as many prescriptions of piperacillin–tazobactam as possible within the time available, including those without a clinical alert, to generate data not only of true and false positives, but also of true and false negatives.

The core members of the prospective audit and feedback antimicrobial stewardship program were three antimicrobial stewardship pharmacists (one full-time equivalent) and one infectious diseases specialist (Dr. L. Valiquette). The antimicrobial stewardship pharmacists used APSS to review the ongoing antimicrobial treatment of hospitalized patients from Monday to Friday. Alerts that occurred during the weekend were reviewed the next Monday and alerts that occurred during the night were reviewed the next morning if the prescription was still ongoing. The infectious diseases specialist assisted in the revision of the most complex cases. When deemed appropriate, the antimicrobial stewardship pharmacist contacted the prescribing physician by phone to recommend a prescription modification or discontinuation. The pharmacists documented in APSS whether they accepted or rejected the alerts of a prescription.

We evaluated the performances of the baseline system coupled with the learning module, of the baseline system (without the learning module), and the learning module, and compared them to the antimicrobial stewardship pharmacist's opinion, which is considered the gold standard. We evaluated the clinical relevance of the learned rules using a five-point Likert scale. We evaluated the effectiveness of the systems’ rule bases using the rate of actionable alerts measured as the ratio of reviewed alerts for which a recommendation was issued by the reviewing pharmacist to the total number of reviewed alerts. We measured the positive predictive value (precision), sensitivity (recall), and accuracy of the rules of these systems with their confidence intervals (CI) calculated using “exact” Clopper-Pearson CIs. We performed a McNemar's test of significance to compare the classification performances of the combined system (baseline system+learning module) and the baseline system using a significance level of 0.05.

@&#RESULTS@&#


                     Table 1
                      describes the retrospective data set used in the first step of the evaluation process to extract new rules for identifying inappropriate prescriptions of piperacillin–tazobactam. The baseline system evaluated 4430 prescriptions of piperacillin–tazobactam over 2584 hospitalizations. The antimicrobial stewardship pharmacists reviewed 1255 (28% of 4430) evaluated prescriptions, for which they issued 234 recommendations. The retrospective data set consisted of 2584 sequences, one for each hospitalization, including 204,354 episodes over 3224 attributes.

To discover rules that complement the knowledge base of the baseline system with useful and actionable alerts, we extracted rules using pharmacist recommendations. The learning module extracted 52 rules from the 234 pharmacist recommendations. We manually removed eight rules that poorly discriminated between true and false positives (low true-false positives ratio) and kept the remaining 44 learned rules. We tested these rules for identifying the reviewed inappropriate prescriptions of the retrospective data set where they achieved a precision of 66%, a recall of 64%, and an accuracy of 71%.

During the five-week evaluation period, the baseline system and learning module evaluated 515 prescriptions of piperacillin–tazobactam over 421 hospitalizations. As seen in Table 2
                        , the antimicrobial stewardship pharmacists reviewed 374 (73% of 515) evaluated prescriptions of piperacillin–tazobactam for which they issued 43 recommendations. For the remainder of this article, we will focus on the prescriptions that were evaluated by the baseline system and the learning module, and were reviewed by the antimicrobial stewardship pharmacist whose opinion is considered the gold standard.

The baseline system combined with the learning module triggered alerts for 270 reviewed prescriptions, the baseline system (without the learning module) triggered alerts for 240 of these prescriptions, and the learning module triggered alerts for 105 of these prescriptions. A single prescription can be the subject of alerts by both the baseline system and the learning module.

The antimicrobial stewardship pharmacists issued 43 recommendations of modification or discontinuation of piperacillin–tazobactam prescriptions. Table 3
                         presents these recommendations by type and the respective number of prescriptions correctly identified by the combined system (baseline+learning), the baseline system, and learning module. There were no recommendations for spectrum redundancy during the evaluation period. However, alerts for spectrum redundancy often translate into recommendations for discontinuation.

The combined system triggered alerts for all 43 prescriptions, resulting in a rate of actionable alerts of 16% (43 recommendations of 270 reviewed alerts). The baseline system triggered alerts for 38 of these 43 prescriptions, resulting in a rate of actionable alerts of 16% (38 of 240 reviewed alerts), whereas the learning module triggered alerts for 17 of these 43 prescriptions, resulting in the equal rate of actionable alerts of 16% (17 of 105 reviewed alerts). These 17 prescriptions identified by the learning module included the five prescriptions that were missed by the knowledge base of the baseline system. The recommendations issued for these five prescriptions were as follows: two for dose/frequency, two for early switch, and one for discontinuation.

Three learned rules were of particular interest because they identified the five inappropriate prescriptions that were missed by the knowledge base of the baseline system but for which a recommendation was issued. One of these rules is described in Fig. 1
                        . Noting C the conjunction of its conditions illustrated in Fig. 1, we have the rule C
                        →
                        inappropriate. The infectious diseases specialist hypothesized that the contraindication described by its conditions was associated with the neutropenic status of this middle-aged female patient. Based on local guidelines for neutropenic patients, he would have recommended a higher dosage of intravenous (IV) piperacillin–tazobactam (e.g., “3 g q4h”). Interestingly, the knowledge base of the baseline system did not implement rules for neutropenic patient guidelines. However, the learning module extracted a classification rule for this specific practice based on past recommendations.

Only 14 of the 44 rules of the learning module were triggered; five rules were responsible for classifying 83 (79% of 105) prescriptions. These 14 rules were presented to an infectious diseases specialist who evaluated their clinical relevance using a five-point Likert scale ranging from 1 (not relevant) to 5 (very relevant). The infectious diseases specialist considered a rule to be clinically relevant (score≥3) if he was able to discern a probable and clinically relevant contraindication from its conditions. To achieve a score of 5, the conditions of a rule were required to describe explicitly the underlying contraindication. Fig. 2
                         presents the scores; 11 (79% of 14) rules were found to be clinically relevant, including the aforementioned five rules.

The antimicrobial stewardship pharmacists reviewed 374 prescriptions of piperacillin–tazobactam, of which 209 (56% of 374) were identified as inappropriate. Tables 4–6
                        
                        
                         present contingency tables that contain information about actual and predicted classifications of reviewed prescriptions by the combined system (baseline+learning), the baseline system, and learning module, respectively, compared to the antimicrobial stewardship pharmacist's opinion. Table 7
                         describes the precision of their alerts categorized according to the alert categories of the baseline system.

The combined system achieved an overall positive predictive value (precision) of identifying confirmed inappropriate prescriptions of 74% (95% CI, 68–79), with a sensitivity (recall) of 96% (95% CI, 92–98), and accuracy of 79% (95% CI, 74–83). The alerts of the baseline system had a positive predictive value of 82% (95% CI, 77–87), with a sensitivity of 94% (95% CI, 90–97), and accuracy of 85% (95% CI, 81–89). The alerts of the learning module had a positive predictive value of 62% (95% CI, 52–71), with a sensitivity of 31% (95% CI, 25–38), and accuracy of 51% (95% CI, 46–56). The McNemar's test indicated a statistically significant difference between the classification performances of the combined system and the baseline system (p
                        <0.0001).


                        Table 8
                         presents a weekly summary of the evaluation period according to the antimicrobial stewardship pharmacists that were working each week. It describes the number of reviewed prescriptions, recommendations, and a comparison of precision and accuracy between the combined system, baseline system, and learning module. The hospital pharmacists worked from Monday to Friday but also reviewed alerts that occurred during the previous weekend (Saturday and Sunday) for ongoing prescriptions. There was a weekly variation in the number of reviewed prescriptions that can be partly attributed to the normal fluctuation of piperacillin–tazobactam prescriptions, but mainly to the reviewing pharmacist.

Three hospital pharmacists used APSS during the evaluation period. Pharmacist A had more than 10 years of experience and worked four days on the first week and five days on the fifth week; pharmacist B had between two and five years of experience and worked one day on the first week, four days on the second week, and two days on the third week; pharmacist C had between two and five years of experience and worked three days on the third week and five days on the fourth week. Pharmacist B reviewed the most prescriptions and was the most lenient when reviewing prescriptions, rejecting alerts for less than 5% of reviewed prescriptions during the second week. In contrast, pharmacist A reviewed the fewest prescriptions and was the most severe when reviewing prescriptions, rejecting alerts for 43% of reviewed prescriptions during the fifth week.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Whereas the baseline system should be valued by its ability to identify a high proportion of inappropriate prescriptions (high recall) followed by its ability to trigger few false alerts (high precision), the learning module is valued by its ability to discover clinically relevant rules that complement those of the baseline system and to trigger actionable alerts. Our results confirm that it was able to learn clinically relevant rules with a rate of actionable alerts equal to that of the baseline system. Furthermore, the learned rules were able to identify interventions that were missed by the knowledge base of the baseline system. The example of the learned rule for neutropenic patients also showed that the rules of the learning module extend the knowledge base of the baseline system. These results support our working hypothesis that discovering rules using past recommendations would lead to satisfactory rates of actionable alerts, but more importantly, to interventions.

The alerts of the combined system achieved a satisfactory overall override rate (calculated as 1−
                     precision) of 36% with an 18% override rate for the reviewed alerts of the baseline system compared to 38% for those of the learning module. Although twice as high as the baseline system, the override rate of the learned rules compares positively to that of other medication monitoring systems reported in the literature. For example, Hermsen et al. [10] reported 30% actionable alerts (70% override rate) for another clinical decision support system for antimicrobial stewardship. van der Sijs et al. [24] reviewed several drug safety alert systems and, except for serious alerts for overdose, alerts were overridden in 49–96% of cases. The override rate of the learned rules also compares positively to that of the baseline system in its first two years of use. In previous work, we reported an override rate of 68% after one year of use of the baseline system and 50% after two years. During this period, we manually adjusted the rules of the knowledge base [15].

However, these rules were less effective for predicting individual alert type. They also had a low recall of inappropriate prescriptions of 31% compared to 94% for the baseline system. These results differ from [15,16] where we discovered rules aimed solely at identifying alerts for early switch from intravenous to oral therapy. These previous rules were tested retrospectively and achieved similar precision (63% vs 62%) but higher accuracy (74% vs 51%) and recall (99% vs 31%), even when compared to the retrospective tests reported here (precision of 66%, accuracy of 71%, and recall of 64%). Investigating different approaches to discovering rules for multiple error types would be an interesting area of future work.

The override rate of alerts varied greatly from week to week. The more experienced hospital pharmacist reviewed fewer prescriptions and rejected a higher proportion of alerts. The more experienced pharmacist A performed a more thorough analysis of patient cases. Pharmacist A was more prone to reject alerts for which he/she did not believe an intervention to be clinically relevant. On the other hand, pharmacists B and C were more prone to accept alerts for which they did not issue a recommendation.

Different reasons might explain the acceptance of an alert for which no recommendation is issued, the more frequent reason being that the alert is considered valid but the clinical impact of an intervention is deemed too low. For example, the antimicrobial stewardship pharmacist would not recommend the discontinuation of a prescription that is already scheduled to end the next day. There are alerts for which the rule is considered valid but the patient presents a clinical exception to the rule: for example, the presence of a co-morbidity not handled by the rule. There are also instances where missing or erroneous data from the baseline system led to an alert that would have been otherwise prevented.

Another possible explanation for the varying override rate of alerts is the method used by the pharmacist to review a prescription. In this version of APSS, pharmacists accept or reject the alerts of a prescription as a whole. Whereas a pharmacist could accept the alerts of a prescription because it contained one alert considered valid, another pharmacist could reject the alerts of the same prescription for having one alert considered invalid. Another factor that may affect the opinion of the reviewing pharmacist is the numerical thresholds used for triggering an alert. Whereas a pharmacist may reject an alert because he/she considers it to be clinically irrelevant, another pharmacist may accept the same alert knowing the underlying threshold for which it was triggered (e.g., renal function is only slightly over the threshold value).

Implementing and maintaining knowledge-based medication monitoring systems remain a challenge to this day [8,10,13,23,24]. Overcoming the barriers that impede the deployment and customization of these systems requires the dedication and support of all involved actors. We had a similar experience that required an enormous amount of time and specialized resources from our research group as well as from the antimicrobial stewardship team and information technology (IT) department. Identifying local leaders of opinion and administrators that supported our project helped to prioritize it and allowed the allocation of necessary resources. It accelerated the fulfillment of requests that competed with other demands on hospital resources, especially on the IT department and antimicrobial stewardship team.

The evaluation of a clinical decision support system is also an involved process that requires going over and above the normal workload. Scarce resources and weekdays’ work schedule prevent antimicrobial stewardship pharmacists from reviewing all prescriptions. They prioritized reviewing patients with potentially inappropriate prescriptions identified by APSS, and then reviewed patients receiving antimicrobials that require close monitoring (e.g., individualization of vancomycin therapy) and patients from high-risk wards (e.g., intensive care). Finally, they reviewed the remaining patients, including those targeted by this study.

We evaluated the ability of APSS and its learning module to identify inappropriate prescriptions in the actual clinical setting that the system is intended for: in the daily practice of a hospital antimicrobial stewardship team. These clinically valuable results could therefore be applied directly to another hospital's antimicrobial stewardship program where the presented system would assist their team in activities, such as prospective audit and feedback. The availability of communication interfaces with the hospital admission, laboratory, and pharmacy systems is required to take advantage fully of the decision support system.

In this study, we concentrated our efforts on a single-agent antimicrobial therapy using a well-established agent. The frequent use of piperacillin–tazobactam is common practice in many hospitals; Pakyz et al. [25] reported that it was the most commonly ordered broad-spectrum antimicrobial in 22 US academic health centers from 2002 to 2006. The antimicrobial stewardship pharmacists exceeded our expectations by reviewing 73% of all piperacillin–tazobactam prescriptions, including 64% of prescriptions with no alerts. We believe that their dedication was in part due to being closely involved in the implementation and maintenance of APSS.

This study did not address combination therapies, where a combination of two or more antimicrobial agents is recommended to take advantage of their synergistic mechanisms of action or their broader empirical coverage [3], such as for treating polymicrobial infections, when critically ill patients require empirical therapy for health care-associated infections that are frequently caused by multi-resistant bacteria, and so on.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

We investigated the discovery of classification rules to extend the knowledge base of APSS, which is a deployed clinical decision support system for antimicrobial stewardship. Its supervised learning module was used to extract clinically relevant classification rules for actionable alerts of inappropriate prescriptions using past recommendations for dose and dosing frequency adjustments, discontinuation of prolonged therapy, early switch from intravenous to oral therapy, and spectrum redundancy. The learning module was prospectively evaluated alongside the baseline system. The learned rules were shown to extend the knowledge base of the baseline system by identifying pharmacist interventions that were missed by the baseline system. The learned rules identified prescribing practices that were not supported by local experts and were missing from its knowledge base. These rules achieved a satisfactory override rate and a rate of actionable alerts that equaled that of the baseline system. These results show that supervised learning methods can improve the knowledge base of a clinical decision support system for antimicrobial stewardship.

We are still investigating the use of supervised learning methods for facilitating the implementation and maintenance of knowledge bases for clinical decision support system. We have not yet characterized the ability of our learning module to incrementally learn new rules and integrate them gracefully into the knowledge base of the baseline system: for example, how should new learned rules be integrated with existing learned rules to ensure a stable quality and satisfactory classification times with an ever-growing rule set? How can we automate tasks of rule maintenance, such as removing rules that have become irrelevant, to ensure sustained improvement to the knowledge base?

Another concern is the ability to extract rules for multiple types of alerts. In this study, we addressed this task as a binary classification problem. While we were able to extract rules for multiple alert types with satisfactory precision, their recall and accuracy were lower than in previous work focusing on a single error type. Using multiple classifiers or a multiclass classifier are alternative approaches worth investigating. However, addressing alert types individually would decrease the number of instances per class and lead to data sets that are more imbalanced, for which we have yet to characterize our learning algorithm.

Being able to monitor the evolving condition of a patient using chronological information is a key element in providing optimal care to patients in a timely manner. Clinical decision support systems can play an important role in benefiting from the wealth of available data and transforming clinical information it into actual actionable information. However, implementing and maintaining such systems is a long and onerous process that requires the tight collaboration of a multidisciplinary team of experts along with support from leaders of opinion and key allies at all levels of the institution.

This work is part of greater efforts to accelerate the adoption of clinical decision support systems by acquiring a better understanding of its facilitators and barriers, including improving alert overriding and customization. We hope to both contribute and benefit from advances in this area of research as we are extending the use of APSS to other centers, including smaller secondary care centers with fewer resources. We also have started investigating new clinical domains that could benefit from an approach similar to APSS, whose general design for monitoring and reacting to an evolving patient state is not domain-specific. An exemplar domain is intensive care, where a high quantity of real-time data is collected from multiple sources and reaction time is critical.

This project was partially funded by the Fonds de recherche du Québec – Santé, the Fonds de recherche du Québec – Nature et technologies, the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, and the Centre hospitalier universitaire de Sherbrooke.

Mathieu Beaudoin and Vincent Nault are currently employed by Lumed Inc., a company that commercializes APSS. Mathieu Beaudoin, Vincent Nault and Louis Valiquette are shareholders of Lumed Inc. Froduald Kabanza reports no conflicts of interest relevant to this article.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The authors would like to thank the antimicrobial stewardship pharmacists at the Centre hospitalier universitaire de Sherbrooke for their time and support. The authors would also like to thank the three anonymous reviewers for their critical reading and helpful comments.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

