@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#An integrated index for detection of Sudden Cardiac Death using Discrete Wavelet Transform and nonlinear features

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Novel Sudden Cardiac Death Index (SCDI) is proposed using ECG signals.


                        
                        
                           
                           Nonlinear features are extracted from DWT coefficients.


                        
                        
                           
                           SCDI is formulated using nonlinear features.


                        
                        
                           
                           SCDI predicts accurately SCD 4min before its onset.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

ECG

DWT

SCD

Cardiac death

Nonlinear

Ventricular fibrillation

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Early prediction of person at risk of Sudden Cardiac Death (SCD) with or without the onset of Ventricular Tachycardia (VT) or Ventricular Fibrillation (VF) still remains a continuing challenge to clinicians. In this work, we have presented a novel integrated index for prediction of SCD with a high level of accuracy by using electrocardiogram (ECG) signals. To achieve this, nonlinear features (Fractal Dimension (FD), Hurst’s exponent (H), Detrended Fluctuation Analysis (DFA), Approximate Entropy (ApproxEnt), Sample Entropy (SampEnt), and Correlation Dimension (CD)) are first extracted from the second level Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) decomposed ECG signal. The extracted nonlinear features are ranked using t-value and then, a combination of highly ranked features are used in the formulation and employment of an integrated Sudden Cardiac Death Index (SCDI). This calculated novel SCDI can be used to accurately predict SCD (four minutes before the occurrence) by using just one numerical value four minutes before the SCD episode. Also, the nonlinear features are fed to the following classifiers: Decision Tree (DT), k-Nearest Neighbour (KNN), and Support Vector Machine (SVM). The combination of DWT and nonlinear analysis of ECG signals is able to predict SCD with an accuracy of 92.11% (KNN), 98.68% (SVM), 93.42% (KNN) and 92.11% (SVM) for first, second, third and fourth minutes before the occurrence of SCD, respectively. The proposed SCDI will constitute a valuable tool for the medical professionals to enable them in SCD prediction.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Sudden Cardiac Death (SCD) is an unexpected and sudden death of a person from known or unknown underlying cardiac causes within a short period of time (<1h) after the onset of symptoms [46,9,66]. SCD is an alarming cardiac event that can significantly strip off a person’s life within several minutes [11]. In spite of decline in death from cardiac disease in the industrialised world for the last two decades [26,52,53,13], approximately 20% of all sudden and unexpected deaths are still reported to occur, most frequently caused by Ventricular Fibrillation (VF) or asystole [56]. It is estimated that the death caused by SCD alone is 10 times higher than the deaths by traffic accidents in the EU, and USA combined and 250,000–300,000 lives annually in the USA alone [39,56]. It accounts for more than 50% of all deaths from cardiovascular diseases and more than 12% of all natural or sudden death worldwide [67,58,2,47,15]. However, precise worldwide figures are currently not available due to the lack of emergency medical facilities in most regions [10]. These alarming statistics emphasize the importance of this societal challenge and the need for attempts to improve SCD risk prediction methods.

The process of death in almost 84% of SCD patients is ventricular tachyarrhythmias (including VF and Ventricular Tachycardia (VT)) and 16% is due to bradyarrhythmia [63]. These arrhythmias often lead to Sudden Cardiac Arrest (SCA), which renders the heart unable to pump out the blood effectively. Then, unattended SCA leads to SCD. There are numerous other risk factors identified for SCD, such as Coronary Artery Diseases (CAD), Valvular Diseases (VD), previous Myocardial Infarction (MI), and genetic factors [66]. Research worldwide has focused on this severe health problem with the goal of developing an efficient way of predicting the risk of SCD using invasive and non-invasive techniques [1,59,35,28,30,50]. Studies show that the QT interval/dispersion and Heart Rate Variability (HRV, namely the RR interval in an ECG signal) from the ECG recordings are the most prominent electrophysiological indicators for SCD risk assessment [43,29]. However, QT interval measurement is complex and there are reported negative results of its prognostic ability [64]. HRV signal analysis has proved to be a strong and accurate mortality predictor after MI [48]. HRV is decreased in a person with higher risk of ventricular arrhythmia and SCD [37]. VanHoogenhuyze et al. [68] used Standard Deviation (SD) of the mean sinus R–R intervals (SDANN) and mean of SD from HRV signals. The study claims that the value of HRV is lower in SCD patients compared to normal young subjects.

Even though linear methods are used for HRV analysis, information/ability to predict SCD is lacking in such techniques [63,14]. Recently, researchers have used nonlinear methods of HRV analysis to predict SCD from HRV signals, as these methods provide more information compared to the linear methods [36]. Huikuri et al. [27] described the nature of ECG signals by means of a non-linear short-term fractal scaling exponent α
                     1 (DFA α
                     1), as a useful independent risk predicting factor for SCD in 446 survivors of acute myocardial infarction with a depressed left ventricular function ejection fraction ⩽35%. The study claims DFA α
                     1 can identify the worse cumulative (arrhythmic and non-arrhythmic cardiac deaths) survival during 1200days of follow-up, as compared with a Standard Deviation of Normal-Normal (SDNN) and very low-frequency spectral component (p
                     <0.001). In a study by [45], the short-term fractal scaling properties of the heart rate were found to indicate increased risk of SCD in a random population of elderly subjects. Furthermore, James et al. [34] developed a novel non-linear algorithm, which used the time-dependent Point Correlation Dimension (PD2i) that was derived from HRV. They reported 100% specificity and 85% sensitivity in detecting VF/VT (p
                     <0.01).

In comparison with the above studies which focus on the HRV signal analysis, our present work proposes a novel algorithm which directly uses ECG signal to predict SCD risk. In our work, features are extracted by applying nonlinear analysis methods (Fractal Dimension (FD), Hurst’s exponent (H), Detrended Fluctuation Analysis (DFA), Correlation Dimension (CD), Approximate Entropy (ApproxEnt), Sample Entropy (SampEnt)) on two level DWT decomposed ECG signals of normal subjects and subjects prone to SCD. The informative features are selected from the extracted features by using a ranking process, and then used in Classifiers like Decision Tree (DT), k-Nearest Neighbour (KNN), and Support Vector Machine (SVM) for classification.

This whole process is applied to individual components of the ECG signals (at consecutive intervals of 1min) i.e. first interval before SCD (first one min before SCD), second interval before SCD (2min before SCD), third interval before SCD (3min before SCD) and fourth interval before SCD (4min before SCD). The accuracy of predicting if the subject is susceptible to SCD or not is calculated for each of the above mentioned time intervals. Fig. 1
                      shows the block diagram of the proposed method for SCD ECG signal classification. Furthermore, a novel Sudden Cardiac Death Index (SCDI) is then presented through a judicious combination of the non-linear features.

The data required for the proposed method was obtained from the open access MIT-BIH SCD Holter database and the Normal Sinus Rhythm database [19,20]. The database consisted of a total of 41 ECG signals taken from 23 patients with SCD (ages ranging from 18 to 89years and 256Hz sampling rate) and 18 normal people (ages ranging from 20 to 50years and 128Hz sampling rate). In order to maintain consistency, the ECGs from SCD patients were down sampled (from 256Hz to 128Hz to match the normal ECGs). But, we have used only 20 SCD subjects as rest of three cases did not have ventricular fibrillation episodes.

From the 24-h ECG recordings of the SCD subjects, only the ECG segments four minutes prior to the SCD onset were captured and used in this work. These four minute segments were divided into four one minute intervals like, the first one minute before SCD onset was considered as the first one minute data (also referred as the first one minute interval), the second one minute period before SCD onset was considered as the second one minute data (also referred as the second one minute interval), and so on. Fig. 2
                         shows a typical ECG signal of a person with SCD, two and four minutes before its occurrence, respectively. In the case of the ECG signals from the normal subjects, four minutes of the signal were selected randomly. The ECG signals obtained were then subjected to wavelet based denoising using db6 mother wavelet [61]. The Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) is performed up to the second level of decomposition prior to feature extraction [3,6]. In this work, we have used biorthogonal 3.7 mother wavelet. cD1 and cD2 denotes the detail coefficients in level 1 and 2 respectively. cA2 indicates the approximation coefficients in level 2.

The nonlinear methods of Fractal Dimension (FD), Hurst’s exponent (H), Detrended Fluctuation Analysis (DFA), Correlation Dimension (CD), Approximate Entropy (ApproxEnt), Sample Entropy (SampEnt), described in this section, are used to extract the features from the non-stationary, complex ECG signals. A total of 18 non-linear features are extracted by using these methods.


                        
                           Fractal dimension (FD):
                         Mandelbrot developed the concept of fractal dimension [51]. This method is used to measure the ECG signal complexity and is a powerful tool for transient detection [4]. Many algorithms are available to determine the FD of a signal [31,33,38]; Higuchi’s method was used in this work.


                        
                           Hurst’s exponent (H):
                         The self-similarity and predictability of the ECG time series signals are measured by using this method. This method also indicates whether a range of signal samples shows any sign of disease condition (asymptomatic) when observed for a particular time span [18,12].


                        
                           Approximate entropy (ApproxEnt):
                         This method is used in time series signal data analysis to quantify the regularity [54]. The ApproxEnt values are inversely proportional to the degree of regularity of a time series [32]. In this work, the formula proposed by [55] is used to detect the variations in the signals that are not reflected in the amplitude or peaks.


                        
                           Sample entropy (SampEnt):
                         This method is a modified version of approximate entropy used for time series signal complexity and regularity measurement [60]. Sample entropy value will be low for repeating signal patterns. It provides an improvised assessment of time-series regularity and better tool to study the dynamics of ECG signals as compared to approximate entropy.


                        
                           Detrended fluctuation analysis (DFA):
                         This method quantifies the fractal properties of the time series non-stationary signals. Peng et al. (1995) proposed this robust method [57,42]. In this work, DFA α, a fractal scaling exponent, was used to describe the nature of ECG signals. This exponent gives an indication of the short and long term correlation behaviour of signals.


                        
                           Correlation dimension (CD):
                         This method measures the dimensionality of signal in relation to its geometrical reconstruction in phase space. In this work, the approach proposed by [21] is used.

The feature extraction step generally results in a large number of features, and many of these features might not have information significant to effectively differentiate both the normal and SCD classes. Therefore, the common practice is to apply feature ranking/selection algorithms on the extracted features to retain only those informative features useful for classification. In this work, the Student’s t-test was used for this purpose. This test determines whether there exists a difference in the mean value of each class [7]. For each feature, the test generates two parameters, namely the p-value and t-value. The p-value is used to identify the significance of the features: lower the p-value, the higher the significance. The t-value is used to rank the features: the higher the t-value, better is the rank and the feature.

Classifiers of Decision Tree (DT), k-Nearest Neighbour (KNN), and Support Vector Machine (SVM) were used to differentiate between ECG of normal subjects and those of subjects at risk of developing SCD. The main goal of classification is to select the best classifier that results in a highest accuracy in classifying the ECG signals belonging to normal and SCD subjects, with the minimum number of significant features. In this work, ten-fold cross validation method is used to build and evaluate the performance of classifiers. The 38 ECG signals are divided into ten parts, each part consisting of equal number of signals from the two classes. During training, nine parts were used to train the classifier, and one part was used to test the classifier. The performance measures are then calculated based on the test set results. This procedure was repeated ten times using a different test set each time, and the average of performance measures such as accuracy, sensitivity and specificity was calculated from all the ten test results. The descriptions of the different classifiers used are given below.


                        
                           Decision Tree (DT):
                         This classifier constructs a tree from the training data by using the selected features [8,40]. This tree provides the rules to classify the two classes, and the rules are used to determine the class of the test data. The performance of this classifier strongly depends on how well the tree is designed.


                        
                           k-Nearest Neighbour (KNN):
                         This classifier calculates the minimum distance between testing and training data in terms of k-nearest neighbours [49,41]. The most common class among the k-nearest neighbours is assigned as the class for the sample under consideration.


                        
                           Support Vector Machine (SVM):
                         This classifier separates the training data into two classes in the feature space, by constructing a separating hyper-plane [62,16]. The nonlinear signals which are not easily separable are converted to a higher dimensional feature space using kernel functions. In this work, polynomial kernel functions of order 1, 2 and 3 and Radial Basis Function (RBF) kernels were used.

@&#RESULTS@&#


                     Tables 1, 3, 5 and 7
                      present the Mean±SD of the various features extracted by using the non-linear techniques described in the previous section from the first, second, third, and fourth interval data of normal and SCD ECG segments respectively. The prefixes cA1 and cD1 represent the features extracted from the first level of approximation and detail coefficients obtained from the DWT application, respectively. The prefixes cA2 and cD
                        2
                      represent the features extracted from the second level of approximation and detail coefficients obtained from the DWT application, respectively. The p-value and t-values indicate that all the selected features are significant enough for classification. In Tables 1, 3, 5 and 7, it is seen that the values of sample entropy, α (scaling exponent) and approximate entropy are more for SCD class compared to the normal class due to the fact that SCD signals have a low degree of regularity.

The features are ranked using their t-value, and the top highly ranked significant features are used as input to SVM, DT, KNN classifiers for classification. The classifiers are evaluated for their performance by using ten-fold cross validation to determine the highest performance accuracy with minimum number of features. Tables 2, 4, 6 and 8
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                      summarize the performance of the various classifiers for the different intervals of ECG data from SCD subjects. We have also evaluated performance of this work using SVM classifier with different kernels such as, polynomial 1, 2 and 3 and RBF. It can be seen that the KNN and SVM classifiers presented the maximum accuracy in all four cases – 92.11% for the first interval (KNN), 98.68% for the second interval (SVM), 93.42% for the third interval (KNN) and 92.11% for the fourth interval (SVM). Since the ECG signals features are nonlinear in nature the nonlinear kernel functions like RBF, polynomial 2, and 3 perform well.

It would be difficult to track how much each of the selected features vary for the normal and SCD cases, in order to make an accurate diagnosis. Even though classifiers can be used for diagnosis, it is more convenient for the clinicians’ use if we present them with a single integrated index that is distinctively different for the two classes. This concept of integrated index was conceived and advanced by Ghista [22,24,25] and Acharya et al. [5]. Accordingly, we have formulated an integrated index called the Sudden Cardiac Death Index (SCDI), by combining the most distinguishing features in such a way that the integrated index value is distinctly different for normal subjects and for subjects with SCD. The SCD Index is developed using the high ranking features common to all four tables of one, two, three and four minutes’ before SCD ECG signals. So cA2_FD, cD2_SampEnt and cA2_H features are selected from Tables 1, 3, 5 and 7. We then adroitly combined them to develop the optimally distinguishing index. So the mathematical formulation of this Integrated SCD Index is given by:
                        
                           (1)
                           
                              SCDI
                              =
                              [
                              0.1173
                              +
                              (
                              0.9894
                              ×
                              cA
                              2
                              _
                              FD
                              )
                              -
                              (
                              0.3973
                              ×
                              cD
                              2
                              _
                              SampEnt
                              )
                              -
                              (
                              0.4166
                              ×
                              cA
                              2
                              _
                              H
                              )
                              ]
                              ×
                              10
                           
                        
                     
                  

Eq. (1) is developed by trial and error method to get maximum discrimination between the two classes. We have used the highly ranked four common features (for 1–4min duration) to formulate the SCDI. This index works well for the MIT-BIH SCD Holter database and the Normal Sinus Rhythm database [19,20] and cA2_FD, cD2_SampEnt and cA2_H features. The ranges of SCDI for subjects at risk of SCD occurrence and normal people are shown in Table 9
                     . Fig. 3
                      shows the plot of SCDI for two classes of subjects. This SCDI can be further improved by taking better features and more subjects in each class.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

While a few other researchers have proposed similar ECG analysis to predict SCD, the unique feature of our work is the formulation and use of the SCDI. The summary of the studies on ECG parametric feature analysis is tabulated in Table 10
                     .

It can be seen from Table 1, 3, 5 and 7 that, ApproxEnt and SampEnt have higher values for SCD patients as compared to normal subjects. This clearly indicates more variability in the SCD class. Similarly the FD, αH, and CD generally show higher values for the detailed coefficients in the level 1 and 2 of DWT for SCD class.

Voss et al. [65] extracted time and frequency domain parameters and features from ECG signals of 26 cardiac patients after MI (low risk and high risk groups), using non-linear methods and renormalized entropy. They found complete 100% separation between these groups by using the combination of features from all domains. La Rovere et al. [44] used time and frequency domain HRV parameters obtained from ECG to study their use in SCD prediction. They found that reduced short-term Low Frequency Power (LFP) during controlled breathing is a powerful predictor of SCD in patients with chronic heart failure. Shen et al. [63] developed a personal cardiac homecare system for SCD event detection and prediction from ECG signals. They reported an accuracy of 87.5% using wavelet analysis for SCD detection. In addition to that, they also used short-term HRV analysis to predict the pre-SCD events, whereby four HRV features (HRV mean, low frequency/high frequency, very high frequency, and SD) are determined and used in Artificial Neural Networks (ANN). They observed an accuracy of 67.44% (Least Mean Square), 58.14% (Decision Based Neural Network) and 55.81% (Back Propagation Neural Network) in SCD prediction.

Elias et al. [14] presented an algorithm for SCD detection and prediction by using classic linear and Time–Frequency (TF) analysis of HRV signals. The algorithm extracted (a) classical linear features: mean of all NN intervals (MNN), standard deviation of all NN intervals (SDNN), root mean square of successive differences (RMSSD), standard deviation of differences between adjacent NN intervals (SDSD), probability the difference of successive intervals be more than 50ms (pNN50), low frequency (LF), high frequency (HF), very low frequency (VLF) and ratio of LF and HF bands power, as well as (b) time–frequency features: average energy from the HRV signal. The study classification results for one minute before the SCD HRV signal showed an accuracy of 74.36% and 73.87% using linear features, and 99.16%, and 96.04% for TF features using MLP and KNN classifiers respectively. The study also reported accuracy of 72.38% and 69.35% for linear method and 91.23% and 89.27% for TF method using MLP and KNN classifiers, respectively, on HRV signals two minutes before SCD.

George et al. [23] proposed a machine learning technique-based SCD risk stratification (high and low risk) after arrhythmia in heart failure patients using HRV analysis. The study used statistical methods (features: SDNN, RMSSD, pNN50, SDSD), geometrical methods (features: triangular index to calculate density distribution), frequency analysis methods (features: power in LF and HF bands) and nonlinear methods (features: approximate entropy, DFA, Poincare plot, Hurst’s exponent) to extract the features. They obtained a classification accuracy of 87.5% by using SVM RBF kernel, and 85% by using Random Forest (RF) classifiers in SCD risk stratification.

Elias et al. [17], in their recent study proposed a novel approach to predict SCD one, two, three and four minutes before its onset by using nonlinear and TF analysis of HRV signals. The algorithm extracted TF features of average energy and nonlinear features of Poincare plot and DFA from HRV signal and used KNN and MLP classifiers to predict the patients prone to SCD. Their study claimed significantly good results to predict SCD with an accuracy of 99.73% for the first one-minute interval, 96.52% for second interval, 90.37% for the third minute interval and 83.96% fourth one-minute interval respectively before SCD onset.

In this paper, a new method of SCD prediction is proposed by using DWT and nonlinear analysis of ECG signals. In our work, the ECG segments four minutes prior to SCD onset are used for analysis. At each one minute interval of the ECG signals, for a maximum of four minutes, nonlinear features are extracted from the approximation and detail coefficients of DWT based decomposed signals. After using feature selection techniques to select only the significant features, several classifiers are built and validated using the selected features.

Thereafter, we selected the best distinguishing features and combined them into an Integrated SCD Index, given by Eq. (1), to optimally separate the SCD class from normal class.

Our method is able to effectively predict the onset of SCD even four minutes prior to the onset with an accuracy of over 92%. Thus, as suggested in the literature, it is observed that important details present in the ECG signal can predict the SCD onset risk four minutes prior to the onset. To best of our knowledge, this result is the first of its kind in prediction of person at risk of developing SCD four minutes prior to its onset, provided that the clinicians have time to attend the patients within these four minutes. Regarding clinical application, such an algorithm can conceivably be implemented in real-time tele-monitoring of high risk subjects either in the hospital setting or in an ambulatory environment, e.g. during exercise rehabilitation. The accurate early signal of impending likely SCD can trigger appropriate pre-emptive measures, which should effectively reduce response time to active resuscitation, where applicable.
                        
                           •
                           Compared to previous work by other researchers (Table 10), our method achieved a highest accuracy, by using nonlinear features for SCD prediction up to 4min prior to the onset.

Our approach is able to predict the risk of developing SCD up to four minutes before its onset using ECG signals.

Compared to published literature, our method predicts SCD much before its onset directly from ECG signal, without the need for extracting HRV signals. Thus, the time otherwise wasted in extracting HRV signals is saved, which is the key advantage of our approach.

The most novel part of this work is the formulation of SCDI using ECG signal features. This index significantly differentiates the ECG signal features of SCD and normal people, and hence can be usefully employed by clinicians for the prediction of SCD in terms of just one number.

In future, authors will be exploring the possibility of improving the window of early duration, and detection accuracy using more subjects. Also, the SCDI need to be tested with huge diverse population.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

Even in this new millennium, Sudden Cardiac Death (SCD) still remains one of the leading and unresolved problems in clinical cardiology. In spite of the recent developments in signal processing and artificial intelligence, the early detection of SCD is still a challenging task. The early detection of SCD can save many lives and help in timely treatment. In this paper, a novel approach is proposed to predict the risk of SCD occurrence from ECG signals.

We applied DWT and nonlinear methods to extract ECG signal features. We have formulated a novel Sudden Cardiac Death Index (SCDI) using highly ranked nonlinear features to enable the clinician to easily and effectively determine the SCD risk of a patient by using a single number four minutes before the SCD episode.

Also, the ranked nonlinear features are fed to classifiers (DT, KNN and SVM) to classify the normal subject and subjects at risk of developing SCD. Our proposed technique achieved an accuracy of 92.11% (KNN), 98.68% (SVM), 93.42% (KNN) and 92.11% (SVM) for one, two, three and four minutes, respectively, before SCD onset.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

