@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#A critical analysis of Building Information Modelling systems used in construction projects

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Construction life cycle project needs to be understood for BIM to be easily integrated.


                        
                        
                           
                           Interoperability is crucial for the uptake of BIM in the construction industry.


                        
                        
                           
                           Supply chain members need to collaborate on projects to deliver BIM compliant projects.


                        
                        
                           
                           There is a need for vendors/manufacturers to adopt a common language in publishing information about BIM software.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

BIM

Classification

Construction

Decision-support

Interoperability

Plug-ins

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Building Information Modelling (BIM) is now a global digital technology which is widely believed to have the potential to revolutionise the construction industry. This has been mainly a result of worldwide government initiatives promoting BIM uptake to improve efficiency and quality in delivering construction projects. This push has been accompanied by the release of a tremendous amount of BIM software systems which are now available in the market. Although this can be seen as a positive development, one cannot ignore how it has overwhelmed many professionals who cannot easily distinguish between the uses of these software systems. Previous studies about different BIM systems have generally been limited in scope focusing predominantly on operational issues. This study aims to conduct a comprehensive and critical appraisal of a wide range of BIM software systems currently being used in managing construction project information. To achieve this, five main methods are adopted. These include a systematic review of the literature, a structured questionnaire survey, action learning, focus group discussions and email surveys. It has to be noted that, although it is impossible to examine the totality of BIM systems, the study adopts a holistic approach looking at most of the major BIM system categories and 122 application examples which are common in the architecture, engineering and construction (AEC) industry.
               
            

@&#BACKGROUND@&#

In recent years, many governments have been promoting the use of Building Information Modelling (BIM) as a means of facilitating collaboration and improving delivery efficiency and project quality. While BIM has been around for a while, recent advances in Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) have given researchers and policy makers in construction a renewed impetus to push for further adoption of the concept. Over the past three decades, software suppliers have flooded the market with numerous BIM software packages dealing with different types of construction information. This has led to end-users facing significant challenges as to which software systems to use, in which type of construction domains/activities/and how to effectively use the chosen software packages(s). Indeed, the requirement to understand the various applications of BIM systems cannot be underestimated. Perhaps, this explains why BIM systems, their applications and exchange formats are now required as part of the pre- and post-contract BIM execution plans [56,57]. Furthermore, the plethora of BIM software applications in the market poses a great challenge for any meaningful decision(s) to be made about their respective use. For example, the US Department of Energy has published a list of 417 energy simulation software applications for buildings (http://apps1.eere.energy.gov/buildings/tools_directory/). Although not all of them are directly linked to BIM, a basic knowledge of most of them is required in order to confidently establish how well they fit with a particular BIM software system. Key to this issue is the degree of communication or interoperability between software systems. Also, the number of software manufacturers (for example Autodesk, Bentley, Dassault Systèmes, Synchro Ltd, Vico, Onuma Systems, Graphisoft, Teckla, etc.) is skyrocketing. Although it is not so straightforward to determine the global number of BIM suppliers and software types, from buildingSmart resources (http://www.buildingsmart-tech.org/), about 75 organisations support the Industry Foundation Classes (IFC). These organisations provide the market with at least 150 BIM software packages that are IFC compliant. This implies that, worldwide, there are at least 150 BIM software packages. In addition, often, BIM applications are costly and are out of reach for several individuals and companies especially small and medium size enterprises (SMEs). In an NBS [48] report, 67% of BIM users and 64% of non-BIM users confirmed cost was a major barrier to BIM uptake. Certainly, the initial costs related to obtaining a BIM software package is not the only cost of investing in BIM. However, it needs to be highlighted that it represents a significant portion of it.

The plethora of software packages, software interoperability challenges and high implementation costs, is accompanied by a lack of peer-reviewed literature on BIM software systems. This could possibly explain many of the challenges facing the construction professionals in the uptake of BIM. A series of surveys by the National Building Specification [44–48] has revealed that the lack of knowledge about different BIM software packages is a major barrier to their adoption.

Therefore, there is a need to investigate and provide a comprehensive study about the use of emerging BIM software systems in managing construction projects. The most important assessment criteria to be considered are cost of software, interoperability format, domain of application and use.

To facilitate understanding, this work is divided into seven sections. Section 1 presents the background and context of this study. In Section 2, the research methods used to achieve the aim of this study are discussed. In Section 3, the concept of BIM is introduced to facilitate understanding. A state-of-the-art classification of BIM systems is undertaken in Section 4. The findings of this study are reported in Section 5. In Section 6, challenges encountered during the process of BIM software systems identification are discussed. The paper is concluded by a way of summary in Section 7.

To achieve the aim of this study, a mixed research methods approach has been used as illustrated in Fig. 1.
                  

The rationale for adopting such an approach is fivefold. First, it allows the triangulation of data and assures its validity. Secondly, the various methods used are complimentary; one method strengthening the other. Thirdly, mixed research methods make it possible to elicit supplemental data which bolster research effectiveness [41]. Fourthly, the approach is particularly helpful to explain complex or contradictory survey responses [22]. Lastly, using various research processes can also lead to unexpected or emergent themes and information that would not have otherwise come to light [22]. Each of the methods adopted will be discussed in greater detail in the ensuing sections.

@&#LITERATURE REVIEW@&#

The purposes of a literature review are many [50]. Gall et al. [30] argued that a literature review can delimit the research problem, seek new lines of inquiry, avoid fruitless approaches, gain methodological insights, identify recommendations for further research, and seek support for grounded theory. For the purpose of this study, two categories of literature were considered: peer-reviewed and grey literature.

With regards to peer-reviewed literature, an extensive review about the different BIM systems was undertaken. Given the nascent nature of BIM, with new software systems being developed, a systematic approach was adopted. This consisted a search of relevant terminologies using the Google search engine; peer-reviewed journal databases and leading BIM research organisations’ websites. The main sources searched included Google Scholar, ScienceDirect, Emerald and the National Building Specification. The search yielded the following studies:

                           
                              a.
                              Kurul et al. [35] reviewed 10 BIM software packages;

Abanda and Tah [1] investigated the potential of some open sourced BIM software;

Crawley et al. [19] conducted a comparative study of 20 building energy simulation tools;

Ruiz [58] and Kia [33] reviewed some BIM authoring software packages;

Wu et al. [64] reviewed four BIM cost estimating software packages focusing on the technical and process approach of cost estimation;


                                 [2], El-Ammari [27], Bynum II [13], Ren [52], Lennert [37], Fernandes [29] and Ruiz [58] have all conducted research that involved the use of a few BIM software packages in their respective masters theses;

NBS [44–48] conducted surveys that altogether identified six BIM software packages.

From the analysis of the sources mentioned in a–g, it emerged that there is paucity of peer-reviewed literature about different BIM software packages. Also, the software applications discussed in the aforementioned literature are too few compared with the quantity currently available in the market. Furthermore, the limited number of studies which focus on BIM software tend to focus on one aspect of BIM as a technology (e.g. Abanda and Tah [1]) or construction practice (e.g. [19,35]). This approach is useful as it offers more focus and understanding into specific aspects of BIM. However, the underlying principle of BIM is collaboration which reflects what the reality in the construction industry should be. This means different professionals tend to use different software at different stages of construction to address different domain-specific challenges. For example, at the design phase, the application of a design BIM software (e.g. Revit) is required while at the operation phase, knowledge of a BIM facilities management software is necessary. Firms considering investing in BIM need to know the different software required in completely delivering a project. As argued by Gall et al. [30] one of the goals of a literature review is to gain methodological insights. The third finding from reviewing the afore-cited literature is the use of a single research method to identify different BIM software systems. For example, NBS [44–48] used a structured closed questionnaire to identify common BIM software systems.

With regards to grey literature, vendors’ websites and social media sources were reviewed. Given the limited number of BIM systems uncovered using peer-reviewed sources, a systematic search was performed by using computer-aided design (CAD)/BIM software manufacturers’ websites. Then, vendors’ websites were visited to obtain further information about the systems. A similar approach was utilised by Crawley et al. [19] to investigate 20 BIM energy simulation software packages. The information retrieved from the various websites included software cost, file formats, interoperable file formats and whether the system is used for building designs. The latter was a particular challenge since from the vendors’ websites it was often unclear whether the software is used by the AEC industry. To deal with this challenge, further research was conducted using social media tools. The potential to easily harnessed information from social media sources has given birth to social media research methods [15,32,49]. Therefore further search was conducted on YouTube to find out if there were tutorials, examples or other information linking the application to any built environment related domain. Blogs and reviews about the software were also examined. These sources provided greater insights about the software packages from a professional perspective. Observing from YouTube videos, how the different software systems work allows for validating the information gathered from peer-reviewed literature and vendors’ websites. Blogs and reviews about the different software systems further reinforced and validated facts gathered from the vendors’ websites and YouTube.

Having elicited a list of software applications through an extensive literature review and by exploring various social media sources, it was imperative to actually establish if the different BIM software systems were the most commonly used in construction. This led to the use of another two research methods; a questionnaire survey and focus group discussions. This served as an opportunity to further elicit other BIM software that might had been missed through the literature review method.

The literature review discussed in Section 2.1 resulted in the identification of a number of BIM software systems. However, these were not linked to the relevant construction domain. Thus, a questionnaire was designed capturing different aspects of BIM systems and distributed to participants who attended the FutureFit Built Assets project Research Workshop at Oxford Brookes University. Although, the survey was part of a wider study, it provided valuable information in terms of software types, interoperability formats, domain of BIM application (e.g., architecture, structural, facilities management, etc.) and uses of BIM (visualisation, embodied energy analysis, cost estimation, etc.). Altogether, three workshops were run with intervals of 2–3 weeks each. These intervals provided opportunities to conduct preliminary analysis and provide feedback during successive workshops.

Based on the questionnaire survey feedback, focus group discussions were organised during the last workshop to capture different qualities of BIM systems. During the workshop important aspects such as BIM library, Mobile BIM and Cloud BIM were highlighted as main aspects of BIM systems. This validated what the literature review had revealed. Furthermore, participants identified the challenges faced with exchanging information with project partners who might use a different BIM application. An investigation about the different software compatible file formats and plug-ins yielded very little and ambiguous information. As a result, action learning techniques and an email survey were conducted.

The term action learning was coined by Revans [54] and refers to a practical group learning and problem-solving process. The idea is that the group meets regularly in a setting where group members are encouraged to learn and share from experience [20]. In this case, action learning techniques were adopted especially because from the literature review it emerged that file types and software plug-ins are rarely discussed on vendors’ websites. To determine file types, authors started the installed software or trial version if available and went to “Save As” from the File menu to determine the available file types. In other cases, the “Import” and “Export” function under the file menu was used to identify the different input and output file formats. With regards to plug-ins, some were installed to ensure compatibility with the system as many do not come as part of the main software installation package. COBie Extension for Autodesk Revit is a clear example where the plug-in requires to be installed separately after Revit has been installed.

An email survey was sent to some selected vendors to establish the different file formats and plug-ins supported by their software packages.

In summary, the results of this paper are based on the findings of a literature review (including manufacturers’ websites, peer-reviewed and grey literature), a structured questionnaire, feedback from focus group discussions and an email survey. The combination of these method facilitated categorising the different BIM systems discussed in Section 4. It was therefore important to establish criteria for inclusion and exclusion (see Table 1). In addition to the methods criteria, IFC compliant BIM software was also considered as a criterion as IFC is key to interoperability.

Using the criteria in Table 1, care was taken not to duplicate previous efforts; which was also beneficial in the sense that the summary table (Table 2
                        ) is not overloaded with too many fields. Furthermore, efforts were made to ensure that the list of chosen BIM software applications was representative so as to avoid many BIM software systems being grouped into one category. For example, it would be valuable to have three BIM software packages related to design, cost estimation and energy simulation than to have all the three belonging to one category. That is why the word “potential” has been used in Table 1.
                     

BIM is being hailed as a solution to overcome everlasting challenges, facing the AEC industry, often associated with traditional working practices. In the US, BIM has been defined differently by leading organisations including the National BIM Standard-United States™ [43] and the American Institute of Architects [3]. In the UK, the joint definition from the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA), Construction Project Information Committee (CPIC) and buildingSmart which states that “BIM is a digital representation of physical and functional characteristics of a facility creating a shared knowledge resource for information about it forming a reliable basis for decisions during its life cycle, from earliest conception to demolition” is widely used amongst professionals.

This paper acknowledges the subtle differences between BIM definitions and their context of application. However, it needs to be highlighted that a common feature in all definitions is that BIM is a process, facilitated by BIM software systems and driven by people. This is also suggested by definitions provided by Mott MacDonald [42] and the Construction Industry Council (CIC) [18]. Mott MacDonald, a management, engineering and development consultancy, defines BIM as “a coordinated set of processes, supported by technology that adds value through creating, managing and sharing the properties of an asset throughout its lifecycle [42].” CIC defines BIM as “an innovative and collaborative way of working that is underpinned by digital technologies which support more efficient methods of designing, creating and maintaining the built environment [18].” What emerges from these definitions is that BIM is not a piece of software nor a new concept. The concept of collaboration dates back many generations and has been promoted since the works of Alfred Charles Bossom. Alfred was an English architect who went to the USA in the early 20th century, where he was involved in the design of skyscrapers. While in the US, he found out that contractors in the USA were able to build faster than their counterparts in the UK, but at the same cost, and as a result they were more profitable and were able to pay higher wages. Upon his return, he argued that construction was a process like any other and that if all the parties worked together it could be planned in advance and then carried out to an agreed schedule [11]. Similar criticisms have followed Alfred's publication, most notably: the Latham Report (1994); the Egan Report (1998); the Government Construction Strategy (2011) and Construction 2025 (2013). The Landscape Institute sums BIM as a continuation of collaborative working within the built environment sector supported by a range of software [36].

As a summary, BIM consists of at least three dimensions: process, technology and people. Arayici et al. [4] argued that the strategic approach to BIM adoption should incorporate equally all these dimensions. Based on preceding literature, the concept of BIM as a process, driven by and involving people, dates back earlier than 1934. Prior to 1934, limitations in computer power and unfriendly user-interfaces were drawbacks to technology or software underpinned by BIM work flow or metaphor. One of the earliest theories that supported BIM metaphor was proposed by Engelbart who in 1962 gave an uncanny vision of the future architect in his paper Augmenting Human Architect [28]. In the mid-1970s the Building Description System, which was the first software application describing individual library elements which could be retrieved and added to a model was developed by Charles Eastman at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory [24–26]. By the 1980s, computer-aided-design systems for exploring how construction information can be managed and integrated started to emerge. An example is MicroStation that was first released in 1980. In 1993, Eastman developed another simulation tool known as the Building Design Advisor, at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory.

While the developments in the US (i.e. works of Engelbart, Building Description System, Building Design Advisor and MicroStation) were rapid, two programming geniuses emerged from the then Soviet Block. These were Leonid Raiz and Gábor Bojár, who went on to be the respective co-founder and founder of Revit and ArchiCAD. ArchiCAD was developed in 1982 in Hungary by Gábor Bojár, a physicist who rebelled against the communist government and began a private company [10]. Using similar technology as the Building Description System, the software Radar CH was released in 1984 for the Apple Lisa Operating System. This later became ArchiCAD making ArchiCAD the first BIM software that was made available on a personal computer [10]. In 1997, Leonid Raiz and Irwin Jungreis founded Charles River Software in Massachusetts, USA [10]. They hired an expert to develop a superior software to AchiCAD. This led to the development of Revit in 2000 which was later on bought by Autodesk in 2002 [10]. Revit revolutionised the BIM world by creating a platform that utilised a visual programming environment for creating parametric families and allowing for time attributes to be added to components. This enabled a ‘fourth-dimension’, time, to be associated with the building model [10]. From 1984, when ArchiCAD first appeared in the market, the BIM software market has experienced tremendous growth. This paper focuses on one of the three BIM dimensions, i.e. technological aspects and software systems only.

Key to collaborative practices is the need to exchange project documents; either graphical or non-graphical. The exchange of project documents is enshrined in the concept known as interoperability. The literature refers to, at least, four types of interoperability. These include syntactic, technical, semantic and organisation interoperability [9,16,17,53,55]. This study looks at syntactic interoperability. Simply, this refers to the ability of two or more separate systems or software programmes to communicate and exchange data (or information) with each other and use the data that has been exchanged [9,55]. The successful information exchange between systems depends on the data file formats that facilitate the importing and/or exporting into/and from other software systems. In general, different file formats common with BIM can be categorised into four types. The first file types are native file formats usually restricted to a particular type of software. For example, a building modelled in Revit will by default assume the .rvt, native Revit file extension. The implication of keeping files in this format means that only Revit software can read this type of files. However, it is important to note that there are cases where within the same software, files with same native extensions of older version cannot read higher or more recent versions. For example, a model created in Revit 2015 cannot be opened in Revit 2014. If systems are to be truly interoperable, they should communicate at least between different versions of the same system. If other software packages are to read Revit files, they must be specially designed to do so. The second category is file formats that facilitate the exchange of models between similar authoring software. The most popular is the IFC. The third category of files is aimed for use in specialised applications. Currently, the most popular is the green building Extensible Markup Language (gbXML) which is widely used for building energy analysis. The fourth category is plug-in. In computing, a plug-in (or add-in, extension or add-on) is a software component that adds a specific feature to an existing software application. For example, there is a Vico plug-in in Revit, that allows Vico to read models developed in Revit. Another example is the Construction Operations Building information exchange (COBie) often used in facilities management. There is a COBie Extension or plug-in that allows Revit software to be able to generate COBie spreadsheet.

The traditional construction domains were considered in categorising the different BIM systems. These included architecture, infrastructure and civil engineering, structural engineering, building services, project management/design coordination, facilities management, sustainability and geographical information systems-BIM (GIS-BIM). Furthermore, based on workshops feedback the following categories were examined.

Generally, sustainability performance analysis tends to focus on buildings with complete information including well-defined geometric features (e.g. rectangular roofs, rectangular walls and square windows). Research about the use of BIM systems in performing whole-building energy analysis on structures with curve and complex surfaces is scarce. This is partly because most BIM energy simulation software systems are only able to handle simple well-established building data. Such data is generally not available in the early stages which are often characterised by unstructured and incomplete data. Visual programming provides the opportunity to leverage on emerging BIM in capturing complex and unstructured data for non-regular geometric objects for performing energy analysis. There are now emerging specific BIM software systems for addressing this challenge. A very popular example is Dynamo used in performing building energy analysis [5].

Storing data on individual computers can be very expensive. This practice would also defeat the whole purpose of BIM; that of fostering collaboration amongst professionals. Cloud computing refers to using processing power and storage space on a virtual server that is managed in a remote datacentre and which can be access over the internet [8]. With stiff competitions among major vendors such as Amazon, Microsoft and Google, cloud computing technologies is getting mature, more reliable, cheaper and simpler to use. The technology is already filtering into construction and research on cloud BIM integration for improving construction processes is becoming widespread. Redmond et al. [51] explored how information exchange can be enhanced using cloud BIM. Jiao et al. [31] developed a video-based on-line augmented reality environment and a pilot cloud framework that utilises web3D technologies in rendering on-site images and registered with virtual objects. This was further extended through federation of BIM and business social network services (BSNS). Wu and Issa [63] integrated BIM and cloud computing to automate the leadership in energy and environmental design (LEED) process for green building certification. For other applications of cloud BIM, see Wong et al. [62].

The British Standard 1192:2007 defines a CDE as “a single-source of information for any given project, used to collect, manage and disseminate all relevant approved project documents for multidisciplinary teams in a managed process”. It may use a project server, extranet, a file-based retrieval system or other suitable toolset. The project documents stored in a CDE contain both graphical and non-graphical data for and from the whole project team. This single data source facilitates collaboration amongst project team members; thus, avoiding duplication and mistakes.

Recent trends in BIM are to tap into already existing emerging mobile technologies to exchange construction project information. These technologies are already matured and latest brands (iPhone 6) are popping up in the markets. BIM is currently being embedded in mobile technologies and can be used to seamlessly collect, track and share field data amongst project stakeholders. Wong et al. [62] argues that in the future, integrating mobile based applications (e.g. iPad, smart phone) with real-time cloud-based collaborative BIM will greatly facilitate the collection of instantaneous feedback design decisions and plans. In Sweden, Skanska reported the use of iPad in sharing construction information reduced the number of journeys to site by half [21]. Hence, recent interest in research about mobile BIM [38,40,61] does not come as a surprise.

A major strength of BIM models is that it can easily be visualised while various option can be explored and investigated. This allows for decisions to be made in virtual models before on site implementation. Sampaio et al. [59] noted that it is increasingly important to incorporate virtual reality 3D visualisation and decision support systems to perform real-time interactive visual exploration tasks. BIM visualisation research is also gaining momentum in the research community [60]. There are two categories of BIM visualisation software, the first often embedded in BIM authoring software while the second being independent of BIM software. The latter family of products is often called BIM viewers and can be more sophisticated than the former. The focus of this paper is on BIM viewers.

A great advantage of BIM is that objects can be modelled and re-used in the design of buildings or in other applications. These objects are generally stored in a library or repository within BIM software folders or in the cloud. For example when Revit is installed a family of objects is also installed in one of the installation folders. These objects can be used at any time and can be re-modified before used in different applications. This field is also an area which has started receiving interest from the research community [12]. In this study only cloud based repository are investigated.

BIM servers are software solutions for BIM based team collaboration developed for AEC professionals. Given the fragmented nature of the construction industry, it seems very difficult, or even impossible, to carry out all project activities in using a single software system. Hence, BIM servers are robust platforms that provide developers a solid foundation to develop their tools to solve different types of problems encountered in their projects (http://bimserver.org/).

This category consists of BIM software used for designing, visualization, as well as simulating building products and building equipment before they are built.

In addition to the different categories, the BIM systems were evaluated against four main criteria as listed below:

                           
                              •
                              Specific application (i.e. how it is being used).

Given that interoperability is key to collaborative practices, the file input and output formats were investigated. Input file types are files that a BIM system will accept during importing while output files are files that a BIM system is able to share with other BIM systems.

The availability of the BIM systems. The intention was to provide the cost of each software package. However, many BIM manufacturers do not usually provide the cost on their websites, or when they do so, it can be unclear whether the cost includes an annual licence renewal fee. Therefore, incorporating specific cost data could be misleading; instead, a simplified approach was used to denote whether or not any cost value is associated with a type of software. The term availability was used as a criterion as to whether the software is commercial (C), freely (F) available to the public, or in a pay-as-print mode (denoted UPP). This information was easily obtained from supplier websites.

Links to supplier websites: This is to provide readers with an opportunity to further explore a particular BIM system.

Using the discussed research methods, 122 major BIM software systems and 71 plug-ins were identified as presented in Table 2. It is important to note that the plug-ins correspond to 71 of the identified systems. No plug-ins were identified for the remaining 51 systems. However, this does not mean that they did not have any, but rather that no relevant information was available. In cases where the existence of corresponding plug-ins could not be established the cell under the plug-in column in Table 2 was left blank (e.g. ArtrA). Through email surveys, feedback was received though that categorically confirmed that IDA ICE (see Sustainability section in Table 2) does not have a plug-in. In this case “No plug-in” is stated in the relevant cell in Table 2. With regards to input and output files, all the input and output file formats were uncovered and explicitly included in Table 2. However, from vendors/manufacturers websites it was not possible to state with certainty the input or output files for some of the applications (such as for example Cadimage, Tekla Structures, BIMMeasure, FME, 4BIM, 3D Repo and datBIM). This was because vendors/manufacturers include generic statements similar to “the software support X many file formats”, X belonging to the set of natural numbers. Given that file formats depended on the main software, we will present statistics only for the main BIM software and plug-ins.

Based on Figs. 2
                         and 3
                        , only 15% of the main BIM software applications and 3% of plug-ins were obtained from peer-reviewed literature. While 66% and 53% was obtained through grey literature, principally from vendors/manufacturers websites. Given the high proportion of software applications obtained from grey literature, the questionnaire and focus group discussions can be suggested as particularly appropriate methods in confirming data validity. Furthermore, action learning was used to establish the validity of some of the identified plug-ins. For example, the literature review did not reveal whether Clima-Win has a plugin or not. However, after installing and exploring the software it emerged that it had an in-built plug-in. In addition to the findings presented in Figs. 2 and 3, specific findings from the different research methods will be discussed in the ensuing sections.

Most cloud BIM software packages have their equivalent mobile BIM or mobile apps. Some examples are Autodesk A360 and Buzzsaw which are both cloud BIM and mobile apps. These have been classified in Table 2 under Cloud BIM and Mobile BIM sections respectively. However, in other cases only the mobile apps have been considered and listed in Table 2. Also, it emerged that while most mobile apps were free, their cloud equivalents were mostly commercial and generally relatively expensive.

Although, there is a growing level in the understanding of BIM, it appears there is still some confusion amongst professionals about which software packages are BIM software systems. For example in AutoCAD Architecture [6], a useful argument is mounted defending the capability of AutoCAD Architecture as a very powerful modelling and drafting tool that can also be used in organising information. The discussion ended with individuals wondering why Autodesk is not marketing AutoCAD Architecture as BIM software. This discussion is similar to that about AutoCAD MEP in AutoCAD MEP [7], where some professionals are arguing in favour or against AutoCAD MEP being considered as BIM. This argument also emerged in one of the focus group discussions when participants argued that AutoCAD Architecture is a BIM software. Interestingly, three workshop participants who use Vectorworks (see the Architecture section in Table 2) still wondered whether it was a BIM software or not. Thus, a general finding is that, while the definition of BIM is clear in books, its practical definition is still very vague and subjective depending mostly on professionals’ ability to use the software. Is it the software that is part of a BIM process or the way the software is used? If a software application developed with a BIM work flow or metaphor (e.g. Revit) is used without embracing a BIM philosophy, then the whole concept of BIM is defeated. However, that does not stop Revit from being a BIM software. On the other hand if a software developed with an AutoCAD workflow (e.g. AutoCAD Architecture) is used in an intelligent way following or aligning with BIM principles, then that is good practice and should be commended. However, this does not make the software a BIM software package as it may be clearly limited in some BIM capabilities. For example, if changes are made in a sectional drawing in AutoCAD Architecture, these changes might not be automatically updated in the different views; an essential BIM software package feature.

It is now common to find studies reporting surveys on the assessment of various aspects of BIM implementation. While some may be one-off academic or industry based research to ascertain the BIM adoption benefits [14,23], others such as McGraw-Hill Construction [39] and National Building Specification (NBS, [44–48]) are periodic investigations to benchmark progress made in BIM adoption. The NBS 2014 report [48] investigated in particular the use of 10 BIM authoring tools to gauge the level of BIM adoption in the industry. Although three of the tools are Autodesk products, it is interesting to note that the 7% of over 1000 respondents indicated that they use other BIM authoring tools. This clearly portrays that there are still some design and modelling software tools yet to be captured in the literature given that close to 80% of the respondents indicated they create BIM objects in-house and re-use them.

The options of modelling tools from different vendors/manufacturers were extended to 17 in the survey conducted as part of this study. Although this number is still not exhaustive, as typical of recent surveys it ensured that the common BIM-enabled tools were captured as seen in Fig. 4. This list was added to the software inventory list of Table 2.
                     

A cross examination of Fig. 4 yields the revelations that more than 75% of the companies have little experience or no knowledge at all of any of the 17 BIM software applications considered in the survey. Looking beyond this revelation makes it apparent that the considerations around these commonly featured tools bring the ‘technology aspect’ of BIM into focus and the tendency to ignore the ‘processes aspect’. It is therefore imperative for BIM tools featuring in assessment surveys to be holistic in terms of technology and process. Such an approach would help to achieve a more realistic picture of how the BIM concept has actually been already enshrined in the industry. Based on this suggestion, BIM software packages in the construction sector can be said to be numerous and likely to continue increasing in number with advances in technology. This is partly due to the fragmented nature of the industry and the need for specialty applications in the various professional domains. Technology is yet to advance to the level of developing some all-purpose software. As a result, many software packages are tailored towards specific needs of professional domains. Although, this may appear to be a complementary progress of the industry, it could also be a source of confusion for professionals who struggle to identify appropriate BIM software applications and implementation pathways. As the survey results illustrate (Fig. 5
                        ), overwhelming quantity of software systems also poses a challenge and barrier to BIM implementation.

At least 34% of the respondents indicated that a huge number of software available in the market is a significant and crucial barrier to the uptake of BIM. This proportion increased to 51% of respondents for software interoperability related barrier which on one hand is a function of the increasing number of software and on the other; handicap from advances in technology. This finding is one of the basis upon which this study was grounded.

In practice some factors may be related to each other or one may have an influence on the other. For example, respondents who might have suggested “lack of interoperability between software” might have done so simply because they “lack knowledge about the software”. To ensure this was not the case, another parameter was included in the questionnaire about the “relative level of familiarity” with BIM interoperable standards. A great deal of research explores relationships between two or more variables. While the univariate statistical procedures have their place in the analysis of practically any data (e.g. Figs. 2–5), many research questions require methods which help assess the interrelationships or correlations between different variables. Using this technique it was established that 13 out of 56 respondents who had “basic” (on a scale of “excellent, very good, good, basic, none”) familiarity with IFC and gbXML, thought lack of interoperability was a barrier. Of the 13, 4 considered this a crucial barrier while 9 indicated that it was a very significant barrier. Furthermore, another parameter was used; “the relative level of knowledge of use of 4D/5D BIM software” (e.g. Navisworks) (factor 4) to measure the level of understanding of interoperability. Of the 16 out 56 respondents that had at least “moderate” expertise of Navisworks, 15 of them thought interoperability was “crucial” and 1 suggested it was “very significant” as a barrier to the uptake of BIM. This clearly indicates that the lack of knowledge about BIM has not influenced the understanding of interoperability as a barrier.

Commencing from the BIM implementation barrier of ‘Lack of knowledge’; with at least 50% of respondents acknowledging it to be very significant in Fig. 5 is a corroboration of results indicated by Fig. 4. As discussed earlier, BIM understanding should cover both process and technological aspects. However, it was evident from the focus group discussions that professionals generally feel BIM knowledge is all about the operation of BIM-enabled software tools. For example, some of the participants already had BIM related mobile apps such as Autodesk A360 cloud in their phones and tablets to support collaborative working BIM processes. Still, the same individuals felt that they are fully unaware of the software potential and difference from others. Besides escalating costs of software licences, the issue of proliferation of BIM software was also mentioned as a challenge. Indeed, it is rather difficult to know which software is best coupled with the task of achieving a balanced cost regime. Although, many vendors will offer trial periods of about a month, this is hardly enough to explore all plausible capabilities of software products.

Another interesting issue that unfolded from the discussions is the need for hands-on training on the operation of BIM software packages. The groups admitted having attended a number of seminars and workshops promoting BIM without improving their knowledge of BIM software operations. It is therefore important to note that BIM training should also consider exploring hands-on BIM operation sessions. In this way participants could have a first-hand appreciation of the advantages of BIM without exorbitant cost implications. Focus groups participants were also worried about the extent to which a BIM approach can trickle down the various tiers of construction supply chains. Since the approach depends highly on computer knowledge; many systems, fieldworkers and tradesmen are still operating following traditional ways of carrying out daily tasks. As such there will always be some gaps even when a member of a supply chain is BIM ready as it is not possible to collaborate alone.

Action learning technique was used to identify the file formats and different plug-ins of BIM software systems. As such it was based on the software identified through the literature review, questionnaire and focus group discussions. Using this technique led to the exclusion of some BIM software systems. For example, CATIA (http://www.3ds.com/products-services/catia/) was excluded because authors could not find a trial version to explore the different file formats and plug-ins functionality. Also, through the literature it was not easy to identify some of the plug-ins for the different BIM software systems. Also, through the focus group discussions, only 7% of additional plug-ins listed in Table 2 were identified. To address this issue an email was sent to software developers’ technical directors and/or departments. This led to the identification of an extra 30% of the plug-ins listed in Table 2.
                     

The first challenge was that, in some cases the vendor's website did not explicitly state whether a particular software system is a BIM tool or not. In these cases the systems are not included in this manuscript. This challenge was exacerbated further due to the fact that grey literature information often contradicted information published by the vendor. For example AutoCAD MEP is stated as a BIM software in Kiviniemi et al. [34], while on the vendor's website (http://www.autodesk.com/products/autocad-mep/overview) it is not explicitly stated to be a BIM software. It is important to note that AutoCAD MEP is capable of doing what BIM tools can do; although there are some subtle differences between the two. In many instances, in AutoCAD MEP, views have to be manually generated while in all BIM software views are generated automatically. In this manuscript, AutoCAD MEP was not considered as a BIM software.

Secondly, most software systems have multiple uses, which are relevant to different professional domains. The key challenge was how to classify such systems. To overcome this challenge, the authors chose one main domain for which the software is used and then listed its other uses under the specific application column of Table 2. For example, Calcus is a cost estimation software application which is also used as a carbon footprint analysis tool. This was categorised as a project management tool while its applications including its use as a carbon footprint analysis tool were listed in the application column.

Thirdly, several suppliers’ websites included a broad statement about the type of file formats supported by the promoted software”. As a result it was particularly unclear whether the software actually imports, exports or does both. In these circumstances, the statement or file formats was put across the Import and Export columns of Table 2. Some examples are AECOsim Energy Simulator v8i, Tekla Structures, FME and datBIM.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

Although collaborative practices in the construction sector have been encouraged with little success, emerging BIM systems provide great opportunities to overcome this everlasting industry-wide challenge. Ultimately, this depends highly on the effectiveness of information exchange and relevant capabilities. This is the underlying concept of the interoperability of BIM systems.

The main aim of this study was to appraise a significant number of common BIM systems available in the market using interoperability as the main criterion. Other secondary factors considered in the appraisal include the different domains of use of BIM software systems, how BIM software systems are being used and whether BIM software systems are free or not. To this end, 122 BIM software systems were reviewed and classified according to the aforementioned criteria. For example, Clima-Win was classified under: Building Services domain; Specific applications: thermal calculations (meaning a tool used for building thermal calculations); Input files: gbXML, IFC, etc. (files that can be read by Clima-Win); Output files: XML, Excel, etc. (files that can be exported by Clima-Win); Plug-ins: Plug-in for Revit (Clima-Win plug-in can be installed in Revit and thermal calculations performed Revit); Availability: C (C for commercial to mean it is not free). Given that the authors are not aware of any comprehensive study of this nature, web links for the different BIM software systems were also provided. Similarly, these criteria were applied on all software applications presented in structured Table 2.
                  

One potential take-away from this study is enshrined in the question often heard from professionals during BIM workshops or seminars. The question is “which BIM software should I use?” From our experience, many construction firms have often invested in BIM software systems that perform similar functions. For example, a firm could be investing in Revit, ArchiCAD and Vectorworks at the same time. While each of these software systems have their pros and cons, all of them can be employed in a BIM project differently to achieve the same goal. Each one of them also has its strengths when coupling with other software systems such as 4D and 5D simulation software (i.e. interoperability and collaboration). While this study, particularly Table 2 does not offer a panacea solution, it offers some basis to start from. We strongly propose two pieces of advice to companies interested in adopting BIM. First, that a firm should think of its supply chain partners and the type of construction activities they are involved and then invest in software systems compatible with those used by its supply chain partners. Secondly, for large firms, they should consider the lifecycle of projects and purchase software that aligns with the project life cycle. Investing in two or more BIM software systems used in the same phase is not generally helpful, rather it is better to invest in different BIM software systems from different phases of construction. In both cases interoperability is key and this study will serve as a good starting point.

Although the list of BIM software suggested in this paper is not exhaustive, an effort was made to cover key construction domains. By doing so, the study compliments others that have often focused on mostly one category of BIM software systems (e.g. BIM authoring tools or only energy simulation tools).

To conclude, one major challenge in this emerging domain is that of trust. To what extent can one believe the information provided about the functionalities and capabilities of software by their respective vendors/manufacturers as presented on their websites. For open source BIM software systems it was easy to verify this by simply downloading and trying out the application. For commercial software, despite the availability of trial versions, it is a huge challenge as most trial versions are usually limited in scope. The authors suggest with confidence that one way to overcome this challenge is for users to provide feedback and ratings for different BIM systems. Given the complexity of the construction sector and supply chains the classification table incorporated in this paper should be upgraded and expanded to include other factors that can further support decision-making. Lastly, it is important to note that, most of the information related to the plug-ins discussed in this paper was mostly retrieved from vendors’/manufacturers’ websites. Given the important function of plug-ins in terms of interoperability, the next step of this study is to conduct a detailed appraisal of the potential of plug-ins in fostering interoperability. As a word of caution, readers should read this work taking into account the context of time. This is because the rate of development of BIM software systems is astonishing and vendors/manufacturers may develop or improve other aspects that have not been considered in this study.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

Part of this study was funded through the FutureFit Built Assets programme part of the EU funded BIM programme. FutureFit offers free business support to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) located in the South East of England.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

