@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Crash analysis and evaluation of cable median barriers on sloped medians using an efficient finite element model

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           An efficient FE model of a CMB was developed for full-scale crash simulations.


                        
                        
                           
                           A current CMB design and seven alternative designs were evaluated.


                        
                        
                           
                           The CMB performance on a sloped median and vehicle-cable engagement were studied.


                        
                        
                           
                           A new CMB design was developed and shown to have improved performance.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Crash analysis and design

Finite element analysis

Cable barrier

Vehicular crash

Transportation safety

Sloped median

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Perpetual high traffic volumes on U.S. highways have raised more public concern than ever about transportation safety. Over the years, various traffic barrier systems, including cable median barriers (CMBs), have been developed to reduce the number and severity of vehicle crashes. Despite their general effectiveness, there remains room for improvement, especially when CMBs are installed on unlevelled terrains such as sloped medians. The destructive nature of crashes imposes significant challenges to barrier design using full-scale physical testing; numerical simulations thus become a viable means to support crash analysis, performance evaluation, and barrier designs. In this study, validated vehicle and CMB models were used to perform full-scale simulations of vehicle-CMB impacts. Several CMB designs, including the currently used one, were evaluated under vehicular impacts at different velocities and angles. To address the challenge of modeling slender members such as cables and hook-bolts in contact analyses, an efficient beam-element contact model was employed in the analysis. Different design options of cable height and spacing under various impact velocities and angles were investigated in this study.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Transportation safety has received wide attention in recent years due to the perpetual high traffic volumes on U.S. highways. One of the major concerns about highway safety is the prevention of cross-median crashes, which are caused by run-out-of-way vehicles crossing the median and colliding with oncoming vehicles. Due to the high relative velocity of the two colliding vehicles, cross-median crashes have very high fatality rates and result in severe damage. Median barriers are designed to prevent such events by safely redirecting the run-out-of-way vehicles. Different types of barriers have been developed over the years including rigid, semi-rigid, and flexible systems. All barriers used on U.S. highways are designed following the guidelines of the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) [1,2] and must be tested to satisfy the safety requirements specified by the Manual for Assessing Safety Hardware (MASH) [3], which is a replacement of National Cooperative Highway Research Program (NCHRP) Report 350 [4]. The evaluation of safety devices was facilitated through three main criteria: structural adequacy, occupant risk and post-impact trajectory. With respect to cross-median crashes, MASH specifies the standard testing conditions for median barriers. All barrier systems on U.S. highways must be tested to satisfy the requirements specified by MASH. However, it should be noted that the standard safety tests specified in MASH are all conducted on flat terrain, while most in-service barriers are installed on sloped medians. To this end, evaluation of in-service performance of median barriers has been one of the important and challenging efforts in transportation safety research [5–16].

Cable barriers are cost-effective, flexible systems that are ideal for retrofit designs to prevent cross-median crashes in existing, relatively wide medians. Although they are tested on flat terrain and pass the MASH requirements, cable barriers are shown to be generally effective on medians with 6H:1V slopes. Cable median barriers (CMBs) are more forgiving than concrete barriers and W-beam guardrails when struck by an errant vehicle, because the cables deflect laterally and reduce the impact forces transmitted to the vehicle and occupants. The high flexibility of cable barriers, however, requires that the medians have sufficient widths to allow for lateral cable deflections. For the single-run, low-tension CMB shown in Fig. 1
                     , the median is required to have a minimum width of 24ft. (7m), with 12ft. (3.5m) on each side of the CMB [1,2]. Although all of the CMBs satisfied the safety requirements of AASHTO MASH, penetrations of CMBs were still found in certain situations. For example, the crash data analysis performed by research engineers in the North Carolina Department of Transportation (NCDOT) showed that there was approximately a 3.6 percent penetration occurrence for CMBs, with the majority of penetrations being vehicle under-riding [17]. Although these CMBs had a very good safety performance (less than five percent penetrations), it is desired that CMB performance be improved.

Full-scale crash tests have been adopted by researchers and engineers to evaluate the safety performance of vehicles and roadside hardware systems for a long time, for their good representation of real crash scenarios. Fig. 2
                      shows an example of a crash test in which a sedan was on its way to under-riding and penetrating a CMB [11]. Despite its usefulness in understanding the crash mechanism and evaluating safety performance, full-scale crash testing is typically time consuming and uneconomical, especially in evaluating large test matrices of designs. With the rapid development of computer technology and parallel computing algorithms, it is now possible to perform full-scale finite element (FE) simulations of vehicular crashes using commercial software packages such as LS-DYNA [18,19]. Computer simulations have become a viable alternative for crashworthiness analysis of vehicular components [20–25] and the entire vehicular structure under different crash scenarios such as front, side, and rear impacts [26–34]. In addition to their applications to crashworthiness design of modern vehicles, crash simulations are also used for safety evaluation and validations of highway infrastructure [35–46] as well as for the failure analysis of security barriers [47]. The use of simulations has progressed from modeling crash tests to supporting hardware design decisions and to providing guidance for roadside hardware placement. Effective use of simulations permits design optimization, as exemplified in the work of Hou et al. [48], and minimizes the number of crash tests required to achieve acceptable safety performance, thus reducing the costs of development, installation, and retrofit of roadside safety devices. Additionally, simulations provide a tool for assessing the performance limits of roadside hardware devices under conditions that full-scale crash testing cannot readily accommodate.

By integrating the vehicle and barrier models, researchers have successfully evaluated the performance of existing barrier systems [12] and developed a new cable barrier that was finally crash tested [13]. Since most actual medians have slopes and horizontal curves, the in-service conditions of a barrier system are different from the testing conditions specified in MASH and may cause the in-service performance of a barrier to be unsatisfactory under certain impact conditions. Therefore, cross-median simulations with in-service conditions need to be studied and verified with testing to ensure that correct dynamic crash responses can be obtained in numerical simulations. Although the current MASH standards only require assessing barriers on flat terrain, extensive research has been carried out for barriers on sloped terrains [49–52]. Recent and ongoing research seeks to develop a test matrix to specifically assess the safety performance of barriers placed close to or within slopes, including the NCHRP 22-22 project. Currently, little work exists in the literature that deals with crash simulations on sloped medians; most of the safety studies on CMBs are empirical.

In this study, nonlinear FE simulations were employed to investigate several CMB designs under vehicular impacts to assist with design improvement and retrofit options of in-service CMBs. Since under-riding CMB penetrations were the focus of this study, the FE model of a small vehicle (i.e., a 1996 Dodge Neon) was used to evaluate the performance of different CMB designs under vehicular impacts from both sides of the CMB. All available numerical data obtained from FE analyses were summarized in order to evaluate the performance of various CMB designs. The major research objectives were to: (1) develop the relationship between cable height and cable-vehicle engagement, so as to determine the recommended height of the cables in the three-cable system; and (2) investigate the cable and vehicle interaction behavior corresponding to different impact scenarios, such as a range of impact velocities and angles. In addition, CMBs with four cables were also studied in comparison to the traditionally used three-cable CMBs. Based on the literature review and crash data analysis, eight different CMB design cases were first generated for impacts at different vehicle velocities and impact angles. The simulation results were then analyzed and showed that cable-vehicle engagement was related to the cable heights, impact velocities, and impact angles. The use of FE simulations in the exploration of new designs was shown to be both effective and efficient. Based on FE simulation results, full-scale crash tests can be conducted to further validate design options for developing economical and effective CMB designs.

Over the years, various FE models have been developed for vehicles and roadside barriers, and many of them are in the public domain of the National Crash Analysis Center (NCAC) [53]. Most of these models were validated based on the standard vehicle crashworthiness tests or barrier crash tests conducted on flat terrain. This includes the FE model of the 1996 Dodge Neon, which was originally developed at the NCAC for simulations of frontal impacts occurring on flat terrain. This model was composed of 339 parts (or components) with a total mass of 1333kg. Table 1
                         gives a summary of nodal and element information for this model. The materials in this vehicle model include carbon steels (for most components), rubber, aluminum honeycomb, aluminum foam, spot-welds, springs, and dampers. The 1996 Dodge Neon model was used in the simulations of this study, since it had a lower profile and thus a higher likelihood of under-riding the CMB.

Since frontal impact simulations were conducted only on flat terrain, the vehicle suspension models were validated before they were used in crash simulations involving sloped medians. To validate the suspension models, simulations of the 1996 Dodge Neon running across a 6:1 sloped median were performed. The simulation results showed that both the front and rear suspension models did not exhibit realistic dynamic behavior. Unrealistic tilting of the front and rear wheels of the vehicle was observed during and after crossing the median centerline. In the original FE model of the suspension, spherical joints, which allowed three rotational degrees of freedom, were used at each of the two joints. These spherical joints were replaced by cylindrical joints in the modified suspension model to constrain two of the rotations at the strut locations. The modified suspension models were then used in simulations of the vehicle crossing the median, and the results showed that the unrealistic wheel tilting was corrected. To check the robustness and stability of the modified suspension model, the vehicle models with the original and modified suspension models were also tested in simulations of the vehicle crossing medians with larger slopes. The commercial software package, Hypermesh [54], was used in the modification of all FE models.

The original FE model of the CMB was developed by the NCAC based on the Washington State design (Fig. 3
                        a); therefore, it was modified to conform to the NCDOT design specifications [55,56]. Several modifications were made to the NCAC CMB model. First, the post spacing was changed from 16ft. – 4.85in. (5m) to 16ft. (4.88m), as per the NCDOT specifications. Secondly, an efficient beam element model was used to model cables and hook-bolts (Fig. 3b). Finally, the CMB in the NCAC model, originally on flat terrain, was modified to be placed on a 6:1 median slope for the simulations of this study.

The CMB model used in this study was developed based on the NCAC CMB model, which was validated with crash testing. The new CMB model had the same level of detail as the NCAC model (e.g., the cables, hook-bolts, posts, soil, etc.), but adopted an enhanced contact algorithm that could also handle edge contact. Further, with the enhanced contact algorithm that supported contact with beam elements, the new CMB model eliminated the null-shells around the cables in the NCAC model that were used solely for contact purposes. The use of beam elements and beam-element based contact algorithm to model slender members was studied and shown to be computationally efficient (due to the elimination of many null shells) and numerically stable (due to the new contact algorithm) in full-scale crash simulations [57]. The beam contact model implements a relatively new method of handing contact with beam elements. In this model, a virtual cylindrical surface is generated to define contact for each beam element, since they do not have explicit sectional dimensions in the FE model. The longitudinal axis of the cylindrical surface is defined by the beam’s two nodes (see Fig. 4
                        ). This model is available in LS-DYNA ver. 970 and 971 [18,19] and is not limited to circular beam cross-sections. In a contact analysis, more sophisticated and thus more expensive contact algorithms such as the automatic-general contact in LS-DYNA, are required if contacts occur between beam and other elements. For slender members with circular cross-sections, such as cables and hook-bolts, the virtual contact surface of the beam model has an advantage due to its accuracy, stability, and efficiency compared to existing models [57].

The original 1996 Dodge Neon model was validated using experimental data of frontal impacts specified by the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards and Regulations (FMVSS) [58] as shown in Fig. 5
                     . Before evaluating its dynamic responses on a sloped median, the vehicle model with the new suspension model was first evaluated using this frontal impact scenario, where the vehicle crashes into a rigid wall at 35mph (56.5km/hr) on a flat surface. The full frontal crash test was conducted by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) with test ID 2673. Numerical simulation results and deformation patterns were compared to those of the original model and experimental data. Fig. 5b shows the full-scale vehicle simulation results comparing accelerations measured at the top of the engine of the original model and the updated model to those measured in the experiment. This comparison with experimental data, along with other comparisons such as deformation patterns, showed the validity of the 1996 Dodge Neon model for such simulations. Like the original model, the updated model demonstrated a reasonably good agreement with the available test data.

When used in cross-median simulations, the original vehicle model exhibited other modeling issues that were not found in the frontal impact simulations shown in Fig. 5. One of these issues was improper or missing contact definitions for components with potentially large displacements and/or deformations. Another issue was the poor mesh quality that caused numerical instability in the simulations. Some unconnected elements in the front bumper cover were identified. These anomalies did not incur numerical instability in the frontal-impact simulation as shown in Fig. 5; therefore, no significant difference was observed between the original and the new model in the frontal-impact simulations. When used in oblique impact simulations such as the vehicle impacting the CMB, the corner of the front bumper cover was in contact with cables/posts and caused numerical instability in the simulations, resulting in abnormal aborting of the simulations. All modeling issues were corrected in the modified model before it was used in the cross-median simulations.

The above-mentioned updates to the Dodge Neon model did not significantly change computational times, compared to the original vehicle model. The major savings of computational time was due to the use of the new CMB model, which was compared to the old CMB model in a full-scale simulation of the Neon crashing into the CMB. The simulation time of the new model was 143h. using 16 CPUs on a Linux cluster, representing a 19.2% savings compared to the 177h. required by the old model.

Based on an analysis of the NCDOT crash data, different design cases were evaluated with FE crash simulations using the following constant conditions:
                           
                              •
                              
                                 Median width: 46ft. (14m) including two 6-ft. (1.83m) shoulders and a 34-ft. (10.4m) wide ditch (17-ft. wide on each side of the median centerline).


                                 Median slope: 6:1 (Horizontal: Vertical) on both sides of the ditch.


                                 CMB location: 4ft. (1.22m) from the ditch centerline.


                                 Effective CMB length: approximately 400ft. (122m) between the third post from the anchor on both ends.


                                 Post spacing: 16ft. (4.88m) within the effective CMB length.


                                 Impact point: at the midpoint of the effective length of the CMB and midway between two adjacent posts.


                                 Vehicle’s initial state: fully landed on the sloped ditch before impact; therefore, vehicle trajectories were not considered in these simulations.

The above parameters represented the standard conditions for CMB installations according to NCDOT design specifications. The longitudinal placement and effective length of the CMB is illustrated in Fig. 6
                        .

Both backside and front-side impacts were considered in the evaluation of CMB performance. The definitions of backside and front-side impacts are:
                           
                              •
                              
                                 Backside: vehicle coming from the side with the ditch.


                                 Front-side: vehicle coming from the side without the ditch.


                        Fig. 7
                         shows the simulation scenarios for front-side and backside impacts. Since the focus of this study is on the CMB’s performance in preventing vehicle under-riding, the evaluation of these design cases was primarily focused on backside impacts; see Table 2
                        .

Four vehicle impact speeds and three impact angles were selected. This means that a total of 12 (4×3) impact scenarios were considered for either a front-side or a backside impact. The impact angle was defined as the angle between the vehicle’s travel direction and the longitudinal axis of the CMB, as illustrated in Fig. 8
                        . Simulations for backside impacts were performed under the same vehicle speeds and impact angles as those for the front-side impacts. The four selected impact speeds were 55, 65, 70, and 75miles per hour (mph) (88.5, 104.6, 112.6, and 120.7km/hr) and the three impact angles were 20°, 30°, and 40°.

In this study, the median was modeled as a rigid surface (with friction) so there was no ground deformation in the current model. This simplification represented a scenario that had a minimum effect on the vehicle’s impact speed, impact angle, and redirections. Therefore, the effect of cable heights on vehicle-cable engagement would be relative to the rigid-ground situation but valid to guide CMB designs. In addition, the impact conditions of this study were selected in an effort to cover a wide range of impact speeds and angles so as to effectively study vehicle under-riding relative to CMB cable heights. Therefore, these conditions are not the same as those specified in MASH. The standard MASH TL-2 and TL-3 conditions are listed in Table 3
                        .

The goal of evaluating new CMB designs is to reduce the likelihood of small vehicles under-riding the barrier. The straightforward approach is to lower some of the cables in the current design to increase the likelihood of CMB engagement under small vehicle impact. Along with the current design, seven new design cases were proposed and evaluated using FE simulations to determine the effect of cable heights on the vehicle’s engagement with the cables of the CMB and CMB’s overall performance. The cable heights of all design cases are given in Table 2 and are shown schematically in Fig. 9
                        . All design cases were organized in groups, based on how the cable heights were determined:
                           
                              (1)
                              
                                 Group 0: The current design, which was denoted as G0D1, was used by NCDOT as the standard CMB installation. G0D1 was first evaluated for both front-side and backside impact to establish a baseline for evaluating the seven new designs in this study.


                                 Group 1 (three 3-cable designs): In the three designs of this group, which were denoted as G1D2, G1D3, and G1D4, the height of the 1st (top) cable was unchanged. The heights of the 2nd (middle) cable were changed from 25.25″ (641mm) to 23.5″ (597mm), 22.5″ (572mm), and 22″ (559mm) for G1D2, G1D3, and G1D4, respectively. The heights of the 3rd (bottom) cable were changed from 20.5″ (520.7mm) to 17″ (432mm), 15″ (381mm), and 14″ (356mm) for G1D2, G1D3, and G1D4, respectively. The three designs in this group were only evaluated for backside impacts to determine if lowering the middle and bottom cables could reduce the occurrence of small vehicle under-riding.


                                 Group 2 (two 3-cable designs): The two designs in this group, G2D5 and G2D6, had the same cable height for the middle cable, 20.5″ (521mm). The heights of the 3rd (bottom) cable for G2D5 and G2D6 were 15″ (381mm) and 13″ (330mm), respectively. It was noted that the height of the middle cable for both designs was the same as the bottom cable for the current design, indicating a 9.5″ (241mm) spacing between the top and middle cable for G2D5 and G2D6. This large cable spacing raised a concern of CMB performance in front-side impacts. Therefore, G2D5 and G2D6 were evaluated for both front-side and backside impacts.


                                 Group 3 (two 4-cable designs): A 4th cable was added to the current NCDOT three-cable design below the 3rd cable. Two design cases were evaluated with the 4th cable placed at 17in. (432mm) and 16in. (406mm) above grade for the two designs G3D7 and G3D8, respectively.


                        Fig. 10
                         provides a visual comparison of the cable heights for all the above-mentioned designs, as well as a new CMB design (G4D9) that will be presented in Section 5.4.

In all the design cases, the posts had a fixed length of 69.5in. (1.765m), and the portion above grade was 33in. (0.838m), which is based on current NCDOT practice. To facilitate presentation and comparisons among the designs, the cables are numbered from top to bottom. The 1st cable is the cable at the top and the 3rd cable is the bottom cable if only three cables are used. When four cables are used in a CMB design, the bottom cable is labeled as the 4th cable.

The eight CMB design cases were examined using FE simulations to evaluate the vehicle’s engagement with the cables at different heights, as well as to evaluate the corresponding CMB performance. The vehicle’s post-impact responses were placed into one of four categories to be used for CMB performance evaluation.
                           
                              1.
                              
                                 Redirected (R): The vehicle engaged with one or more cables and was redirected within the 34-ft. (10.4m) sloped median.


                                 Redirected on shoulder (RS): The vehicle engaged with one or more cables and was redirected on the 6-ft. (1.83m) shoulders of the 46-ft. (14m) median.


                                 Redirected out of median (RO): The vehicle engaged with one or more cables and was redirected outside the 46-ft. (14m) median.


                                 Penetrated (P): The vehicle penetrated the CMB and entered into the oncoming traffic lane without significantly engaging with any cable.

It is noted that both redirection (R) and redirection on shoulder (RS) were considered to be successful redirections of the vehicle; that is, the vehicle was adequately retained by the CMB, significantly reducing the probability of it getting involved in a subsequent crash. However, redirection out of median (RO) and penetration (P) were regarded as CMB failures.

The behavior of each cable in vehicle-CMB engagement was defined as follows.
                           
                              1.
                              
                                 Engaging (E): A cable was engaged with the vehicle for the entire impact duration.


                                 Sliding (S): A cable was initially engaged with the vehicle, slid along it, and finally lost engagement; the cable made some contribution to redirecting the vehicle.


                                 Over (O): A cable slid over the vehicle without significant contribution to redirecting the vehicle.


                                 Under (U): A cable slid under the vehicle without significant contribution to redirecting the vehicle.

Under certain impact and terrain conditions, the vehicle could under-ride the CMB without engaging with any of the cables. Finally, cable-vehicle engagement was also characterized using combinations of the letters defined above. For example, “SU” means that the cable initially engaged with the vehicle, but eventually slid under it.

In current engineering practice of roadside safety evaluation, vehicular responses are the primary factors to examine to determine if a barrier system has acceptable performance. Although vehicle occupant safety is the ultimate goal of transportation safety, human injury has not been directly used as a design parameter for roadside barriers due to the lack of studies and/or test data. In MASH, it is recommended to use occupant responses (i.e., occupant impact velocity, OIV) for evaluating the safety performance of barriers. With numerical simulations, occupant safety could also be assessed using the vehicle’s kinetic energy, vehicular behavior (e.g., yaw, pitch, and roll angles), and other criteria such as the head injury criterion (HIC) and the acceleration severity index (ASI). Assessing occupant safety was beyond the scope of the current work and thus was not included in this study.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

The simulation results of cable-vehicle engagement for all eight design cases are summarized in Tables 4 and 5
                        
                        , including both front-side and backside impacts of the 1996 Dodge Neon. As an illustration of the simulation results, Fig. 11
                         shows four plan-view snapshots of the vehicle for a backside impact (CMB design case: G0D1) at an impact speed of 65mph (104.6km/hr) and an impact angle of 20°. It can be seen that the vehicle is successfully redirected on the shoulder (RS) of the median in this case. Fig. 12
                         shows two screenshots of vehicle-CMB engagement during a front-side and a backside impact for CMB design case G0D1, both at 65mph (104.6km/hr) and 20°. In both cases, the bottom cable engaged with the vehicle’s fender and then slid under the hood. It can be seen that the beam model was capable of handling contacts between cables and the complex geometries of the vehicle’s exterior and interior components.

From Tables 4 and 5, it is clear that the change of cable height (and spacing) affected the cable-vehicle engagement and thus the subsequent responses. In addition, impact speed and impact angle also affect cable-vehicle engagement. For the backside impacts shown in Table 4, the vehicle was safely redirected for all cases when impact angles were less than 30° and impact speeds were lower than 65mph (104.6km/hr). For more severe impact conditions (i.e., with larger impact angles and/or higher impact speeds), the vehicle was not safely redirected within the median in many of the cases due to the short transverse distance for cable deflections. For example, at a 30° impact angle, the current design G0D1 could not redirect the vehicle within the median when the impact speed was higher than 55mph (88.5km/hr). Among all the designs under backside impact, G3D7 and G3D8 were shown to safely redirect the vehicle in all cases.


                        Fig. 13
                        a summarizes cable engagement corresponding to various cable heights and impact angles for backside impacts. The approximate ranges for cables sliding over the vehicle (O), cables engaging with the vehicle (E), and cables sliding under the vehicle (U) are shown by dashed lines. For backside impacts, it was found that the preferred cable height ranged from 16 to 22.5in. (406 to 572mm) for 20° impacts, from 14 to 20.5in. (356 to 521mm) for 30° impacts, and from 13 to 20.5in. (330 to 521mm) for 40° impacts. The results in Fig. 13a shows that the cable was unlikely to fully engage with the vehicle in a backside impact if its height was 22.5in. (572mm) or higher. This was why the 2nd cable of design cases G0D1, G1D2, G3D7, and G3D8 did not engage with the vehicle in all backside impacts. This observation was important for determining effective cable heights for the three-cable designs.

For front-side impacts, the results in Table 5 shows that the current design G0D1 was effective in preventing penetrations of small vehicles, even at high impact speeds and large impact angles. The two three-cable designs, G2D5 and G2D6, performed well until 40° impact angles with impact speeds higher than 55mph (88.5km/hr) were considered. The two four-cable designs, G3D7 and G3D8, were not evaluated for their performance in front-side impacts, because they were essentially the same as the current design (G0D1), except for the added forth cable; this would ensure that these four-cable designs would have at least the same performance as G0D1. Fig. 13b summarizes cable engagement corresponding to various cable heights and impact angles for front-side impacts. The results in Fig. 13b shows that a cable was unlikely to fully engage with the vehicle in a front-side impact if its height was 15in. (381mm) or lower, or if its height was higher than 25.25in. (641mm). This was the reason that the two design cases G2D5 and G2D6 did not perform well in engaging and redirecting the impacting vehicle, since their 3rd (bottom) cables were placed at 15in. (381mm) 13in. (330mm), respectively.

Considering both front-side and backside impacts, the cable height range with the best vehicle-cable engagement was identified to be 16–20.5in. (406–521mm). For three-cable designs, this suggested that the 2nd (middle) and 3rd (bottom) cables would be most effective in engaging with the vehicle when placed within this range of cable height. It should be noted that, although the top cable did not engage with the vehicle in all cases, it needs to remain at its current height of 30in. (762mm) for redirecting large impacting vehicles. The two four-cable designs, G3D7 and G3D8, generally improved the cable-vehicle engagement in backside impacts, compared to the current design G0D1, with G3D7 performing slightly better than G3D8 for the case of an impact at 40° and 65mph (104.6km/hr).


                        Fig. 14
                         shows the maximum cable deflection versus vehicle speed for various impact angles for backside and front-side impacts, respectively. Based on the available design cases, the trend-lines are plotted in the figures and used to facilitate comparisons among the different impact angles. It can be seen from the plots that for both backside and front-side impacts, the maximum cable deflection increased with the increase of vehicle impact speed or impact angle. For example, the average maximum cable deflection of the nine design cases was 2.7m, 5.0m, and 6.2m when the vehicle impact angle was 20°, 30°, and 40°, respectively, for the backside impacts.

The relationship between maximum vehicle acceleration and vehicle impact speed at various impact angles is plotted in Fig. 15
                         for backside and front-side impacts. It was observed that the maximum accelerations increased with the increase of impact speed or impact angle. It is also noted that at a given impact angle (i.e., 20°), the effect of impact speed on the maximum acceleration was not significant.


                        Fig. 16
                         shows the vehicle’s maximum yaw angle versus impact angle at various impact speeds for backside and front-side impacts. The vehicle’s maximum pitch angle versus impact angle is plotted in Fig. 17
                        , and its maximum roll angle versus impact angle is plotted in Fig. 18
                         for both backside and front-side impacts. It can be seen from these plots that the maximum yaw and pitch angles did not change significantly with the change of impact speed or impact angle. In general, the magnitude of the maximum roll angle increased with an increase of impact speed or impact angle, as can be seen in Fig. 18. For the design cases considered, the maximum vehicle roll angles ranged from −25° to −20° in backside and from 10° to 25° in front-side impacts. It is also noted that when the impact angle was small (e.g., 20°), the maximum roll angle was not significantly affected by the impact speed for backside impacts.

The performance levels were not equal for front-side and backside impacts for the three-cable CMBs, as can be seen in Tables 4 and 5. There are several reasons for the unsuccessful retention/redirection of the vehicle in some of the backside impacts. First, the transverse distance to safely redirect the vehicle in backside impacts was only 19ft. (5.79m), which was shorter than the 27ft. (8.23m) distance in front-side impacts. Secondly, the vehicle did not engage with the middle cable, due to the vehicle’s lower profile (caused by suspension compression) after crossing the median centerline. It was observed from the simulation results that the larger the impact speed and impact angle, the lower the vehicle’s profile after crossing the ditch centerline. Therefore the typical range of cable heights such that cable-vehicle engagement occurred was lower in backside impacts than in front-side impacts, as shown in Fig. 13.

Based on the cable height versus engagement figure (Fig. 13) and analysis of simulation results for all eight CMB designs (particularly those of the six three-cable designs), a new three-cable design (G4D9) was developed (see Fig. 10 for a comparison with the other eight designs). The G4D9 design had the 2nd (middle) and 3rd (bottom) cables located at 20.5in. (521mm) and 17in. (432mm), respectively, above grade. The new design was evaluated in both front-side and backside impacts, and the simulation results are summarized in Table 6
                        . It can be seen that for all front-side impacts, the CMB retained the same performance as the current design G0D1 and was able to safely redirect the vehicle within the median. For backside impacts, G4D9 was shown to perform better than all the previous six three-cable designs; it safely redirected the vehicle in all simulated cases due to improved cable-vehicle engagement.

To verify the performance of the new CMB design under impacts of other vehicles, simulations were also performed using a Ford F250 pick-up truck as the impacting vehicle. The simulation results showed that the CMB could safely redirect the truck when the impact angle was 30° or less and the impact speed was less than 70mph (112.6km/hr). Thus, the new CMB design was considered to meet the TL-3 requirements of MASH.

The major research findings obtained from the analysis of simulation results are summarized as follows:
                           
                              •
                              Cable heights strongly affected the cable-vehicle interactions and engagement and, therefore, the redirection of the impacting vehicle. Lower cables typically engaged better with smaller vehicles. The top cable was effective for large vehicles but ineffective for small vehicles. Cable-vehicle engagement could also be affected by impact angle and impact speed. A typical range of cable heights where cable-vehicle engagement occurred was identified, and the results were successfully applied to obtain the new CMB design G4D9.

The vehicle’s post-impact responses were significantly affected by impact speed and impact angle. Generally speaking, the CMB performed better when impacted by a vehicle at small impact angles and low impact speeds (corresponding to lower impact severity), with the vehicle being redirected within the median ditch (R) or its shoulders (RS). Large impact angles and high impact speeds increased the impact severity; therefore, a larger transverse distance was required to redirect the vehicle, as observed from the simulation results.

It was observed that the vehicle’s maximum yaw and pitch angles were not very sensitive to impact speed and impact angle.

Upon impacting the CMB placed four feet from the bottom of the ditch, the vehicle’s front-end was significantly lower in a backside impact than in a front-side impact, due to suspension compression upon crossing the ditch. Thus the simulation results showed that the potential of a vehicle under-riding the CMB was higher in a backside impact than in a front-side impact, because the vehicle had a lower front profile in the backside impact and there was a shorter transverse distance available to redirect the vehicle.

The evaluation of different design cases using three cables indicated that lowering the 2nd (middle) and 3rd (bottom) cables increased the likelihood of redirecting small vehicles for backside impacts without sacrificing the CMB’s performance for front-side impacts. This was clearly shown in the new CMB design.

A numerical study was performed using full-scale FE crash simulations to investigate design options of CMBs under different impact scenarios. The CMB investigated had an effective length of 400ft. (122m) and was placed on a 46-ft. (14m) wide, 6:1 sloped median, which represents a typical CMB configuration used in practice. The results of the FE simulations were used to evaluate CMB performance for both front-side and backside impacts by a small vehicle. The FE simulations performed in this study provided insight into the effects of cable height as well as cable-vehicle engagement in relation to the vehicle’s impact speed and impact angle. A major finding was that cable heights strongly affect cable-vehicle interaction and engagement and, therefore, the redirection of impacting vehicles. In addition, the simulation results showed that all nine CMB designs prevent small vehicles from under-riding the barrier in front-side impacts, even at high impact speeds (e.g., 75mph or 120.7km/hr) and large impact angles (e.g., 40°). For backside impacts, most CMB designs safely redirected the vehicle for impact angles less than 30° and impact speeds lower than 65mph (104.6km/hr). For backside impacts with larger impact angles and higher impact speeds, some CMB designs failed to redirect the vehicle within the median, due to the short available transverse distance for cable deflections. The new three-cable design (G4D9) and the two four-cable designs (G3D7 and G3D8) can potentially reduce the under-riding of small vehicles. It was also found that the designs with four cables, in general, improved cable-vehicle engagement and redirection. However, there was no significant difference between the performance of the four-cable designs and the best three-cable design (G4D9). Therefore, the addition of the 4th cable may not be necessary for practical applications.

It should be noted that the simulation results in this study only served as a means of finding general design trends and potential improvements of designs to prevent under-riding of small vehicles. Many factors that affect CMB performance were not considered in the simulations of this study. These factors included the types of vehicles, post spacing, impact locations along the longitudinal axis of the CMB, and driver behavior, etc. These will be considered in future research. It is noted that the findings of this paper serve only as a preliminary study to identify the most critical impact scenarios, which should be validated by full-scale crash tests before being implemented in practice. Nevertheless, full-scale FE simulation was demonstrated to be a useful tool in crash analysis and decision-making, and will be used in future research to investigate other variables important to designing CMBs.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENT@&#

The authors acknowledge the support of North Carolina Department of Transportation (NCDOT) under Project NCDOT 2008-010, “Finite Element Evaluation of Two Retrofit Options to Enhance the Performance of Cable Median Barriers.”

@&#REFERENCES@&#

