@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#A submarine arrangement design program based on the expert system and the multistage optimization

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           An arrangement method of submarine compartments and equipment based on an expert system and a multistage optimization is proposed.


                        
                        
                           
                           An optimization method that can yield a better arrangement design of a submarine is proposed.


                        
                        
                           
                           We develop a prototype program based on an arrangement template model, an expert system module, and an optimization module.


                        
                        
                           
                           We apply the program to a problem of a small submarine.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Arrangement design

Expert system

Optimization

Arrangement evaluation model

Submarine

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The arrangement design of a submarine depends on the data of the parent ships and the knowledge of experts. Some delay in design can occur when data or experts are absent. An arrangement design problem of a submarine can also be difficult to solve due to the number of compartments and equipment placed in the limited space, as well as the numerous potential alternatives for the arrangement design. Thus, a compelling need arises to accumulate data regarding the parent ships, the knowledge of experts, and design rules as a systematic structure, increasing the demand for optimization of the arrangement design. In this study, we proposed an arrangement method of the submarine compartments and equipment based on an expert system and a multistage optimization. For this task, we used a template model for the arrangement design of a submarine proposed by the authors in the previous study to store the arrangement data. We also improved and used an expert system that can systematically computerize the knowledge of experts, previously developed by the authors. Then, we proposed an optimization method that can yield a better arrangement design after formulating a submarine arrangement problem as an optimization problem, solving it with the use of an efficient optimization algorithm. To evaluate the applicability of the proposed method, we developed a prototype program consisting of an arrangement template model, an expert system module, and an optimization module. Finally, we applied the developed program to a problem with regard to the arrangement design of a small submarine. The results showed that the developed program can be used as a new tool for the arrangement design of a submarine.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Designers have performed the arrangement design of a ship by referring to previous ships as examples, modifying certain parts as needed. In the case of the arrangement design of a submarine, however, limited data is available about previous submarine designs. Thus, the role of experts is extremely important in the stage of the arrangement design of a submarine, being dependent on the limited data regarding parent ships and the knowledge of experts. Some delay in design can occur when data or experts are absent. Thus, an expert system can represent one of the alternative solutions to such problems. An expert system involves systematically computerizing the knowledge of experts. Arrangement design experts have difficulty calculating complicated, quantitative values (e.g., material flows and space efficiency), but they can take account of many things (e.g., the efficiency, manufacturability, and maintenance aspects of the submarine) by relying on their knowledge. If well developed and applied in the stage of the arrangement design, an expert system can be used to evaluate the feasibility of an arrangement design alternative, rather than relying solely on experts for each design instance. Thus, the authors of this study had previously developed an expert system (that could systematically computerize the knowledge of experts in the stage of the arrangement design of a submarine), further improved for use in this study.

In general, such design efforts place a number of compartments and equipment in a limited space (called a pressure hull), with many potential alternatives for its arrangement design. Finding the best arrangement for a submarine requires finding an optimal arrangement among many alternatives by considering specific criteria (e.g., the feasibility of the arrangement, the operational performance of the submarine, and the convenience of the crew). While difficult, this problem can be effectively solved within the allowable time if using an optimization technique. Thus, we mathematically formulated an optimization problem in this study for finding an optimal arrangement based on the evaluation results for design alternatives obtained from the expert system. As formulating an optimization problem with all the variables to be used in the arrangement design presents difficult challenges, we divided the optimization process in this study into three steps, then formulated a multistage optimization problem to consider and solve all these steps.

In other words, in order to solve the difficult problems regarding the arrangement design of a submarine (including the problem of delay in design due to missing data or the absence of experts), we proposed in this study a submarine arrangement design method based on the expert system and the multistage optimization, and we developed a prototype program for the proposed method.

@&#RELATED WORKS@&#

As mentioned earlier, most of the equipment in a submarine (being a special kind of ship) must be placed in a limited space. Thus, the arrangement design of a submarine requires greater efforts compared to the arrangement design of a conventional ship, due to the severe space limitations of the former. Many studies on the arrangement design for ships have been conducted, but there have been precious few publicly-available studies on the arrangement design for submarines, as most submarines have been made for military purposes and thus are kept secret. Most that are available focused on an expert system or the optimization for the arrangement design of a ship, but not both. A summary of past studies related to arrangement design in the field of naval architecture and ocean engineering appears below. Byun [1] proposed an expert system based on knowledge bases for supporting initial ship design (e.g., compartment design at the initial design stage), constructing knowledge bases for determining the arrangement of the compartments and the principal dimensions of an oil tanker to obtain the maximum volume of cargo oil (as per the ship owner's requirements and the pertinent international regulations). Shin et al. [2] proposed an expert system for the layout design of the machinery in a ship, devising rules for the layout design of the machinery from the relation between the equipment to the ship owner's requirements, the insights of the designer, etc. When evaluating the rules for design alternatives, these designers also considered fuzzy rules. Finally, these designers developed a new algorithm for the layout design of machinery using the expert system. Lee et al. [3,4] proposed a method for the arrangement design of the facilities on the multi-decks of a naval ship by considering that such ships have inner walls and passages, proposing an improved genetic algorithm that represented the layout of the facilities in a four-segmented chromosome. All the relationships between the facilities and passages were represented through an adjacency graph (i.e., they found an optimal layout for the facilities on the decks by using the optimization technique. Helvacioglu and Insel [5] proposed a multistage expert system for the arrangement design of a container ship (i.e., compartment arrangement), dividing a container ship into several large blocks called function groups, then initially arranging them to determine the compartment arrangement. By considering more detailed data, these designers derived the final arrangement of the ship's compartments, using heuristic knowledge and rules for the container ship in their expert system. Chung et al. [6] proposed a submarine arrangement design method based on an expert system and an optimization technique, using a rule-based expert system in their method. These designers selected partitions dividing the pressure hull into compartments, and the sequence of the compartments, as design variables for optimization. The evaluation values for the alternatives obtained from their expert system were used as an objective function for optimization (i.e., if a certain alternative violated a rule, a penalty would be added to the value of the objective function of that alternative). Yang et al. [7] proposed a knowledge-based engineering methodology for ship structural design. To design structural members (e.g., L bars, T bars, brackets, etc.), these designers defined several parametric models and parameters (e.g., web thickness, ribbon width, etc.). Gathering various knowledge from rules or experts to design the structural members, these designers developed a products design knowledge base containing such knowledge. Following their study, Cui et al. [8] suggested a knowledge-based engineering method for ship structural design, including optimization. A products design knowledge base in their study was similar with the former study; however, their study adopted an optimization process, after selecting parameters used to design structural members. To reduce structural weight without strength failure, the parameters were optimized using GA. Then, these designers applied the proposed method to design a midship. Shin [9] proposed a method for the arrangement design of a naval ship by considering its survivability at the initial design stage. Shin used the SLP (systematic layout planning) method for analyzing the relation between the equipment in the naval ship, then proposed an arrangement method for generating alternatives and evaluating them. The SLP method differs from an expert system in that the method decides the arrangement by using the relation matrix between the equipment; however, as such equipment would be made by an expert, the SLP method remains somewhat similar to an expert system. We proposed an expert system based on an arrangement evaluation model (AEM) for the arrangement design of a submarine from a previous study [10], with the AEM proposed as an expansion of a rule-based expert system. In addition, we proposed an arrangement template model (ATM) for the submarine to store the arrangement data of the submarine. However, we chose not to integrate the expert system with an optimization technique for arrangement design.

The field of architecture also produces research on expert systems. Park [11] proposed a framework for representing the knowledge of experts by using the space requirements (area, position, etc.) and the relation between the spaces (adjacency, level difference, etc.). Then, Park manually evaluated the given arrangement for a building using the proposed framework.

As with the above, most relevant research thus far has focused on the expert system or the optimization technique for the arrangement design (i.e., in most studies, the designers independently performed the expert system and the optimization process, without any integration between them). Moreover, a three-dimensional submarine arrangement design method based on an expert system and an optimization technique has not yet been studied. Thus, by expanding on the previous study [10], we used an arrangement evaluation model (AEM) in this study that could systematically convey the knowledge of experts for the arrangement design of a submarine to evaluate the feasibility of the alternatives for the arrangement design. We mathematically formulated multistage optimization problems based on the evaluation values from our expert system (AEM) for the efficient performance of optimization. In addition, we used a data structure for the arrangement design of a submarine (arrangement template model; ATM) for storing all the data for the arrangement design and to effectively interface the data between the expert system module and the optimization module. In this study, we seamlessly integrated the expert system and the optimization process, incorporating the expert system to optimization problems as one of the objective functions. Using this method, we linked the expert system (including the knowledge of experts) with (but separate from) the optimization process; thus, the developed program based on the method did not need to be recompiled or rebuilt, even when the knowledge of experts changed or updated. However, when implementing the knowledge as objective functions or constraints in the optimization process, the program should be recompiled or rebuilt whenever changing or updating the knowledge. Table 1
                         shows a summary of the related works, as well as a comparison of such works with this study.

@&#OVERVIEW@&#

In this study, we proposed a submarine arrangement design method based on an expert system and a multistage optimization. Fig. 1
                         shows the configuration of the proposed method. As shown in this figure, the proposed method consisted of four components: the ATM, the expert system module, the optimization module, and the user interface. A more detailed description of each part appears below:

To perform the arrangement design of a submarine requires space for storing the arrangement data. In this study, we hierarchically defined the space for the arrangement design (ATM) using the UML (unified modeling language) to store various data related to the arrangement design of the submarine (e.g., the pressure hull, compartment, sub-compartment, tanks, and equipment). In addition, we used this model to interface various data between the expert system module and the optimization module.

In artificial intelligence, an expert system means a computer system that emulates the decision-making ability of a human expert [12]. In this sense, the expert system can be used to systematically computerize the knowledge of experts. Various kinds of expert systems have been developed: the rule-based system, the frame-based system, the hybrid system, the model-based system, the off-the-shelf system, etc. Among these expert systems, the rule-based expert system currently enjoys widespread utility, due to its wide applicability and convenience. In the rule-based expert system, designers express a rule that corresponds to experts’ experience or knowledge by the “IF-THEN” phrase. In this study, we used the AEM to evaluate the feasibility of the alternatives for the arrangement design. Based on a space list and a relation list, this model easily conveyed various rules about the arrangement design of a submarine to evaluate the feasibility of the design.

Optimization techniques are currently in widespread use in the field of engineering to obtain the optimal design based on the given requirements. Using the proposed method for optimization, we sought to derive an optimal arrangement for a submarine as one of the objectives of this study, necessitating an optimization module. The optimization module included the mathematical formulation of the optimization problems and an optimization algorithm for solving the formulated problems. Related to the mathematical formulation, we formulated a multistage optimization problem, selecting and using genetic algorithms for optimization to solve such a problem. During the optimization, we generated evaluation values for the alternatives from the expert system module, using the values as objective functions in the optimization modules (thus pointing to the integration of the expert system module and the optimization module). We, of course, acquired the data required for the expert system and optimization through the interface with the ATM.

For the smooth employment of the above components, we also needed a user interface. In this study, we developed a user interface consisting of three components used for the arrangement design of a submarine: the tool for the expert system module (to create, edit, and operate experts’ rules); the tool for the optimization module (to configure the optimization process and the parameters for the optimization problem); and the 3D visualization panel (to investigate and visualize the arrangement result).

In this study, a submarine served as the target for the arrangement design, consisting of an outer hull and a pressure hull. As the crew and most of the equipment can be found in the pressure hull, the pressure hull design carries more importance than the outer hull; thus, this study focused on the arrangement design of the pressure hull. Fig. 2
                         shows the main components of the pressure hull of a submarine. As shown in this figure, many key items exist in the pressure hull (e.g., compartments, sub-compartments, tanks, equipment, partitions, etc.):

The overall procedure for the arrangement design of the pressure hull follows. First, we defined the pressure hull with the most equipment and watertight spaces, then likewise defined the partitions that divide the pressure hull into several regions (called compartments). For their efficient use, we further divided the compartments into smaller regions (called sub-compartments) through the use of more partitions. We used some of the sub-compartments as tanks for loading liquid cargos. Finally, we defined and allocated the equipment to the compartments or sub-compartments.

To store the arrangement data in this study pertaining to particular spaces or items (e.g., the pressure hull, compartments, sub-compartments, tanks, and equipment), we hierarchically defined a space (i.e., the ATM) for each using the UML [13] in the authors’ previous study. This space served as a kind of data structure necessary for most computer programs. Fig. 3
                         shows the ATM represented in the form of a class diagram of the UML:

As mentioned earlier, a rule-based expert system expresses a rule that corresponds to experts’ experience or knowledge using the “IF-THEN” phrase. Nevertheless, we found a need to combine various rules in order to meet the difficult challenge of expressing complicated knowledge and thinking processes about arrangement design. Experts remain unsure how to combine various rules to convey their knowledge through an expert system. Therefore, in this study, we used the AEM to easily express various rules about the arrangement design of a submarine, regarding the AEM as an extended, advanced version of a rule-based expert system for this application.

In the AEM, we used two data (space information and relation information) to represent various knowledge items about the arrangement design of a submarine. The space information could express knowledge about the space itself (e.g., the compartments, sub-compartments, tanks, and equipment), while the relation information could express knowledge about the relation between such spaces. A space list could be prepared by grouping all the space information, while a relation list could be prepared by grouping all the relation information. Thus, it could be clearly seen that the AEM was based on the space and relation lists. We automatically converted the knowledge items reflected in the lists into rules in the form of “IF-THEN” phrases, and then we used the rules to evaluate the feasibility of alternatives for the arrangement design of a submarine (i.e., using this model based on the space and relation lists, various rules about the arrangement design of a submarine could be easily expressed to evaluate the feasibility of a design). Fig. 4
                         shows the configuration of the arrangement evaluation model. As shown in this figure, we represented the knowledge of experts about arrangement design as space and relation information, accumulated in the space and relation lists. We automatically converted the knowledge items into rules in the form of “IF-THEN” phrases. Finally, we evaluated the feasibility of alternatives for the arrangement design based on these rules. Such evaluation yielded the feasibility indices of the alternatives, then we transferred these indices to the optimization module to be used as objective functions for optimization.

The space information could express the knowledge of experts about the area or volume requirements for a specific space. For example, if an expert possessed the knowledge that “the machinery in the submarine should be larger than 100 m3, including the equipment installed in the machinery and the maintenance space for the machinery,” such could be represented as one space information item. The key words in the knowledge were the objective space (e.g., “machinery”) and the target value (e.g., “100_min_m3”). Adding an ID (e.g., “S001”) to each distinct rule, each space information item could be expressed with three properties: the ID, the objective space, and the target value. Here, we used the target value to give a certain value to the space. Again, the target value could be defined with three sub-key words: standard value (e.g., “100”), boundary type (e.g., “min” for minimum), and unit type (“m3”). The set of space information for all the spaces defined in the domain was called a space list.

The relation information could express the knowledge of experts about the relation between spaces. In this instance, the measurable values were the objects of the relation. If an expert possessed the knowledge that “the accommodations and CIC (combat information center) should be close to each other for operability by the crew,” such could be represented as one relation information item. The key words in such a knowledge item were the objective space (e.g., “accommodations”), the subjective space (e.g., “CIC”), and the relation between the objective space and the subjective space (e.g., “close”). This example represents a knowledge item as a relation information item, requiring an additional ID to distinguish the relation information from the others. Thus, each relation information item had six properties: the ID, the objective space, the subjective space, the relation type, the target object, and the target value. Here, we used the target object to distinguish an object (e.g., human or material) when calculating the distance between spaces. For instance, if considering a human who might move between spaces, the distance between the spaces should be calculated considering the passages; however, if considering material that might move between spaces, the distance between the spaces could be calculated without considering the passages. The set of relation information for all the spaces defined in the domain was called a relation list. In addition, the relation type represented the relation between two spaces. The previously given example used “closer” to represent the relation; “closer” could be one of the relations between two spaces. To express various relations between two spaces, we used four types of relations in this study: “Connection To” represented the spaces connected to each other; “Depth From” represented the objective space apart from the subjective space, with a certain magnitude of depth; “Distance From” represented the distance between two spaces; while “Level Difference” represented the level difference between two spaces.

We expressed the body of knowledge of experts about the arrangement design of a submarine with two lists: the space and relation lists. We devised rules based on these lists, evaluating arrangement design alternatives based on such rules. As mentioned earlier, we converted the space and relation information into a set of “IF-THEN” rules used to evaluate the feasibility of the alternatives. The space or relation information could be defined differently from one another using some boundary types for the target value (e.g., “min” for minimum, “max” for maximum, “ext” for exact, and “pro” for proposed). If we used the boundary type “max” for the target value of a certain space information item, the rule meant that “the value of the space should be lower than the maximum value.” Therefore, if the value of the space was lower than the maximum value, the feasibility index for this rule was evaluated as “100″ points; contrariwise, if the value was higher than the maximum value, the feasibility index for this rule was evaluated as “0″ points. The boundary type “min” was similar to “max.” If we used the boundary type “ext,” the rule meant that “the value of the space should be exactly the same as the target value.” Therefore, if the value of the space was the same as the target value, the index for this rule was evaluated as “100″ points; contrariwise, if the value was different, the index became “0″ points. The evaluation of the index in these three aforementioned cases appeared very simple. However, if we used the boundary type “pro” for the target value, the evaluation of the index for the rule in this case became somewhat ambiguous. As there were no criteria for determining if the rule was satisfied, this situation was called uncertainty. In this study, we adopted a fuzzy logic to handle the boundary type “pro” [14]. If we used the boundary type “pro” and the value of the space was the same as the target value, the index for the rule was evaluated as “100″ points; while the larger the potential difference between the value and the target value, the lesser the index for the rule according to the normal distribution.

This section describes a multistage optimization method for finding the optimal arrangement of the pressure hull of a submarine, the location of the crew and most of the submarine's equipment. The size of the pressure hull affects the size of the outer hull, as well as the principal dimensions of the submarine. In this sense, the size of the pressure hull (i.e., the allowable space for arrangement) faces limitations. Thus, the pressure hull should be optimally arranged to minimize the total size and cost of the submarine based on the given requirements.

In like manner, various compartments and equipment need to be placed within the limited space of the pressure hull. A number of variables (e.g., the positions of the compartments and equipment) should be determined to find the optimal arrangement. Attempting to solve this problem by considering all the variables at the same time for the numerous potential alternatives for the arrangement design presented untenable difficulties. Thus, in this study, we proposed an effective optimization method (i.e., we divided the optimization process into three steps, then formulated a multistage optimization problem considering all the steps, and then solved the problem). Fig. 5
                         shows the overall optimization procedure of the multistage optimization method for the arrangement design of a submarine. As shown in this figure, we divided the optimization process, considering the procedure for the arrangement design of the pressure hull. The first step of the procedure involved the allocation of the compartments, determining the positions and sizes of the compartments by changing the positions of the partitions. In the second step, we allocated the sub-compartments (including the tanks) to the compartments, determining the positions and sizes of the sub-compartments by changing the positions of the additional partitions. In the third step, we allocated the equipment to the compartments or sub-compartments, determining the positions of the equipment. Finally, we performed a stability check of the submarine after carrying out the three steps. If the check yielded unsatisfactory results, we carried out a suitability step, and then we re-performed the optimization until the check yielded satisfactory results. Finally, when the stability check passed, we had obtained the optimal arrangement of the pressure hull.

In other words, we obtained the optimal arrangement by three sequential stages. And we finally checked the validity of the optimal arrangement with an equilibrium polygon and stability criteria after completing all optimization stages. The optimization problem for each stage actually represented a kind of multi-objective optimization problem, thus involving a Pareto optimal set (a set of many alternatives) for each stage. To automate the optimization process, we selected and transferred the best alternative among the set to the next stage in this study. For example, we obtained many alternatives from the first stage, but only the best one (considering all objective function values) transferred to the second stage. This process applied equally to the second and third stages. If the validity of the optimal arrangement failed to be satisfied, we returned to the corresponding stages and repeated the process with a different alternative in the set.

In the first step, we performed the optimization of the compartments. Fig. 6
                            shows the mathematical formulation for the optimization of the compartments. As shown in this figure, we used the mesh model of the pressure hull, the number of compartments, the weight of each compartment, the CoG (center of gravity) of each compartment, and the number of partitions as input data. We selected the positions of the transverse bulkheads, the positions of the decks, and the sequence of the compartments as the design variables for this problem, optimizing their values. At this point, the design variables should satisfy certain requirements (called constraints) (e.g., the requirements for the positions of the transverse bulkheads and decks, as well as the areas and heights of the compartments). Among the many alternatives that satisfied all the constraints, we derived the optimal arrangement of the compartments by considering three objective functions: maximization of the feasibility index from the expert system; minimization of the distance between the x position (LCG) of the CoG and the x position (LCB) of the CoB (center of buoyancy); and minimization of the z position of the CoG (VCG or KG).

In the second step, we performed the optimization of the sub-compartments. Fig. 7
                            shows the mathematical formulation for the optimization of the sub-compartments. As shown in this figure, we used the number of compartments for the sub-compartments’ optimization, the number of sub-compartments in each compartment, and the required volume of each sub-compartment as input data. We selected the sequence of the sub-compartments as the design variable for this problem, optimizing the values of the sub-compartments. At this point, the design variable should satisfy the constraints (e.g., the requirements for the areas of the sub-compartments, and the heights of the compartments). Among the many alternatives that satisfied all the constraints, we derived the optimal arrangement of the sub-compartments by considering two objective functions: maximization of the feasibility index from the expert system; and minimization of the distance between the LCG and the LCB.

In the third step, we performed the optimization of the equipment. Fig. 8
                            shows the mathematical formulation for the optimization of the sub-compartments. As shown in this figure, we used the equipment size, the equipment weight, the adjacency index matrix of the equipment, and the unit connection cost matrix of the equipment as input data. We selected the positions and rotation angles of the equipment as the design variables for this problem, optimizing their values. At this point, the design variables should satisfy the constraints (e.g., the requirements for the position of each piece of equipment considering the interference, and the areas of the compartments). Among the many alternatives that satisfied all the constraints, we derived the optimal arrangement of the equipment by considering three objective functions: maximization of the feasibility index from the expert system; maximization of the adjacency index between the equipment; and minimization of the connection cost between the equipment.

Once we completed the three optimization processes, we determined all the components of the pressure hull (i.e., the compartments, sub-compartments, equipment, and partitions). Due to its special features and operations, a submarine must maintain its stability both on the surface of the water and underwater. As such, the method of conducting the stability check should be examined, being based on the calculation of the weight and moment. As we determined all the components of the pressure hull, the properties related to the weight and moment could be calculated. When designing a submarine, designers typically use an equilibrium polygon for the stability check. The equilibrium polygon provides a graphical representation used to ensure that the submarine will be able to remain neutrally buoyant and trimmed while submerged in any operating (loading) condition. In all operating conditions, the submarine must be able to compensate as needed, accomplished through the variable ballast tanks. The polygon represents a weight vs. moment diagram. In this study, we used the equilibrium polygon for one mean of the stability check. In addition, the stability could be roughly evaluated through certain properties representing the initial stability. For such purposes in this study, were used GB for the underwater state, and GMT (transverse metacenter height) and GML (longitudinal metacenter height) for the surface state. If the check using the equilibrium polygon and the initial stability properties did not yield satisfactory results, we revisited the previous steps and re-performed the optimization until the check yielded satisfactory results. Finally, when the stability check passed, we had obtained the optimal arrangement of the pressure hull.

Optimization algorithms are generally divided into two categories: global and local optimization algorithms. Several classes of global optimization algorithms are now available, including the genetic algorithm (GA) [15,16] and the simulated annealing method. These global optimization algorithms may be suitable for large-scale problems that have many local optima, but require more iterations to obtain an acceptable optimum compared with local optimization algorithms. Several classes of local optimization algorithms also exist, including sequential linear programming (SLP) [17], sequential quadratic programming (SQP) [17], and the method of feasible directions (MFD) [18]. Each of these local optimization algorithms can effectively find the optimum; though in some cases, these algorithms find the relative optimum closest to the starting point. In this study, was selected the GA as a global optimization algorithm to solve the multistage optimization problem for the arrangement design of a submarine. We utilized the GA to provide solutions to global optimization problems in a similar process as that proposed by Darwin's evolutionary theory. In the GA, the accumulated information can be exploited by a selection mechanism, while a new generation of the search space can be explored by operators within a reasonable amount of computing time. At first, the first generation can be evaluated for the fitness of each individual in the population, and then two individuals with good qualities as parents can be selected to produce new individuals. The new generation can be strengthened simultaneously through crossover and mutation to replace the individuals with bad qualities. In brief, the optimum can be found by repeating the evaluation, reproduction (selection, crossover, and mutation), and replacement process. In this study, we used a well-known, proven GA code, NSGA-II [19], to solve the optimization problems formulated in each step.

In this study, as shown in Fig. 1, we developed a prototype program based on the proposed method, consisting of the ATM, the expert system module (AEM), the optimization module, and the user interface. Fig. 9
                         shows a screenshot of the prototype program developed in this study. To verify the applicability of the proposed method and prototype program for the arrangement design of a submarine, we applied them to the arrangement design of a small submarine; specifically, a littoral warfare submarine (SSLW) designed for use by the U.S. Navy [20]. Fig. 10
                         shows the configuration of the submarine, including the names of its compartments.

As mentioned earlier, the proposed method focused on the arrangement design of the pressure hull. Thus, we selected the compartments (F, G, H, and I) in the pressure hull as the optimization targets. We manually performed the arrangement design of the submarine to which we applied the proposed method; Fig. 11
                         shows the results for the pressure hull.

As shown in Fig. 12
                            (a), the pressure hull of the submarine to which we applied the proposed method consisted of two transverse bulkheads, two decks, and six compartments divided by several partitions. Shown in the figure (from the top-left portion): the torpedo room (storage for torpedoes and launching equipment); the combat information center (CIC) (undertaking of operations related to the submarine); the machinery room (numerous pieces of equipment for propulsion, generation, etc.); the accommodations for the SEAL forces (housing the living quarters for the members of the special forces); the accommodations for the crew (housing the living quarters for the crew members); the bilge compartment (including various tanks); and the battery room. When we applied the proposed method to the pressure hull, we optimally determined two transverse bulkheads, two decks, and six compartments in the first stage (optimization of the compartments).

The bilge compartment, one of the main compartments, consisted of 12 sub-compartments placed 6 apiece on either side of the starboard and port, as shown in Fig. 12 (b). Shown from the left side: the forward-trim tank (for exerting moment by ballasting); the sanitary tank (for saving the sanitary drains emitted by the crew members); the freshwater tank (for loading fresh water for use by the crew members); the auxiliary tank (for loading auxiliary oil for the various pieces of equipment); the fuel tank (for loading fuel oil for propulsion); and the after-trim tank (having the same function as the forward-trim tank). We optimally determined the sub-compartments and partitions of the bilge compartment by carrying out the second stage (optimization of the sub-compartments). The accommodations also have many sub-compartments, but as these were much lighter than the other sub-compartments, we excluded the accommodations from the execution of the second stage in this study, as it proved difficult to improve the operability of the submarine or to change the CoG by rearranging them.

The pressure hull contained many items of equipment. Among the compartments, we set the main machinery, the auxiliary machinery, and the CIC as the targets for the arrangement, as these compartments included most of the important equipment, with numerous pieces of equipment existing therein. The main machinery contained 10 pieces of equipment, the auxiliary machinery 14 pieces of equipment, and the CIC 8 pieces of equipment. We optimally determined the positions and orientations of these 32 pieces of equipment by carrying out the third stage (optimization of the equipment). The accommodations for cooking and living also contained many pieces of equipment, but as these were much lighter than the other equipment, we excluded them from the execution of the third stage in this study, as it proved difficult to improve the operability of the submarine or to change the CoG by rearranging them. The targets for the arrangement of the equipment are shown in Fig. 12 (c).

Activation of the expert system required the knowledge of experts, the accumulation of which pertaining to the arrangement design of a submarine presented challenges. In this study, we obtained this knowledge through consultation with experts and from related books [21,22], as well as from data regarding previous submarine designs, inputting them into the space and relation lists of the AEM. Such lists can readily accept additions and modifications through the user interface, enabling continuous updating in the future. Finally, we used the lists and the feasibility index from the AEM as objective functions in each step of the multistage optimization. The space and relation lists that were used in this example are shown in Tables 2
                            and 3
                           , respectively. As mentioned in Section 2.3, the space information could express knowledge about the space itself (e.g., the compartments, sub-compartments, tanks, and equipment), while the relation information could express knowledge about the relation between such spaces.

We performed the optimization of the arrangement design through the procedure described in Fig. 5, based on the ATM and the AEM. The optimization results are summarized in Table 4
                        , being compared with the results of the manual design to evaluate the applicability of the proposed method. As shown in this table, the optimization results yielded a better alternative compared with the results of the manual design in terms of all the values of the objective functions in each step.

From the first stage of optimization, we optimized the positions of partitions (e.g., transverse bulkheads and decks) by improving objective functions. As shown in Table 4, the feasibility index from the AEM (the first objective function of the first stage) improved from 0.79 (manual design) to 0.86 (optimized design). Through the optimization, the length between the machinery and the accommodations shortened, as shown in Fig. 13
                        ; as a result, the related feasibility indices (e.g., R002, R003, and R005) increased, as shown in Table 5
                        . In addition, the distance between the LCG and the LCB (the second objective function) decreased from 1.02m (manual design) to 0.63m (optimized design). And the VCG (the third objective function) also decreased from 1.95m (manual design) to 0.52m (optimized design). The second and third objective functions related to the positions of the machinery and the CIC. To minimize such objective functions, the positions of the related transverse bulkheads and decks slightly changed through the optimization. The comparison between the manual and optimized designs for the first stage is shown in Table 5 and Fig. 13.
                     

From the second stage of optimization, we optimized the positions of sub-compartments by improving objective functions. As shown in Table 4, the feasibility index from the AEM (the first objective function of the second stage) improved from 0.58 (manual design) to 0.74 (optimized design). Through the optimization, the positions of tanks changed, as shown in Fig. 14
                        ; as a result, the related feasibility indices (e.g., R009–R912, and R014) increased, as shown in Table 6
                        . In addition, the distance between the LCG and the LCB (the second objective function) decreased from 0.63m (manual design) to 0.18m (optimized design). The comparison between the manual and optimized designs for the second stage is shown in Table 6 and Fig. 14.

From the third stage of optimization, we optimized the positions and rotations of equipment by improving objective functions. As shown in Table 4, the adjacency (the first objective function of the third stage) and the connection cost (the second objective function of the third stage) between equipment all improved for each compartment (e.g., the main machinery, the auxiliary machinery, and the CIC) from the manual design to the optimized design. These objective functions related to the positions and rotations of equipment. To minimize such objective functions, the positions and rotations of the related equipment changed through the optimization. The comparison between the manual and optimized designs for the third stage is shown in Fig. 15.
                        
                     

The optimization results and those of the manual design could be visually confirmed using the prototype program, as shown in Fig. 16.
                        
                     

In addition, we performed a stability check for the optimization results, in order to determine if the submarine corresponding to the optimization results could operate underwater. For comparison, we describe the stability check of the results of the manual design below. As mentioned earlier, we performed the stability check in this study using two items: an equilibrium polygon, and the initial stability properties.

An equilibrium polygon provides a graphical representation used to ensure that a submarine will be able to remain neutrally buoyant and trimmed while submerged in any operating (loading) condition. In all operating conditions, a submarine must be able to compensate, accomplished through the variable ballast tanks (i.e., an equilibrium polygon represents the criterion of the weight and moment change of a submarine). In this study, we considered three operating conditions for a submarine: lightweight condition, normal condition, and heavy loading condition. An equilibrium polygon for the optimization results is shown in Fig. 17
                           , being compared with that for the results of the manual design. As shown in this figure, all the points corresponding to the three operating conditions could be found in the polygons, showing the feasibility of the optimization results based on the stability check by equilibrium polygons. When checking these equilibrium polygons, all possible changes during operation had to be considered, with the preferred shape subject to change on a case-by-case basis. Such preference could be reflected on the AEM; we would like to retain this matter as one for future study.

We also evaluated the stability of the submarine to which we applied the proposed method using the initial stability properties: GB for the underwater state, and GMT (transverse metacenter height) and GML (longitudinal metacenter height) for the surface state. The initial stability check for the optimization results is shown in Table 7
                           , together with the results of the manual design. As shown in this table, all the properties satisfied the criteria, showing the feasibility of the optimization results based on the stability check using the initial stability properties.

In this study, we adopted an expert system based on the arrangement evaluation model (AEM) to evaluate the arrangement design of a submarine (i.e., we used a methodology that systematized the knowledge of experts and that could be used in the absence of experts or previous data). By applying the AEM to the existing rule-based expert system, a designer could easily define various knowledge items using the space and relation lists. In addition, we proposed an efficient optimization methodology for the arrangement design of a submarine. We divided the optimization process into three steps, formulated a multistage optimization problem considering all the steps, and then solved the problem. In other words, in order to solve the difficult problem regarding the arrangement design of a submarine, including the problem of delay in design due to missing data or the absence of experts, we proposed in this study a method for the arrangement design of a submarine based on an expert system and a multistage optimization, while also developing a prototype program. To evaluate the applicability of the proposed method and the developed program, we applied them to a problem involving the arrangement design of a small submarine of the U.S. Navy. The results showed that the developed program could be used as a new tool for the arrangement design of a submarine.

In the future, the developed program will be applied to more realistic examples to increase its applicability. Also, the knowledge of experts about the arrangement design of a submarine should be further accumulated for incorporation into submarine arrangement design. The mathematical formulation of the multistage optimization problem should also be further refined to obtain more realistic alternatives. Finally, we will attempt to use other global optimization algorithms (instead of the GA) in order to potentially increase the performance and reliability of the optimization.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This work was partially supported by (a) Agency for Defense Development, Republic of Korea(20130650128), (b) BK21 Plus Program (Education and Research Center for Creative Offshore Plant Engineers) funded by the Ministry of Education, Korea, and (c) Research Institute of Marine Systems Engineering of Seoul National University.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

