@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Feature recognition and volume generation of uncut regions for electrical discharge machining

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           The definition and classification of the hint feature points are proposed.


                        
                        
                           
                           The heuristic rules are proposed to rapidly identify uncut regions and their types.


                        
                        
                           
                           The geometric reasoning-based algorithms are presented for the decomposition of the interacting region.


                        
                        
                           
                           The CAD model of volume feature can be generated, which can be used for the shape design of electrodes.


                        
                        
                           
                           The related parameters of volume feature are extracted, which can be used for the parametric design of electrodes and the setting of processing parameters.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Hint feature point

Region recognition and decomposition

Volume feature generation

Machining process preparation

CAD and CAM

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Feature techniques have played an important role in CAD/CAM integration. These techniques need to be developed for each type of manufacturing process owing to its unique characteristics. Therefore, an approach is proposed in this paper to extract the machining feature of region containing internal sharp points for the process preparation of electrical discharge machining (EDM). The hint feature points are innovatively defined and classified into three types: internal sharp points, cutting-into points and interacting points. Based on this, our approach firstly identifies the faces and the type of the region. Secondly, the interacting region is decomposed into isolated regions through reconstructing the topological structure of the region. Thirdly, the reconstructed faces and original faces are stitched together to form a closed surface, and the CAD models of volumetric features are constructed. Finally, the position and dimension parameters are extracted and saved. The shape and parametric information extracted can be used for subsequent procession preparation, so as to promote the CAD/CAM integration of EDM.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

In mold machining, typical machining process consists of milling (roughing and finishing) and a number of subsequent EDM operations [1]. Since EDM is inefficient and needs extra design of electrodes, machining assistants tend to adopt milling technology. With the wide use of multi-axis machining equipment and ball-end milling cutter, milling has been applied in machining the majority of part surfaces [2–4]. However, milling process cannot machine the region containing internal sharp corners, as shown in Fig. 1
                     , because of the restriction of cutter diameter and feeding direction. EDM is still the only effective technology for such region [5–11].

As non-traditional machining method, EDM needs extra electrode design and meanwhile the setting of its technological parameters is complicated. Recognizing machining feature is the prelude to these process preparations. The researches [5–7] have presented the criteria of characterizing the EDM region. The criteria are in the form of high-level description, and the feature recognition is not considered. Mahajan et al. [8] presented the basic rules for automatic electrode design. But these rules were implemented by machining assistants. Ding et al. [9] developed an algorithm of detecting sharp corner regions for electrode design by calculating the surface angles at their common edges. As the interaction of machining volume was not considered, the machinability of the electrode cannot be ensured. Lee and Li [10] developed an intelligent tool for electrode generation. With the tool, the automaticity of electrode design was improved by at least 50%. However, the machining region was partly recognized through the interactive selection. Zhou and Zhang [11] proposed a volume decomposition-based algorithm to generate the electrode CAD model. But their method assumed that the machining features had been identified. In summary, the related researches have not achieved the recognition of EDM machining feature.

The research work reported in this paper is motivated by the above observation. The work focuses on developing an algorithm for the recognition of EDM regions and the generation of their volumetric features. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the literature review on feature recognition. Section 3 introduces technical definitions. Section 4 outlines the approach proposed here. Section 5–7 details the approach. Section 8 illustrates the algorithm analysis and experiment results, and, finally, Section 9 concludes this paper and discusses future work.

@&#LITERATURE REVIEW@&#

Feature technology has been widely used in computer aided designing and manufacturing (CAD/CAM). [12–14] Recognition of machining feature focuses on the design and implement of the algorithm to extract the required information from the part CAD model for the integration of CAD/CAM. Comprehensive review of various feature recognition techniques has been reported in the literature [15–18]. A key issue in feature recognition is to handle feature interactions [19–24].

The Attributed Adjacency Graph (AAG) proposed by Joshi and Chang [25] formed the basis for many subsequent approaches known as graph-based methods. These methods can effectively recognize non-interacting features, but have difficulties in recognizing interacting features because of the missed arcs caused by feature interaction. There were some attempts to restore the missed arcs [26,27], but recovering the missed arcs is still a difficulty for interacting features. The volume decomposition approach proposed by Woo and Sakurai [28] decompose interacting features into smaller volumetric units by extending the faces or edges. Features are considered as aggregation of these smaller volumes. This method sometimes generates unreasonably large number of small features and thus it is computationally expensive. Vandenbrande and Requicha [29] initiated hint-based approach to recognize interacting features. The authors supposed that no matter how features interacted, a machining feature would certainly leave a trace in the part boundary. So the hint-based approaches are more successful in recognizing interacting features than other existing approaches.

Recently, hybrid approaches, which combine the advantages of the above approaches, have been concerned by a growing number of researchers. Gao and Shah [19] proposed a hybrid method using graph and hint based approaches. In their method, Minimal Condition Sub-Graphs (MCSG) are used as feature hints. All MCSGs are generated by graph decomposition and completed by restoring its missed links. The missed links are restored by extensive geometric reasoning. Rahmani and Arezoo [20] proposed a hybrid of graph and hint based approach to extract interacting features from solid models. Here the graph-based hints are implemented and represented in concave graph forms helping the recognition of interacting feature with less computational effort. The interacting features are extracted based on the properties of concave graphs or its nodes. Sunil et al. [21] presented a graph and rule based approach for recognizing the interacting feature from B-rep CAD models of prismatic parts. Feature Face Adjacency Graphs (FFAGs) are constructed through decomposing Part Face Adjacency Graphs (FAG). Based on the structure of the explicit feature graphs, the interacting features are recognized by using geometric reasoning rules.

Review of related literature reveals that the existing approaches cannot handle the interacting EDM region. So the current work proposes a hint-based approach to generate the volumetric feature of EDM region in honor of automatic process preparations such as technological parameter setting and electrode design.

Handling interacting region is a key issue of our approach in this paper. The associated definitions are introduced as follows.

The topological, geometrical and heuristic information about the part can be used as the hints for the presence of a certain feature, and the choice and utilization of the hint is a key and difficult problem in handling interacting machining feature [17]. The topological vertex is generated via multiple machining operations. The vertex has several adjacent edges, and their convex–concave configuration contains substantial information on the process planning. Therefore, the vertex is innovatively used as the hint in this paper. The vertices of region containing internal sharp points are termed as hint feature points, which are classified into three types: internal sharp points, cutting-into points and interacting points.

The internal sharp point is the hint for extracting the region faces. If the vertex meets the following conditions, it is termed as the internal sharp point.

                              
                                 •
                                 It has at least three adjacent concave edges and no adjacent convex edge.

The two adjacent edges on any topological face are not continuously differentiable (C1).

For example, in Fig. 2
                           , the vertex v
                           1 is the internal sharp point.

The cutting-into point suggests the cutter wedging, and it is one of the hints to handle the interacting regions. If the vertex meets the following conditions, it is termed as the cutting-into point.

                              
                                 •
                                 It has two adjacent convex edges and one or more than one adjacent concave edges.

The other endpoint of all the adjacent concave edge is the internal sharp point.

The two adjacent edges on any topological face are not continuously differentiable (C1).

As the adjacent convex edges of the cutting-into point are formed by the cutter wedging, the edges are termed as the cutting-into edges. For example, in Fig. 3
                           , the vertices v
                           1
                           –v
                           3 are the cutting-into points, and their adjacent convex edges, e
                           1–e6
                           , are the cutting-into edges.

The interacting point is formed by the interaction of machining operations, and its adjacent
                            edges are the face boundary of different regions. So if the vertex meets the following conditions, it is termed as the interacting point.

                              
                                 •
                                 The adjacent edges are the face boundary of different regions.

The two edges on any topological face are not continuously differentiable (C1).


                           Fig. 4 shows an example of the interacting point v1
                           , where e1
                            and e2
                            are the face boundaries of R
                           1, and e
                           2 and e
                           3 are the face boundaries of R
                           2, so v
                           1 is the interacting point of R
                           1 and R
                           2.

An uncut region must contain several types of hint feature points. An internal sharp point belongs to one uncut region and an interacting point must belong to two interacting regions. But a cutting-into point of one uncut region may be the interacting point of another uncut region. For example, in Fig. 5a, v
                           2 is the cutting-into point of R
                           2; but in Fig. 5b, only e
                           2 and e
                           4 are the face boundaries of R
                           1, and so v
                           2 is the interacting point of R
                           1. Therefore the interacting point and the cutting-into point are the hints for handling interacting regions.


                        Uncut region is a cavity that contains internal sharp points. With the restriction of cutter diameter and feeding direction, the milling cutter cannot machine the internal sharp points, thus EDM technology is necessary.

The interacting regions have common topological elements [22–24]. According to whether the uncut region shares common topological elements with another region, the uncut regions can be classified into two types: isolated regions and interacting regions. The isolated region does not share common elements with another region, as R
                           1 in Fig. 6.
                        

According to the difference of common elements, the interacting regions are classified into adjacent-interacting regions and bridge-interacting regions in this paper.

                              
                                 (1)
                                 The adjacent-interacting region

If a group of successive convex edges of one uncut or milling region are on the face of another uncut region, the two regions are adjacent-interacting. For example, in Fig. 7
                                    
                                    , the convex edge of R
                                    2, e
                                    1–e
                                    3, are on the face of R
                                    1, so R
                                    1 and R
                                    2 are adjacent-interacting.

The adjacent interaction can be the interaction between two uncut regions or the interaction between uncut region and milling region. For example, in Fig. 7a, R
                                    1 and R
                                    2 are uncut regions; in Fig. 7b R
                                    1 is uncut region, and R
                                    2 is milling region.

The bridge-interacting region

If one uncut region shares a common face with another uncut or milling region, the two regions are bridge-interacting. For example, in Fig. 8
                                    , f is the common face of R
                                    1 and R
                                    2, so they are bridge-interacting.

The bridge interaction can also be the interaction between two uncut regions or the interaction between uncut region and milling region. In Fig. 8a, R
                                    1 and R
                                    2 are uncut regions; in Fig. 8b R
                                    1 is uncut region, and R
                                    2 is milling region.

The machining feature volume is the material that has to be removed from the blank to produce a finished part [30]. Corresponding to two types of uncut regions, there are two types of volumetric features: isolated volumetric features and interacting volumetric features. The interacting volumetric features can be further divided into two types: adjacent-interacting and bridge-interacting. 
                        Fig. 9
                         shows two types of interacting volumetric features.

Among the interacting volumetric features, there are two types of special faces: the adjacent face and the bridge face.


                        The adjacent face is a common face shared by two volumetric features. In fact, in the part CAD model there is no adjacent face, which is cut off by the cutter, and so the adjacent face is virtual.

A face in CAD model becomes a bridge face if its two portions are machined in two machining operations. The bridge face is actually the merging of two portions.


                        Fig. 10 shows the adjacent face and the bridge face in two types of interacting volumetric features. The defect and merging of regional face prevents the generation of volumetric feature.

Based on the above definitions, the proposed approach automatically recognizes the face of uncut region and generates the volumetric feature of each region, so as to promote the CAD/CAM integration of EDM. Our approach consists of four main steps.

                        
                           Step 1:
                           Extract the faces of uncut region with internal sharp points as hint.

Determine the types of uncut regions according to the common elements.

Decompose the interacting region into isolated regions by reconstructing the topological structure of the interacting region.

Stitch the reconstructed faces and original faces to extract the closed surface, which is then solidified to generate the CAD model of volumetric feature.

The flowchart of our approach is shown in Fig. 11.
                     
                     
                  

Among the above steps, the decomposition of interacting regions is the most important step of our approach. The following sections elaborate on these individual steps and provide details for our approach.

The region recognition includes the extraction of region faces and the determination of region type.

In this section, the region faces are extracted through utilizing the adjacent relation of topological elements with the internal sharp points as hint. So the internal sharp points are firstly extracted from all vertices in B-rep model of the part based on the definition of internal sharp points, as shown in Fig. 12. The internal sharp points extracted are stored into the list V.
                     

Next, the concave edges of each region are searched. For the bridge-interacting regions there may be geometrically co-defined edges, and so the search scope includes both the topologically adjacent edges and geometrically co-defined edges. The concrete steps are as follows.

                           
                              Step 1:
                              Visit the first unvisited internal sharp point into the list V.
                              

Search other internal sharp points along the adjacent concave edge based on Depth First Search Principles. Once an internal sharp point is searched, perform the following steps.

                                    
                                       Step 2.1:
                                       Uniquely store the adjacent concave edges of the internal sharp point.

If the other endpoint of current edge is an interacting point, that is, there may be the co-defined edge with the current edge, then search and store such edge.

The above steps are performed repeatedly until all the elements in the list V are visited, and the concave edges of each region are stored into their respective lists.

Finally, the regional faces are extracted with the extracted concave edges as input. Fig. 13 shows an example, where the concave edges and the faces of one region extracted successively are shown.

During the execution of our approach, the extracted certain type of hint elements of i-th region are stored into the one list with i as index. For example, the faces of i-th region extracted by the above steps are stored into the list Fi
                        .

The cutter wedging of one region split the cutting-into edge of another region, and so the isolated region is firstly filtered out based on the configuration of the cutting-into edges. Secondly, the type of interacting region is identified. The concrete steps are as following.

                           
                              Step 1:
                              Extract the convex edges on the faces of each region.

Extract the cutting-into points on the convex edge.

Identify the isolated region based on the following criteria.

The cutting-into edge is closed to form a loop.

All the cutting-into edge is on the face of non-uncut region.

Process the interacting regions to identify their types.

                                    
                                       Step 4.1:
                                       Execute the matching of convex edges to identify the adjacent-interacting regions, which have the common convex edges.

Execute the matching of faces to identify the bridge-interacting regions, which have the common face.

The manufacturing process is more easily described
                         volumetrically [20]. But the defect and merging of interacting regional faces hamper the volumetric feature generation. So the interacting regions must be decomposed firstly before generating the CAD model of volumetric feature.

The basic idea of the decomposition is to reconstruct the topological structure of interacting region. To do this, the two methods of Patch and Sweep are designed. In this section, we will
                     
                     
                      discuss the corresponding methods for two types of interacting regions.

The adjacent-interacting regions have a group of successive common convex edges. There are cutting-into points on the common edges. The cutting-into points suggest the cutter wedging, which split the face of another region. So the region to which the cutting-into points belong is tagged as Interacting Region (IR), and the other is tagged as Be Interacted Region (BIR), the face to be split is tagged as the split face. The adjacent edge of interacting point belonging exclusively to BIR is tagged as the split edge, which contains the boundary information of the split face. In Fig. 14, e
                        2
                        
                           ., e
                        4 and e
                        6 are the common edges, v
                        2 and v
                        4 are the cutting-into points, and so R
                        2 is IR, R
                        1 is BIR, f is the split face; the adjacent edges of v
                        1 and v
                        3, e
                        1 and e
                        7, belong exclusively to R
                        1, and so they are the split edges. The above elements are the hint for topology reconstruction of interacting regions.

The decomposition of adjacent-interacting region only needs to reconstruct the adjacent face bounded by the common convex edges. The method Patch and Sweep are selectively performed, and the associated flowchart is shown in Fig. 15.
                     

The Patch method includes two operators: Repair-Edge and Fill-Face. The associated flowchart is shown in Fig. 16.
                        

When the cutting-into edges of IR are coplanar, that is, the common convex edges are closed, the Fill-Face operator can be directly executed to reconstruct the adjacent face. Conversely, the Repair-Edge operator reconstructs the edge to make the unclosed common edges closed based on the geometrical configuration of the split edges. So we extract the interacting points on the common edge firstly, and then execute the corresponding operation according to the configuration of split edges.

                              
                                 •
                                 Case 1: The split edges are geometrically co-defined

Built the connecting edge of two split edges.

Set the new edge to be continuous curvature with the split edges.

Case 2: The split edges are topologically co-surfaced

Extend the split edges from the respective interacting points.

Set the extended edges to be continuous curvature with the respective split edges.

The Fill-Face operator is to build the adjacent face. The concrete steps are as follows.

                              
                                 Step 1:
                                 Fill the loop formed by the repaired edges and the common convex edges to build a face.

Set the geometry type of the new face to be the same as the split face.


                           Fig. 17 shows the building of the repaired edges e and the adjacent face f, where in Fig. 17a the split edges are co-defined, and in Fig. 17b the split edges are co-surfaced.

The unused common convex edge suggests that the BIR's face have not completely been repaired. Therefore, after performing the Patch method, we judge whether there are unused common edges based on the following criteria:

                              
                                 •
                                 A common convex edge having only one adjacent face of BIR is an unused edge.

The Sweep method is to handle the unused common edge, and the steps are as follows.

                              
                                 Step 1:
                                 Extend the split edges being coplanar with the unused common edge from the interacting points.

Build the swept face with the unused common edge as silhouette and the extended edges as the leading curves.

Split the swept faces with each other and retain the inside partitions.

The method analysis is given in Fig. 19b.

There are cutting-into points of one region on the common edges in Fig. 17. But sometimes there are cutting-into points of two regions on the common edge. In Fig. 18
                           b, v
                           1–v
                           2 are the cutting-into points of R
                           1, and so R
                           1 is IR, R
                           2 is BIR; in Fig. 18c, v
                           3 is the cutting-into point of R
                           2, and so R
                           2 is IR, 
                           R
                           1 is BIR. In this case, two groups of the adjacent faces need to be built.


                           Fig. 19
                           
                           
                            shows the building of two groups of adjacent faces. For BIR R
                           2, its split edges e
                           1 and e
                           2, e
                           2 and e
                           3 are respectively co-surfaced, and the adjacent faces f
                           1 and f
                           2 are built by executing the Patch method, as shown in Fig. 19a. For the BIR R
                           1, after the adjacent face f
                           1 is built with the Patch method, the edges e4
                            and e5
                            are unused. So the Sweep method is executed to build the adjacent faces f
                           2 and f
                           3, as shown Fig. 19b.

There is a bridge face on the bridge-interacting regions. So the decomposition includes both the reconstruction of the adjacent face and the partition of the bridge face, the associated flowchart is shown in Fig. 20.

There may be one single or a pair of interacting points on the bridge face of the bridge-interacting regions, as shown in Fig. 21a and b.

The methods for the two cases are different. So we extract interacting points on the bridge face firstly, and then judge whether there is a pair of interacting points based on the following criteria:

                              
                                 •
                                 Two interacting points having co-defined concave edges are a pair.

Based on whether the interacting points are in pair, the methods of Patch and Sweep are selectively performed. The associated flowchart is shown in Fig. 22.
                        

In this case, there are two pairs of co-defined edges. These edges are formed by the wedging of cutter, and so the region to which two pairs of edges belong is BIR, the other is IR. The edges are the split edges. For example, in Fig. 23, e
                              1 and e
                              2 are a pair of split edges, and e
                              3 and e
                              4 are another pair.

The split edges contain the boundary information of adjacent face to be built, the Patch method is as follows.

                                 
                                    Step 1:
                                    Build the connecting edges of the co-defined split edges.

Set two new edges to be continuous curvature with their respective split edges.

Fill the loop formed by the new edges and the common convex edges to build a face.

Set the geometry type of the new face to be the same as the split face.


                              Fig. 24
                              
                              
                              
                              
                              
                              
                              
                               shows the performance of the above steps, where e
                              5 and e
                              6 are the connecting edges, and f is the adjacent face.

For the bridge-interacting region only having a single interacting point, there are only two split edges. The Sweep method is as follows.

                                 
                                    Step 1:
                                    Extend the two coplanar split edges.

Build the swept face with the convex edge of the interacting point as silhouette and the extended edges as the leading curves.

Set the geometry type of the new face the same as the split face.


                              Fig. 25 shows the execution of above steps, where e
                              1 and e
                              2 are the split edges of BIR, e
                              3 and e
                              4 are their extended edges, and f is the adjacent face built.

Because such bridge-interacting regions have two groups of coplanar split edges, there are two choices for decomposition directions. To promise the electrode rigidity, the volumetric feature to be generated cannot be too thin. To evaluate the rigidity of volumetric feature, we take the ratio of the width and the length of the cross sectional profile of the pre-decomposed region as the rigidity coefficient (RC). The calculation steps are as follows.

                                 
                                    Step 1:
                                    Project the faces of decomposed region except the bridge face onto the plane parallel to the bridge face.

Create the smallest quadrangle encasing box of the projection.

Calculate RC = w/l, where w is the width of the box, l is the length of the box.


                              Fig. 26 shows the calculation of the RC of the pre-decomposed region R
                              1 with the edge e
                              1 as the leading directions, where P is the projection of the faces f
                              1–f
                              3, B is the smallest quadrangle encasing box.

To generate the volumetric feature with better rigidity, we firstly calculate the RC of all pre-decomposed regions in two leading directions, and then choose the adjacent concave edge, whose RC has no extreme value, as leading direction. This way avoids the volumetric feature to be too thin.


                              Fig. 27 shows two groups of pre-decomposed regions. In Fig. 27b, as the RCs contain the extreme value in two groups of RCs, the decomposition causes the volume feature of region R
                              1 to be too thin. So the decomposition in Fig. 27a is better.

The partition of bridge face is relatively simple, namely, by cutting the bridge face with the reconstructed adjacent face f, the bridge face is partitioned into the separate regions. Fig. 28a shows the region with the reconstructed adjacent face, and Fig. 28b shows the two decomposed isolated regions.

In this section, the method of Generate is designed to generate the volumetric feature. The concrete steps are as follows.

                        
                           Step 1:
                           Stitch the reconstructed faces and original faces together to obtain a closed surface.

Solidify the closed surface to generate the volumetric feature.


                     Fig. 29 shows
                      an example of generating volumetric feature, where the region R
                     1 is adjacent-interacting with R
                     2, as shown in Fig. 29a. As the cutting-into edges of R
                     1 are all capped by the adjacent face f, as shown in Fig. 29b, the volumetric feature is built by executing the above steps, as shown in Fig. 29c.

However, if the cutting-into edges have not been completely capped, the above method cannot be executed. Therefore, we first judge whether there are the uncapped cutting-into edges based on the following criteria before executing the Generate method:

                        
                           •
                           A cutting-into edge having only one adjacent regional face is an uncapped cutting-into edge.

The uncapped cutting-into edges exist between the non-uncut region and the uncut region. As is same with the common edges of the adjacent-interacting regions, the uncapped cutting-into edges are still classified into two cases: coplanar and non-coplanar. So if there are uncapped cutting-into edges, then the Patch method in Section 6.1.1 is again executed to build the adjacent face between the uncut region and the non-uncut region.

The above analysis is represented by the flowchart in Fig. 30.
                  


                     Fig. 31 shows two examples of generating volumetric features. In Fig. 31a, all the uncapped cutting-into edges ei
                      are coplanar, while in Fig. 31b the uncapped cutting-into edges ei
                      are non-coplanar.

Using a 2.2 GHz i3-2330M CPU with 4G RAM, the proposed approach was implemented by using “Visual Studio 2005” integrated with the “CAA and RADE” toolkit for the application development of CATIA v5 R21. All of the tested samples come from industry.

Experiment 1 was performed for the purpose of validating the correctness of each stage of our approach.

This example is a mold of phone rear cabinet. The input model is shown in Fig. 32a. The
                         result of regional recognition is shown in Fig. 32b, where there are 11 uncut regions. The regions R
                        1–R
                        3 and R
                        5–R
                        8 are the isolated regions, and others are the interacting regions. The analysis of interacting region decomposition is shown in Fig. 32c–e. In Fig. 32c, e
                        1–e
                        3 are the common convex edges of R
                        4 and one milling region, and so R
                        4 is adjacent-interacting with the milling region. The common edges are unclosed, and so the operator Edge-Repair is executed. The split edges e
                        4 and e
                        5 are geometrically co-defined, and so the connecting edge e
                        6 is built. And then the adjacent face is reconstructed by executing the operator Fill-Face. In Fig. 32d, e
                        1–e
                        3 are the common convex edges of R
                        10 and R
                        11, and so R
                        10 and R
                        11 are adjacent-interacting. The procession of their decomposition is similar with R
                        4. Fig. 32e shows the decomposition of bridge-interacting regions. The bridge face f is shared by R
                        9 and one milling region, and so R
                        9 is bridge-interacting with the milling region. There is a pair of interacting points, v
                        1 and v
                        2, on face f, and so the adjacent face is rebuilt after the connecting edges e
                        1 and e
                        2 are built. Finally, the bridge face is partitioned into the two separate regions by cutting the bridge face with the reconstructed adjacent face.

Before generating the volumetric feature, the adjacent face between the uncut region and non-uncut region is rebuilt. Then the original face and reconstructed face are stitched together to obtain closed surfaces (rendered in yellow). Finally, these closed surfaces are solidified to generate the volumetric feature (rendered in red), as shown in Fig. 32f.

Experiment 2 demonstrated the implemented system. The whole system is divided into three modules: Region-Recognition, Region-Decomposition, and Volume-Generation. The CAD models of volumetric features are generated with only little user intervention, namely, the input of sweeping edges length and the button click. The generated CAD model of volumetric feature can be used for the shape design of electrodes.

The first example is a mold of phone front panel. There are 8 uncut regions. R
                        2–R
                        4 are bridge-interacting with milling regions, and R
                        7 is adjacent-interacting with R
                        8, as shown with wireframe views in Fig. 33a. The other regions R
                        1, R
                        5 and R
                        6 are isolated regions. After decomposing the region, the volumetric features are generated by clicking the Generate button. Fig. 33b shows the CAD models of volumetric features translated along z axis.

The second example is a mold of distributor box. There are 13 uncut regions. There exist three groups of bridge-interacting regions, as shown with wireframe views in Fig. 34
                        a. The other regions R
                        7–R
                        13 are isolated regions. After decomposing the region, the volumetric features are generated by clicking the Generate button. Fig. 34b shows the CAD models of volumetric features translated along z axis.

The parameters of generated volumetric features are extracted and saved by clicking the Measure button on the dialog. The relevant information of position and volume can be used for the parametric design of electrodes and the optimization analysis of processing parameters. The volumetric features are sorted by the x value, and their details are stored in .TXT file, as shown in Fig. 35.
                        
                     

The complexity of the above models and the execution time of each stage are listed in Table 1
                        , where NF, NE and NV indicate the number of faces, edges, vertices in the model, TRR, TDR, and TVG respectively indicate the time of the recognition, decomposition of uncut regions, and the volume generation, NVF indicates the number of volumetric features.

The experimental results suggest that our approach can generate the volumetric features of uncut regions in several seconds. Besides, the following conclusions can be drawn from the experiments.

                           
                              1
                              The CAD model of volumetric feature can be created with only little user interaction. The CAD model can be used for the shape design of electrodes.

The related parameters of volume feature are extracted, and these parameters can be used for the parametric design of electrodes and the setting of processing parameters.

@&#CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK@&#

EDM is the only effective technology for uncut regions. The volumetric feature promotes the CAD/CAM integration of EDM, such as the electrode design and the processing optimization. In this research, a novel method has been proposed to generate volumetric features for orthogonal or non-orthogonal EDM region. The innovation in our work is concluded as follows.

                        
                           1.
                           According to the characteristics of EDM technology, the hint feature points of uncut region are defined and classified into three types: internal sharp points, cutting-into points and interacting points. Based on this, a set of heuristic rules are proposed to rapidly identify the uncut region and its types.

Through executing various geometric reasoning-based algorithms, the interacting regions are decomposed into isolated regions so as to ensure the machinability of electrodes designed on the basis of the generated volumetric features.

The CAD models of feature volumes and their relevant parameters are extracted to promote the CAD/CAM integration of EDM.

However, our future work can further focus on the following two aspects.

                        
                           1.
                           The rapid design of single electrode tool.

The optimal combination of multiple electrode tools.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This work was supported by Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61472118); Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province of China (No. BK20141158) and Science and Technology Program of Jiangsu Province of China (No. BE2014048); Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (No. 2013B21714).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

