@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Flexible testing platform for employment of RFID-enabled multi-agent system on flexible assembly line

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           The objective of this study is to examine the potential enhancement of flexible assembly line performance through the use of a radio-frequency-identification-enabled multi-agent scheduling and control system (RFID-enabled MASCS).


                        
                        
                           
                           A novel simulation test platform is developed for the examination of an RFID-enabled MASCS in a flexible assembly line, and several system performance measures are considered in the simulation test platform.


                        
                        
                           
                           The developed simulation test platform is based on a hybrid agent (HA) and uses an existing RFID-enabled MASCS architecture.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

RFID technology

Flexible assembly line (FAL)

Multi-agent system (MAS)

Production scheduling and control

Simulation test platform

Intelligent Manufacturing system

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The success of a flexible assembly line (FAL) depends on efficacious scheduling and control architecture. However, the scheduling and control architectures currently employed in FALs lack the flexibility and reconfiguration capacity to manage disturbances when they occur. Consequently, the system performance rapidly degrades when the system operation is interrupted. The objective of this study is to examine the potential enhancement of FAL performance through the use of a radio-frequency-identification-enabled multi-agent scheduling and control system (RFID-enabled MASCS). A simulation test platform is developed for the examination of an RFID-enabled MASCS in a FAL, and several system performance measures are considered in the simulation test platform. The results indicate that the RFID-enabled MASCS can increase the uptime productivity and production rate of a FAL. A real case-study test is performed, and a 22% decrease in lead time along with significant improvements in other system performance indicators are observed, especially when a series of disturbances occur within the examined assembly machine.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

In the current era of agile manufacturing, lean manufacturing, intelligent manufacturing worldwide competitiveness and changing client prerequisites underscore the importance of effective planning, scheduling, and control systems [1]. However, as competition becomes increasingly fierce and the need for differentiated and singular product introductions increase, the style of production remains an area in which limited options exist. Producers must change their production systems to adapt to the changes occurring in manufacturing. Effective use of these new systems and machines requires effective scheduling and control systems because the control systems used have a direct influence on the productivity of manufacturing systems [2]. Effective scheduling and control architecture increase the flexibility and reconfiguration possibilities of manufacturing systems [3].

A Flexible Assembly Line (FAL) is a unidirectional flow system consisting of a sequence of assembly stations and storage or loading/unloading (L/U) station, coordinated by an automated material handling system. Each station contains assembly robots with limited workspace available for component feeders and gripper magazines. In FAL, various types of products are assembled concurrently. Where, the base part of a product is loaded on a pallet and enters the assembly line at the L/U station. Then, the pallet is carried by a conveyor or an automated guided vehicle through a sequence of assembly stations; modules are assembled and combined with the base part. The product may bypass some stations. When all the required components are assembled and combined with the base part, the product is conveyed back to the L/U station, and the completed product leaves the system [4].

The possible consequences of the occurrence of disturbances in a flexible assembly line (FAL) are the degradation of system productivity and the loss of business opportunities, which are crucial for competitiveness [5]. Traditional FAL are not designed to possess responsiveness and re-configuration capability, as they are built upon centralized and hierarchical control structures. These structures exhibit good production optimization but weak response to change, because of their rigidity [6]. Usually, in these paradigms, system shutdown is required when a failure occurs [7]. Therefore, the current challenge is to develop innovative manufacturing scheduling and control systems that respond quickly to changes and production fluctuations, without stopping, re-programming, or re-starting of the process [4,8].

In addition to efficiency and productivity, major concerns related to FALs are their lack of flexibility, insufficient agility to address a variety of manufacturing needs, and low-volume production. Furthermore, these systems do not have the ability to be reconfigured in real-time in response to unanticipated events. Adaptability to change and the ability to react in a dynamic fashion to disturbances are highly desirable in competitive manufacturing environments [9,10].The problems related to scheduling and control in FALs are characterized as follows:

                        
                           •
                           Lack of distribution: an FAL is controlled by a central architecture that is located on a host computer; thus, all decisions are made by this control unit.

Lack of reactivity: FALs are typically unable to manage a set of simultaneous events that must be addressed (e.g., equipment breakdowns, supply problems, environmental impacts).

Lack of autonomous control systems for individual stations.

No gathering of real-time data for use in real-time reconfiguration and no part-selection flexibility.

Weak response to change as a result of control structure rigidity.

To address the above FAL problems, we developed a simulation test platform for the employment of a radio-frequency-identification-enabled multi-agent scheduling and control system (RFID-enabled MASCS). The developed simulation test platform is based on a hybrid agent (HA) and uses an existing RFID-enabled MASCS architecture, which has been developed by the authors in previous studies [10–13]. The HA realizes simultaneous communication between the soft agents, along with communication with other hardware and low-level external software. Communication between the agents and simulation test platform is realized via the extensible markup language (XML). Color Petri Nets (CPN) Tools 4.0 is used as the shop-floor modeling software, as this tool has the ability to communicate with other software via XML. The basic feature of the simulation test platform developed in this study is that it supports the investigation of any control architecture when applied to a discrete manufacturing system. The objective of this research is to investigate whether the performance of an FAL can be improved through the implementation of RFID-enabled MASCS.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. An overview of related literature is presented in the next section, which is followed by a section describing the RFID-enabled MASCS for FAL. The simulation test platform is described in the fourth section, which is followed by the details and results of a related case study. Finally, the conclusions drawn from the results of the study are given.

@&#LITERATURE REVIEW@&#

A FAL consists of highly flexible stations connected by material handling systems. Each station consists of an assembly robot and machines for part assembly. The stations are complex, stochastic environments that require the development of innovative and intelligent control architectures that support flexibility, agility, and re-configurability [7–9,14]. Commonly, a centralized control system (CCS) is used for scheduling and process planning proposes in FAL [3]. Controllers, such as those used for the stations, cells, and factories, are hierarchically connected by a host computer in a centralized fashion. All the decisions related to the manufacturing process are made by the host computer. This control architecture is effective when the product variety is low and when the product volume does not vary significantly [6–9]. However, this control method is not sufficiently flexible or agile for high-variety low-volume production. Furthermore, this approach does not allow the system to reconfigure in the event of an unanticipated event. In recent years, many researchers have made efforts to improve the flexibility and re-configuration capacity of FALs [10]. In particular, the multi-agent system (MAS) has been welcomed by many authors as a new technology for improving the flexibility, agility, and re-configurability of FALs.

The MAS is a manifestation of a distributed artificial intelligence (DAI) system comprised of a collection of autonomous agents [15]. The agents in the MAS interact and collaborate to achieve common objectives while each agent simultaneously pursues individual objectives [16]. MAS technology can be used to develop manufacturing scheduling and control systems that meet the requirements of reconfigurable and agile manufacturing. Multi-agent and holonic approaches are promising methods for increasing productivity and profitability by enhancing shop floor flexibility [17]. MASs have been widely applied in manufacturing applications because of their flexibility, re-configurability, and scalability [18]. The main purpose of the agents in these systems is to achieve global objectives from local agent solutions. The use of agents enriches the reliability and flexibility of planning and scheduling functions in dynamic manufacturing systems, and the agent structure facilitates re-configurability in response to changes. The agents also contribute a fault tolerance capability to the manufacturing environment, which is achieved through resource reallocation. Previous studies on this subject have primarily focused on departing from traditional centralized system forms and incorporating multiple decision makers that can be arranged via various coordination systems [19].

Recent developments have promoted rounding out of the MAS with RFID. MAS and RFID form bi-level twinned systems, overcoming each other's shortcomings [8]. MAS primarily concentrates on the management of shop-floor operations such as scheduling, as well as execution and control. It also informs shop-floor supervisors of equipment status, material delivery, consumption, and manufacturing progress in a timely manner [20]. As the majority of items and their statuses on manufacturing shop floors must be tracked, data collection capability is a significant issue when companies consider MAS implementation. Commonly used data collection systems (e.g., barcodes) dominate manufacturing sites such as shop floors and warehouses. As a result, field data are often incomplete, inaccurate, and out of date. These systems force the scheduling system to manually create plans and schedules and cannot address disturbances efficiently and effectively. Furthermore, the visibility and traceability of manufacturing items such as works in progress (WIPs) are so weak that high WIP inventory levels are common. The application of RFID as a sensing technology for auto identification of machines and WIPs provides a basis for the realization of more flexible and agile systems for MAS utilizing real-time information.

In the past decade, a number of techniques have been developed and are being used in industry to achieve automatic identification, including magnetic strips, optical character recognition (OCR), barcodes, two-dimensional (2D) barcodes, biometrics, and RFID tags. RFID technology has attracted considerable attention because of its unique characteristics, such as long-distance contact, programmability, storage capacity, and flexibility [21]. RFID hardware is waterproof, antimagnetic, and temperature resistant. These unique characteristics make RFID technology well suited to industrial applications [22]. An RFID system contains three components: tags, readers, and antennas. Data are collected on the tag, while the antennas read data from and/or write data to the tag and send the data to the reader. The reader then decodes the data and communicates them to a computer for treatment. Fig. 1 shows an RFID technology sequential diagram.

RFID technology has been used in many areas, including postal
                      tracking, document tracking, baggage tracking, fare collection, library information systems, material handling, warehouse management, animal identification, and waste management. In the area of manufacturing control, RFID technology is used to enhance the intelligence and performance of manufacturing control systems [23].

Recently, soft test platforms have been employed for MAS implementations. These platforms provide an environment for cooperation and coordination between agents but in cases where the agent is required to link with physical objects (e.g., a manufacturing factory), a soft interface is required in order to connect the agents to the manufacturing activities [24]. Hence, specific simulation test platforms and tools have been developed for examination of the MAS for industrial applications, as reported in the literature [24,25]. The majority of the MAS testing in industrial applications has been conducted using purely conventional discrete-event simulation tools, and has been limited to toy-shop cases. The animation capabilities of the existing simulation tools surveyed by the authors of these studies have aided understanding of the process characteristics. However, none of these tools can provide the detailed analysis necessary for accurate system adoption. That is, they simply fail to meet the examining requirements specific to the equipment and physical configuration [25]. Petri nets (PN) can be used for the modeling of manufacturing systems, as these tools have the capability to reflect all the details of these systems. Therefore, it appears that the construction of a link between a PN model of a system on one hand and a MAS soft platform on the other will result in a suitable and flexible testing platform for the examination of MAS paradigm performance in any real industrial case.

In general, the objective of scheduling is to find a way to assign and sequence the use of limited resources, such that the production constraints are satisfied and the production costs are minimized. To achieve this goal, RFID-enabled MASCS architecture has been developed by the authors and implemented in an educational lab [11–14]. The RFID-enabled MASCS falls under the physical decomposition category, where agents represent the software of the machines and tools in the FAL. Note that all the real-time data related to the WIP and machines used in this study were recorded using RFID technology.

The scheduling and control architecture of the shop was developed based on adaptive RFID-enabled MASCS, with the aim of improving the agility, flexibility, and re-configurability of the system [26]. The architecture development was comprised of four phases, namely, system requirements, design and development, verification, and implementation. The developed RFID-enabled MASCS is implemented as a network of soft agents that interact with each other and with the system actors. These agents are categorized as shop management agents, agent managers, shop monitoring and command agents, station control agents, station monitoring agents, agent machine interfaces, and manufacturing resource agents. In addition to the agents comprising the architecture, two groups of databases also exist: shop and station databases. Furthermore, ontology (a capability-based knowledge model) is used to establish appropriate inter-agent communication. The RFID-enabled MASCS system uses simple scheduling algorithms embedded in distributed entities, supported by adaptive and dynamic mechanisms, which improve the system performance in industrial scenarios. That is, the need for fast scheduling solutions is satisfied. The agents in RFID-enabled MASCS can be classified into three main categories: shop-level, database, and station-level agents. The overall architecture of this system is shown in Fig. 2.
                  

The shop-level agents category comprises shop management agents, shop monitoring and command agents, and agent managers. A shop management agent is responsible for helping a shop manager to define a new product to be manufactured by the system. Thus, they help to specify the initial manufacturing parameters and decompose the product capabilities. The shop management agents utilize a user interface to assist the shop manager in making any changes that become necessary as the plan becomes more detailed, and when higher levels of the plan require updating. An agent manager is responsible for controlling the utilization and availability of all agents by maintaining an accurate, complete, and timely list of all active agents. This list allows the agents of the system to cooperate and communicate with each other. A shop monitoring and command agent is responsible for obtaining and displaying the real-time states of raw materials, in-process products, and finished products, as well as the statuses of the stations. In addition, a shop monitoring and command agent serves as a port for incoming commands from the shop supervisor. These are manually input to the system in the case of any unanticipated events and during new-product setup.

There are three types of database agents: ontology, shop-database, and scheduling agents. The definition of an ontology agent is based on a capability-based knowledge model. These agents facilitate communication between the database agents. A detailed discussion of the used of ontology can be found in Refs [27–29].

The station-level agents are the station control agents, station monitoring agents, agent-machine interfaces, station database agents, and manufacturing resource agents. Station control agents select suitable capabilities from the product capability list for a given station and identify the capabilities required of basic agents for a particular job. In addition, a station control agent can update status data in the station database regularly and can send control instructions to the shop database. The information that reflects the manufacturing state at a given station is displayed by station monitoring agents, and each station's process history is stored in the station database. The manufacturing resource agent group comprises specific manufacturing components, such as robots, conveyors, and machinery, that encapsulate all the capabilities, interaction behaviors (collective capabilities), and internal statuses of these types of physical components. The agent-machine interface is directly connected to the physical controller. It acts as a type of device driver for the manufacturing resource agent. One agent-machine interface is required for each controller. The agent-machine interface is the agent wrapper of a manufacturing component that exports the functionalities existing in its physical controller (proxy).

All the agents are connected by a local network, through which they communicate via an asynchronous message-passing system. For expediency, the shop management agent and agent manager run on an application server; the ontology operates on a data server that is also responsible for maintaining the shop database, the station control agent, the station monitoring agent, the manufacturing resource agent, and the agent-machine interface; and the station database operates on the station's personal computer.

FAL involves a significant number of different machines, which are associated with various robots and also with material-handling and storage systems with different controllers. Analyzing this type of system in a real factory environment is infeasible, because of the long period of time that would be required for the development of resources for each individual machine. It is also very difficult to reproduce the conditions of multiple experimental tests when attempting to compare alternative scheduling systems [25]. One means of overcoming this problem is to use a simulation test platform that behaves like a real system. As regards the control of a real system, connection to a simulation test platform is indistinguishable from connection to a real system.

An integrated simulation test system, which is referred to herein as the “simulation test platform,” was developed in this study, in order to evaluate the potential benefits of employing RFID-enabled MASCS in FAL. Further, we defined and integrated a new HA agent within our previously developed RFID-enabled MASCS framework. The HA agent has the capability to communicate with other external agents, and can also send and receive data from other software using XML. Fig. 3 illustrates the proposed RFID-enabled MAS architecture with added HA.

The HA is a soft agent capable of moving throughout a network, interacting with foreign hosts, gathering information on behalf of the user, and returning to the user after performing an assigned task within the architecture. Additionally, the HA can manage the tremendous amount of information that is available within the system networks. The characteristics of the HA include: (a) the ability to communicate with other agents in real-time; (b) the ability to understand the decisions made by the RFID-enabled MASCS; and (c) the ability to communicate with other external software via XML. Fig. 4
                     
                      shows a sequence diagram illustrating the initiation of a new task in the system and also the agent interactions. Examination of the manner in which new tasks are initiated by the user also demonstrates how decisions are made through the RFID-enabled MASCS.

As shown in Fig. 4, a new task is sent to the HA via an XML file distributed through external software. The HA then communicates with the shop-level agents. As stated previously, the shop-level agent category comprises three agent types: the shop monitoring agents, shop monitoring and control agents, and agent management. A shop-level agent sends a request for new data to a database agent, who responds to this request. If the answer is positive, the shop-level agent sends a further request to the station agents checking for availability and the possibility of undertaking a new job. If the answer to this request is positive, the shop-level agent accepts this job, sends a comment to the database agents, and the database agents send the requirement data to the station agents. The station agent performs its duty via communication between sub-agents.

The developed simulation test platform is illustrated in Fig. 5. This platform contains two main modules:

                        
                           (a)
                           Hardware simulation agent module: This belongs to the CPN model of the system and is used to analyze the FAL behavior.

RFID-enabled MASCS with added HA module, which is related to the scheduling and control architecture of the system.

The RFID-enabled MASCS with added HA was employed to implement RFID-enabled MAS. The hardware simulation characterized the physical actions that occur in the manufacturing environment. The communication model in the CPN tool was established, facilitating real-time communication among the players. The XML code for integration of the hardware simulation and RFID-enabled MASCS with added HA is shown in Table 1
                     
                     .

A system incorporating each agent thread that runs and interacts with the components of the simulation, with the aid of a communication module, was developed in Java; this is the multi-agent control part of the system. The RFID-enabled MASCS with added HA was developed in the Java agent development (JADE) framework. Registration services, the sending/receiving of ACL messages, remote management, and the addition of features that characterize the precise behavior of each agent class are a number of basic agent-based software system functionalities that are delivered by the JADE platform. To permit the implementation of numerous actions in parallel, every agent in the system uses multi-threaded programming based on the JADE framework. Operation status, machinery failure, order influx, order type, and other resource information are all provided in messages from the simulation part to the multi-agent control. Actions are taken against any interruptions that occur within the simulation part, which is responsible for sending the control signals to the simulation component for the implementation of defined schedules. To promote seamless transfer between the two processes in a multithreaded program construction, which transmits status update messages from the simulation along with control messages within the control framework, a custom, but widely recyclable, modeling building block was designed.

The simulation test platform was employed for the case of a medium-sized FAL in a gas-oven factory, in order to demonstrate the effects of RFID-enabled MASCS on the system performance. The performance extracted from the RFID-enabled MASCS was compared with that of a conventional production control system in the same factory. A medium-sized gas-oven factory was considered, where oven parts for a variety of products are assembled. The main products output by this factory are ovens for home use, with different sizes and features. The layout of the factory FAL is illustrated in Fig. 6.
                  

The shop contains a final assembly machine (FAM), a SCORBOT-ER 10 robot, two multiprocessor machines (M1 and M2), two storage centers, and two conveyors for transporting parts from storage to M1 and M2. PN was used to model the FAL.

PN is a mathematical and graphical language for the design, specification, simulation, and verification of discrete event systems [30]. CPN, which is a backward-compatible extension of PN, can overcome the weaknesses of PN as regards description of complex systems. A CPN model, like a PN model, consists of four components: place, transition, direction, and token. A CPN model can achieve a compact representation of a system by attaching a data value, i.e., a color, to each token [31]. CPN, and especially hierarchical CPN, has primarily been used to model and analyze large systems, such as automated manufacturing systems. In this case study, a top-down approach was used for the modeling: first, the CPN model of the stations was extracted; second, using place negotiation, all of the CPN model stations were integrated as shops; third, the negotiation model of the system was extracted; and finally, the CPN model of the RFID gates was developed. Through the place negotiation, the CPN model of the system was integrated with the RFID-enabled MASCS using the HA.

CPN models were created for all stations by taking the capabilities of the real system into consideration. Fig. 7
                         shows the CPN model of a multi-process machine and the robot loading part. To model the stations and shops of the FAL, process-oriented PNs (POPNs) are used [32]. In this method, operation places are used to describe the operation sequences of every part to be processed in the system, and resource places are used to describe the resource requirements for all the operations. To model the FAL using POPN, the following interpretations of places, transitions, and tokens are employed: (a) A place (circle) represents a resource or job-order status, or an operation; (b) If a place represents a resource status, the presence (absence) of a token (dot) indicates that the resource is available (unavailable); and (c) A transition (rectangle) represents either the start or completion of an event or operation process. For this purpose, all the activities and resources required for a product are first identified. Second, precedence relations based on process plans are established so as to order all the activities. Third, a place is created and labeled for each activity in order, so as to represent the status of that activity. A transition (start activity) is added with an output arc(s) to the appropriate place(s), and a transition (stop activity)is added with an input arc(s) from the activity place(s). Fourth, for each product item, a place is created and labeled, which represents the job-order status. This place has an output arc(s) to the start transition(s) of the first activity of the item and an input arc(s) from the stop transition(s) of the last activity of the item. The tokens in this place indicate the number of job orders required for the item to be performed in the system. Fifth, if a place has not already been created for each activity in order, one is established for each resource. The places must be created and marked available for the activity to be initiated. Finally, the initial marking for the system is specified [33].

Modeling the FAL described in the case study using a dedicated CPN results in a concise model. The system model describes the resources and the properties that are independent of the work plans. Fig. 8
                         shows the top layer of the hierarchical model of the assembly line structure. Each of the so-called substitution transitions is refined by a subpage that describes the behavior of a machine or a conveyor in more detail. In this model, the places labeled N realize station integrations. Also, these places act as data communication gates (B to B using XML codes) with RFID-enabled MASCS.

To construct negotiation protocols for the agents involved in the FAL, we first considered one station control agent and the number of resource agents competing to execute the order. In this study, it is assumed that the set of candidate resource agents is never empty for all the orders entering the system. It is also assumed that any candidate resource agent can propose a time window for the resource for order execution. Note that the objective of the study is to propose a negotiation protocol such that a negotiation failure never occurs. Taking these negotiation requirements into account, a negotiation model for the system control agents was proposed (see Fig. 9
                        ).

RIFD technology is used to track and trace WIPs instead of traditional sensor technology, because of the unique capabilities of this technology. Fig. 10
                         shows the sensor-level CPN flow control module of the RFID device. Two tasks performed by RFID technology are reading and writing commands on RFID tags.

Experiments were conducted by considering two different scenarios: (a) no disturbances and a well-functioning system, and (b) a 15% probability of failure occurring in M1. The probability distribution for the failure time was regarded as an exponential distribution with a rate of 25. A Weibull distribution with a total availability of 85% was used for the repair time, with the mean repair time being taken as 60 min. No setup time was considered, and it was assumed that negotiation failure would never occur. The transporting operations were performed by robot and conveyor, and orders were queued in order of arrival. Each transport action required 0.78 min. For each part, the processing time at M1 and M2 was 4.5 min, and the FAM processing time for the final product was 2.8 min. Each individual book of orders comprised the production of four components: a body, two handles, and a cover. For this purpose, the body was first placed in either M1 or M2, where handles were assembled. Then, the body was transferred to the FAM, the cover was sent to the sub-assembly, and the final product was transferred to storage by a robot. The tests considered 10,000 working minutes. The adopted time unit was 1/100th of a minute, as in the standard time data provided. Using the Welch method [34], a warm-up period of 1500 min was used to fill the machine queues and to obtain steady-state results. Overall, 25 replication runs were performed for each model and for each test case.

Performance indicators can be classified as qualitative and quantitative. The quantitative indicators considered are based on various production performance measures, such as the lead time and throughput [2]. The vital quantitative indicators that must be considered in lean production are the average buffer levels of the system [34]. In the interests of simplicity, no buffer was considered in the case study; therefore, this indicator is neglected here. Another variable of interest in this paper is the system output variability, which can be measured from the coefficient of variation (CV) of the production output per unit time [35,36]. The CV is an indicator that represents the ratio of the standard deviation to the mean, and it is a useful statistic for comparing the degree of variation between the conventional control system performance and the RFID-enabled MASCS, even if the means are drastically different from each other. The qualitative indicators are of a more subjective nature and reflect properties of the manufacturing control solution, such as agility and flexibility, that cannot be directly determined from the production data. In the simulation tests, the RFID-enabled MASCS was evaluated by analyzing the following performance indicators:

                           
                              •
                              Manufacturing lead time: The total time required to manufacture an item, including the order-preparation, queue, setup, process, move, inspection, and put-away times.

Throughput: An indicator of the productivity of a manufacturing system, defined here as the number of items produced per unit time.

Resource utilization: The percentage of processing time during a time interval.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

The experience gained from the simulation debugging and testing allowed us to draw some conclusions concerning the operation of the RFID-enabled MASCS in the FAL. The system was found to function robustly and in accordance with specifications for both normal operations and in the presence of disturbances. Furthermore, the re-configurability of the system was demonstrated by its accurate reactions to the introduction, removal, and modification of manufacturing components. In particular, it was shown that, when a resource control agent broke down or was removed from the system, other agents continued to find alternative solutions for executing the production plan. The average values, standard deviations (SD) and coefficient of variation (CV) for each test case are presented in Tables 2–4
                        
                        
                        .

Analysis of the SD of the utilization of all the resources indicates whether the manufacturing load is evenly distributed by all of the resources or concentrated in a few points. A high value for this parameter may indicate the existence of overloaded resources, and the need to re-allocate some of the load to other resources. Fig. 11
                         shows the results for the stable scenario, i.e., no unexpected disturbances, and also for a manufacturing scenario incorporating disturbances. In the stable scenario, the RFID-enabled MASCS yielded smaller values for the manufacturing lead time and higher values for the throughput, in comparison to those obtained using a conventional control system. The superior performance of the proposed system is the result of cooperation between autonomous entities, i.e., the employment of an agent manger that elaborates upon optimized production plans. To produce this optimal plan, the crosstalk algorithms used in the RFID-enabled MASCS follow the approach used in Ref. [37].

The first conclusion drawn from these simulation results is that the values of all the performance indicators decreased in the presence of disturbances. An analysis of the lead times and throughputs confirmed that the RFID-enabled MASCS nonetheless yielded superior performance than the centralized control system. Disturbances increase the entropy and unpredictability of a manufacturing control system. However, RFID-enabled MASCS implementation enhances the system performance by improving the system's ability to respond to disturbances, as illustrated by the smaller manufacturing lead-time values and higher throughput values, compared to the conventional scheduling control approach. The difference in performance between these two types of systems increases as the number and frequency of breakdowns increase. The results indicate that the proposed system can achieve good productivity even with increased resource interruptions, and that it can respond to resource breakdowns effectively. Analysis of the results confirms that use of the proposed RFID-enabled MASCS results in superior resource utilization to that provided by the conventional approach in both stable and unstable scenarios.

The design and development of a simulation test platform for the examination of RFID-enabled MASCS in a FAL was described in this paper. An RFID-enabled MASCS with an added HA was developed to supply a FAL, which was based on previously developed RFID-enabled MASCS architecture. The proposed simulation test platform architecture consisted of two modules, namely the hardware simulation agent and the RFID-enabled MASCS with added HA. CPN was used to model the hardware simulation module, while all shop-related information was exchanged by the RFID-enabled MASCS platform through the HA. A simulation performance assessment was performed in a real case study in order to investigate the effectiveness of the RFID-enabled MASCS approach in comparison with a conventional control platform. The simulation results show that the RFID-enabled MASCS outperforms the conventional centralized scheduling and control approach in practice. Furthermore, the proposed system exhibits superior performance in terms of run time, because the multi-agent scheduling system can take immediate action to reschedule tasks in the event of a high number of failures.

The merits and benefits of the developed simulation test platform in comparison to existing tools are as follows:

                        
                           •
                           This platform is a generic real-time simulation test platform that can be applied to not only FALs, but also any flexible manufacturing system (FMS), in order to examine the efficacy of upgrading a conventional centralized control system to the newly emerged RFID-enabled MASCS. The test platform tool can be used to validate the system performance improvements prior to any expensive investments.

The simulation test platform is flexible and modular. The modular architecture allows any other control approaches (e.g., holonic manufacturing) to be integrated.

Future work will involve the development of more user-friendly engineering tools for the modeling and simulation of multi-agent manufacturing control-system software tools and PN engineering platforms. Research towards the achievement of smooth migration from virtual scenarios to real systems will also be pursued.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENT@&#

The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments and feedbacks to enhance the quality of the paper. Also, we would like to gratefully acknowledged Prof Murat Caner Testik and Volkan Sonmez for constructive discussions through the revise of the paper.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

