@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Systematically linking qualitative elements of scenarios across levels, scales, and sectors

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Elements of multi-level qualitative scenarios have asymmetric interrelationships.


                        
                        
                           
                           Structures of interrelationships can be documented and partitioned into subsets.


                        
                        
                           
                           Analyses of subsets can systematically reconstitute a multi-level parent scenario.


                        
                        
                           
                           Internal consistency of multi-scale scenarios may be preserved with partitioning.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Cross-impact balance

Multi-scale scenarios

Socioeconomic scenarios

Shared socioeconomic pathways

Climate change

Global change

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  New scenarios for climate change research connect climate model results based on Representative Concentration Pathways to nested interpretations of Shared Socioeconomic Pathways. Socioeconomic drivers of emissions and determinants of impacts are now decoupled from climate model outputs. To retain scenario credibility, more internally consistent linking across scales must be achieved. This paper addresses this need, demonstrating a modification to cross impact balances (CIB), a method for systematically deriving qualitative socioeconomic scenarios. Traditionally CIB is performed with one cross-impact matrix. This poses limitations, as more than a few dozen scenario elements with sufficiently varied outcomes can become computationally infeasible to comprehensively explore. Through this paper, we introduce the concept of ‘linked CIB’, which takes the structure of judgements for how scenario elements interact to partition a single cross-impact matrix into multiple smaller matrices. Potentially, this enables analysis of large CIB matrices and ensures internally consistent linking of scenario elements across scales.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Scenarios are tools for analyzing plausible alternative future trajectories in a complex system in which there is considerable uncertainty of outcomes when determining future developments. Scenarios can provide scientifically defensible narratives that describe future developments based on major driving forces and their impacts. Scenarios are useful in creating a bridge between science and policy by exploring deeper implications for different decision paths (Zurek and Henrichs, 2007). The value of scenarios for this purpose has been recognized for decades if not longer (Aligica, 2004; Linstone and Turoff, 2011). In environmental change research, scenarios have informed a variety of assessments of the potential consequences of human activities on the environment (European Environment Agency, 2009). In these contexts, the demands for scenario detail, flexibility and consistency are high. Under traditional analytical approaches, the labour of validating socioeconomic scenarios is divided between qualitative narratives (stories) and quantitative models (simulation). This approach, which is known as “Story and Simulation”, or SAS (Alcamo, 2008), presumes that stories and simulations can mutually validate each other. A plausible story acts as a guide for assumptions that would be interesting to model, while a finished simulation is considered a demonstration of the internal consistency of a story. However, recent research has called into question this assumed relationship (Kok, 2009; Schweizer and Kriegler, 2012). Because quantitative models may be simplifications of stories (and vice versa), stories may also benefit from internal validation before they are handed off to modelling teams. Failing to do this can result in scenarios that overlook policy relevant risks (Schweizer and Kriegler, 2012) or become vulnerable to political manipulation (Girod and Flüeler, 2009). A tool that can validate the internal consistency of stories (or qualitative scenarios) is cross-impact balance analysis, or CIB (Weimer-Jehle, 2006). However, validating the internal consistency of a highly detailed story, such as one that is multi-scale (describing outcomes for a country within a region within a global context), would be intractable with traditional CIB. To address this problem, this paper presents a new method (so-called “linked CIB”) for assessing scenarios that are multi-scale so that localized versions of scenarios can be produced that are demonstrably internally consistent with the global version. This study presents an example of this new method in the context of the new Shared Socioeconomic Pathways framework for climate change research (O'Neill et al., 2014), which is discussed further in Section 2. To demonstrate the linked approach for CIB, in Section 3, the paper provides a step-by-step example for systematically partitioning the relationships among a multi-scale list of socioeconomic factors. In Section 4, a conceptual framework for interpreting bottom-up results of a linked CIB analysis is presented. Finally, in Section 5, the general promise of this analytical approach for multi-scale scenario analysis is discussed as well as potential limitations.

@&#BACKGROUND@&#

Since the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (Carpenter et al., 2005), there has been a growing body of literature for multi-level and multi-scale scenarios. Zurek and Henrichs (2007) wrote an influential methodological paper that distinguished ‘linked’ and ‘coupled’ multi-scale scenarios. Similar to them, we are interested in linked scenarios. Furthermore, they distinguished scenarios with ‘hard links’ (statistical or dynamical downscaling) from scenarios with ‘soft links’ (consistent, coherent, or comparable across scales). They explained that these links sit on a continuum, where the boundary conditions of ‘consistent’ soft links could be considered a relaxation of the requirements for hard links, while ‘comparable’ soft links are considerably more tenuous and approach resembling scenarios with no links at all. This terminology is useful, but through this study, we challenge the prevailing view on ‘consistent’ multi-scale scenarios. Of consistent linked scenarios, Zurek and Henrichs wrote:
                        The main scenario assumptions and the selection of driving forces and their trends are set to be consistent with each other in … scenario exercises [across scales]. Basically, the higher scale scenarios provide strict boundary conditions for lower scale scenarios. The scenarios thus also play out in similar ways at the different scales, their main assumptions on drivers and scenario logics are fully consistent [emphasis added]. Some of the concrete outcomes at the various scales may differ, as long as these deviations do not challenge the governing scenario logics and assumptions made (p. 1288).
                     
                  

A major limitation to this approach is that, for analytical tractability, rigidities are imposed for how the scenarios “play out” at different scales where such rigidities may not exist in reality. Moreover, realistic and important policy-relevant developments may be completely overlooked due to such rigid assumptions across scales. With the new cross-scale framework for scenarios in climate change research (Van Vuuren et al., 2014) elaborated below in Section 2.1, the issue of how to improve the quality of linked multi-scale scenarios becomes pressing (Hewitson et al., 2014). In the following subsections, we review the new cross-scale scenario framework for climate change research (the Shared Socioeconomic Pathways and the Scenario Matrix Architecture in Section 2.1), methodological advancements in scenario analysis that may better address new demands for multi-scale scenarios (cross-impact balances in Section 2.2), and analytical concepts that can serve as inspiration for handling intractably large numbers of scenarios (nested dissection in Section 2.3).

In climate change research, socioeconomic scenarios have always been part of a larger scenario framework (Girod et al., 2009). In the latest framework, socioeconomic scenarios are referred to as Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSPs; O'Neill et al., 2014), and they are to be combined with climate scenarios (Representative Concentration Pathways, or RCPs; Van Vuuren et al. (2011)) as well as international policy scenarios called Shared Policy Assumptions (SPAs; Kriegler et al. (2014)). These three dimensions (SSPs, RCPs, and SPAs) are to be combined within a Scenario Matrix Architecture (Van Vuuren et al., 2014), which can reveal different expected outcomes for the intersection of particular socioeconomic, climatic, and policy conditions. Such frameworks formalize interdisciplinary connections, namely changes in climate captured with earth systems models, evolution of the economy captured with integrated assessment models (Sarofim and Reilly, 2011), and environmental impacts explored with sector-specific impacts models (for example, see Warszawski et al., 2014) that may require policy responses. An example of a particular type of future within the Scenario Matrix Architecture that could be analyzed is SSP4-RCP6. This designation refers to a future where global socio-economic conditions fit the profile of SSP4, which is characterized by stratification across and within countries due to highly unequal investments in human and physical capital as well as clear disparities in economic opportunities and political power. Simultaneous to this, climatic conditions are those determined by RCP6, where global greenhouse gas concentrations are approximately 850 ppm CO2 eq. by 2100. This particular combination of outcomes may yield very different impacts compared to SSP5-RCP6, where the climatic conditions are the same but the socioeconomic conditions are quite different (SSP5, where globalization is a huge success, resulting in strong economic growth worldwide powered with fossil fuels as the dominant primary energy source. SSP5 is also a scenario with strong investments in human and physical capital, high social cohesion, and high faith in technological fixes to environmental problems).

As mentioned above in Section 1, integrated assessment models rely upon qualitative scenarios (narratives) for the specification of sets of plausible exogenous assumptions. In this paper, we focus on such qualitative scenarios that are multi-scale as well as methodological innovations that may better ensure their scientific credibility (Cash et al., 2003; Lloyd and Schweizer, 2014). For presenting this work through a simple example, we use three socioeconomic factors discussed explicitly in the SSPs: rate of technological change in the energy sector, GDP per capita, and educational attainment (Schweizer and O'Neill, 2014; O'Neill et al., 2015).

A notable feature of the SSPs is that they aim to be common socioeconomic scenarios for two research communities: those who focus on impact, adaptation and vulnerability and those who focus on integrated assessment modelling (O'Neill et al., 2014). This has resulted in the inclusion of socioeconomic factors that are determinants not only of greenhouse gas emissions (so-called “Challenges to Mitigation”) but also responses to a changing climate (so-called “Challenges to Adaptation”). In addition, it was recognized that the next generation of socioeconomic scenarios could strongly influence climate change research for at least the next 10–15 years, just as the A1, A2, B1, B2 scenarios have of the IPCC Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (Nakicenovic et al., 2000). For this reason, the SSP framework has been sensitive to the need to have flexible scenarios that can be elaborated and updated over time. The first version of the new SSPs (so-called “basic SSPs”) describes alternative socioeconomic trends aggregated at the global scale. It has been envisioned that more localized or sector-specific versions of the SSPs (so-called “extended SSPs”) will continue to be constructed as needed by members of the scientific community (Ebi et al., 2014; O'Neill et al., 2014).

The SSP framework has many promising developments, but an additional challenge for multi-scale socioeconomic scenarios is heterogeneous data availability. For data gaps that may be irreconcilable, this prevents ‘hard linking’ across scales through statistical or dynamical downscaling (Schweizer and Bee, 2013). Nevertheless it remains important for cross-scale scenarios with soft links to be realistic, as Wilbanks (2006) argued that the costs and benefits of adaptation are localized and unevenly distributed due to different environmental, socioeconomic, political, and technological conditions in different places. Failing to recognize this richness can lead to underestimates of impacts and costs both locally and for the global aggregate. Furthermore, the influences of some scenario drivers may be inherent to a specific scale or emergent from interactions across scales. Thus simple aggregation or analyses at one scale at a time may overlook important phenomena.

Finally, in recognition of the limitations of traditional scale-specific scenario analyses, multi-scale scenario analyses are truly coming to be ‘in demand’ in environmental change research. For instance, the Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security (CCAFS) developed food security scenarios with stakeholders at regional levels but also aims to link them to describe global socioeconomic scenarios with opportunities for policy intervention (Carey, 2014; Vervoort et al., 2014). Similar linking exercises for cross-scale scenario studies have also been performed for water (Kok et al., 2011) and energy (Trutnevyte et al., 2014).

New demands for more detailed and extensive scenarios will result in a greater variety of possible futures. Recent CCAFS scenarios mentioned previously (Carey, 2014) have also noted an appetite among stakeholders to move beyond the traditional 2 × 2 scenario logic matrix (Ogilvy and Schwartz, 2004; Wack, 1985) to consider multiple dimensions of uncertainty, each with more than two possible states. An appropriate method for systematically exploring qualitative scenarios with this level of complexity is cross-impact balance analysis (CIB; Weimer-Jehle, 2006). For as many scenario drivers (d) and driver states (s) as an analyst cares to explore (d > 2, s > 2), CIB can record all state-dependent interdependencies of driving factors in matrix form. Recent studies applying CIB analysis demonstrate its promise for scenario research in the context of climate change (Kemp-Benedict et al., 2014; Schweizer and Kriegler, 2012; Schweizer and O'Neill, 2014; Wachsmuth, 2014). CIB has also been applied in studies outside the climate change context such as for waste management (Meylan and Spoerri, 2014; Saner et al., 2011) and public health (Weimer-Jehle et al., 2012).

CIB uses numerical judgements from experts or stakeholders (obtained from workshops or literature review) for state-dependent influences between drivers to identify any scenarios that are internally consistent. In the CIB context, internally consistent scenarios are akin to scenarios describing long-term trends rather than short-term transitions (Von Reibnitz, 1988). Judgements for influences between drivers are recorded in a pairwise fashion using a cross-impact (CI) matrix (Fig. 1
                        ), where scenario factors are considered simultaneously as scenario drivers (the rows of the CI matrix) and as consequences or outcomes (the columns of the CI matrix). Thus the CI matrix is truly a cognitive map, which replicates a mental model of interdependencies among associated variables. Further detail on the methodology of CIB analysis can be found in Weimer-Jehle (2006, 2009).

Available CIB software can comprehensively investigate the internal consistency of up to 1010 possible scenarios (Weimer-Jehle, 2013). However, even this impressive capability is no match for adequately assessing the internal consistency of detailed, multi-scale SSPs. In a CIB study of the global “basic” SSPs, a parsimonious representation of the mandatory scenario elements (i.e. 13 scenario factors each with three possible states) resulted in 313 (nearly 1.6 million) possible scenarios. If one attempted to use the CIB algorithm to systematically derive a modest extension of the basic SSPs (including only three more scales with similar complexity, such as at the continental-scale, national, and sub-national scales, with socioeconomic factors for a particular place), this would generate an intractably large space of scenario possibilities (352, or approximately 6.5 septillion (1024) scenarios).
                           1
                        
                        
                           1
                           Septillions of scenarios are intractable not only because they are very large in number but also because analyzing them pushes the limits of what is technologically feasible. As of November 2014, the fastest existing supercomputer (the Tian-he 2) can perform 33.86 PFLOPS (Top500, 2014). A lower-bound estimate for the time it would take a supercomputer like Tian-he 2 to comprehensively analyze and explore one septillion CIB scenarios is more than 31 years.
                        
                     

Bearing in mind the demand for multi-scale socioeconomic scenarios and yet various methodological limitations to existing tools for systematically developing them, it may seem impossible to improve much upon the common practice of developing ad hoc a few variegated scenarios independently at different scales and then plausibly stitching them together with soft links approaches. However, the seeds for improvement may lie in reinterpreting the meaning of “strict boundary conditions” for consistent soft-linked scenarios as well as exploiting properties of how multi-scale dynamics tend to be reflected in CI matrices. First, in CIB, “internal consistency” refers to self-consistency, which means that the conditions of a scenario are self-reinforcing. This can permit multiple configurations of socioeconomic conditions that are quite different from each other, in contrast to the concept of consistent multi-scale scenarios described by Zurek and Henrichs (where such scenarios must have uniform assumptions across scales on drivers and scenario logics). Second, many socioeconomic dynamics that are interesting for environmental change research have local drivers. This suggests that dynamics could be systematically investigated through a layered approach. Such a layered structure for cross-scale scenarios can be observed in judgements recorded in a CIB matrix (Fig. 1). Because the states for each scenario element directly influence other elements selectively, this results in a network of influences that are often sparsely distributed. Sparse matrices can be manipulated and investigated strategically, which could result in substantial computational savings that would make the systematic derivation and exploration of detailed, multi-scale scenarios tractable.

In computer science, a method for reducing the computational cost of solving a system of equations defined on a square matrix is nested dissection (George, 1973; Lipton et al., 1979). Nested dissection is a type of divide-and-conquer algorithm (Cormen, 2009) that is appropriate for sparse matrices containing mostly zero elements. The idea is to save computing time and space in memory that would be expended through the explicit manipulation of zeros. As discussed by Boman and Wolf (2007) as well as Lipton et al. (1979), strategies for nested dissection to bypass zeros typically involve identifying nonzero positions in a matrix and reordering matrix elements. Balanced partitioning of a large sparse matrix can be achieved by recursive bisection algorithms that compute load balancing (i.e. an even distribution of nonzero elements for each partition) and minimize communication across processors.

As discussed previously in Section 2.2, many multi-scale scenarios have a layered structure, which means that a multi-scale CI matrix inherits the exploitable property of a sparse matrix. Borrowing from the concept of nested dissection, it may be possible to partition a sparse CI matrix. However, the process of partitioning a multi-scale CI matrix would not strictly follow any mathematical recursive bisection algorithm. Instead, it is approached heuristically through a recursive bisection process that is constrained by the structure of cross-impact judgements according to scale-specific and cross-scale influences (e.g. global, regional, national). This would permit a “balanced partitioning” of the large sparse CI matrix so that communication volumes across CI matrix partitions are minimized. In addition, by having nonzero elements grouped together according to scale-specific and cross-scale influences that are well defined, zero elements in the larger CI matrix can be disregarded. This has the potential to reduce computational effort for large CI matrices and to provide a more general strategy for linking different scenario analyses developed at different scales.

@&#MATERIAL AND METHODS@&#

CIB has useful heuristic properties that are best demonstrated through an example. In this section, we define a simple but typical case of a multi-scale socioeconomic scenario and demonstrate that, given a network of influences that form a sparse CI matrix (Section 3.1), one can partition it for nested dissection (Section 3.2). We then isolate smaller portions of the full CI matrix for CIB analysis, rather than perform CIB on the full sparse matrix (Section 3.3). This results in substantial computational savings that can make the systematic analysis of much more detailed multi-scale scenarios tractable. Since the analytical challenges of a multi-scale analysis and multi-sector analysis are the same, this paper demonstrates only a multi-scale example. The example considers the simplest case of a multi-scale scenario: a two-region world. In this example, Region A (RegA) is comprised of industrialized countries, whereas Region B (RegB) is associated with the rest of the world. Scenario parameters are summarized in Table 1
                     . Following conventions introduced by Weimer-Jehle (2006), CIB scenario factors are called descriptors and possible outcomes for each descriptor are called states. The remainder of the paper will use this terminology.

After the important descriptors have been identified, a cross-impact (CI) matrix can be constructed. The CI matrix represents descriptors’ influences or interrelationships, some of which may be well understood quantitatively as well as those that are understood only qualitatively. A traditional CI matrix lists descriptors across the rows and the columns and further differentiates these according to mutually exclusive states for each descriptor. For the descriptors in Table 1, each descriptor has three states, which produces a 15 × 15 CI matrix (the diagonal excepted) as shown in Fig. 1. A scenario in CIB parlance is simply the combination of a specified state for each descriptor. This means that for the CI matrix in Fig. 1, there are 243 (35) possible scenarios.

The numbers in the cells of the CI matrix represent the nature of the interrelationships between descriptor states. For any nonzero numbers recorded in the CI matrix, descriptor states in the row direction exert direct influences on descriptor states in the column direction. A cross-impact judgement of 0 indicates no direct influence is exerted by the descriptor state in the row on the descriptor state in the column. As explained in Weimer-Jehle (2006), only the direct influence of a descriptor state needs to be recorded because the CIB algorithm will automatically account for indirect influences by virtue of having access to the complete network of direct influences.
                           2
                        
                        
                           2
                           This accounting is reflected in the balance calculations for whether a scenario results in a self-consistent network of influences. See Weimer-Jehle (2006).
                         Judgements of influences can be derived from literature reviews, expert opinion, appropriate investigation, and in cases of ambiguity even plausible assumptions (Schweizer and Kriegler, 2012). Using the algorithms for recording cross-impact judgements described by Schweizer and Kriegler (2012) as well as Weimer-Jehle (2006), a precursor version of the populated CI matrix can be produced (Fig. 1). This matrix distinguishes only judgements of direct influence (showing an X) and non-influence (showing a 0). This precursor matrix reveals partitions in the full matrix that would be appropriate for nested dissection. Readers interested in a detailed discussion of the justification for the 0 and nonzero impact judgements in this example are directed to Supplementary information.

The order of appearance of descriptors in the matrix will not affect the CIB analysis. In fact, the appearance of descriptors can be reordered in any way (Weimer-Jehle, 2009), and the CI matrix will still maintain the underlying structure of the interrelationships between descriptors. Taking advantage of this property, the descriptors could be ordered such that they are grouped according to interactions. For multi-scale scenarios, interactions often correspond to individual regions or levels (e.g. global, continental, national). The non-zero cross-impact judgements in Fig. 1 (shaded cells) partition the large matrix into several smaller nested dissections based on their interactions (Fig. 2
                        ). It should be noted that the interactions in this example correspond to multi- and cross-scale interactions between the global level, Region A (RegA), and Region B (RegB). In Fig. 2, it can be seen that there are six subspaces of the full CI matrix that can be partitioned: two subspaces where individual regions influence the global level, two subspaces where influences within each region are innate, and two subspaces where both regions interact with each other (RegA influences RegB, and RegB influences RegA). Note that some of the subspaces are populated with 0's, which indicates that there are no interactions within those specific subspaces. Because of that characteristic, three subspaces could be disregarded in the CIB analysis: direct influences at the World level on RegA and RegB, direct influences of RegA on RegB, and direct influences of RegB on RegA. It is important to note that this particular partitioning of the CI matrix is a function of the descriptors, their states, and the pattern of direct influences between states.

The benefit to disregarding sub-matrices comprised of 0s is that computing power can be allocated more efficiently to focus on sub-matrices with interrelationships. In effect, this simplifies the search for consistent scenarios on the CIB algorithm: Instead of searching for consistent scenarios in one CI matrix with some large number of scenarios possible (243 scenarios in this example), the algorithm can explore smaller partitions for consistent combinations (in this case, each having 9–27 combinations possible; see Fig. 3
                        ). For complex CI matrices representing interactions across multiple scales and regions, this more strategic analysis of interrelationships could mean the difference between a systematic scenario analysis that is computationally feasible and one that is not.

To explain what it means in practice to disregard sub-matrices comprised of 0s, we advocate dissecting, or breaking, the traditional CI matrix into smaller partitions then analyzing the non-zero sub-matrices independently. Fig. 3 demonstrates this transformation of one CI matrix into three sub-matrices. In this example, developments in RegA and RegB are largely independent; these descriptors within their respective regions do not directly affect those in other regions.
                           3
                        
                        
                           3
                           See supplementary information for a discussion of why this assumption is reasonable for the descriptors in this example. Potential limitations for this technique are also discussed in supplementary information and below in Subsection 5.2.
                         However, the region-specific income descriptors each exert their own influences upon the technological change descriptor (TC: Fossil Substitutes), which is aggregated at the global level. For the three smaller matrices extracted from the original CI matrix (Fig. 3), matrix A is comprised of descriptors whose influences are innate to Region A. Similarly, Matrix B has descriptors whose influences are innate to Region B. Matrix C is extracted based on nonzero elements only (the direct influences of the income descriptors of RegA and RegB on the World TC descriptor) as the direct influence scores of zero are discarded (i.e. no direct influence of TC of fossil substitutes on educational attainment in RegA and RegB).

The smaller matrices A, B, and C retain the information for cross-impacts from the full parent matrix and are themselves cross-impact matrices. Matrix A is a 6 × 6 matrix and is comprised of two descriptors, RegA income and RegA educational attainment. As there are three possible outcomes for each descriptor, the total number of possible scenarios for Matrix A is 32 (9). Similarly, Matrix B has the same structure, and it will also have a total of 32 (9) possible scenarios. Matrix C has a slightly different structure compared to matrices A and B. As a result of the partitioning process discussed in Section 3.1, it can be seen that the educational attainment descriptors for both RegA and RegB do not directly influence the TC descriptor. Due to the manner in which the CIB algorithm assesses the internal consistency of scenarios (Weimer-Jehle, 2006), such descriptors exerting no direct influences need not be retained in Matrix C. However, since CIB matrices are full CI matrices (meaning that they include descriptors on both sides of the diagonal), this shows that the total number of possible scenarios for Matrix C is 33 (27).

Borrowing from the concept of nested dissection, ideally, performing CIB analyses on each of these much smaller partitions and then reassembling their results may return results for self-consistent scenarios for the full system that are equivalent to the parent matrix. If so, such a strategy could make CIB analyses of complex multi-scale systems that would otherwise be intractable possible. In Section 4, the results of analyzing the traditional CIB matrix (with 243 scenarios possible) are compared to an analysis of the dissected partitions (each with 9, 9, and 27 scenarios possible respectively, or a total of 45 scenarios).

@&#RESULTS@&#

As noted in Section 3, the potential benefit of nested dissection is that, from a CIB perspective, the search for self-consistent scenarios across a large number of possible scenarios can be performed more strategically. By focussing the search for internally consistent scenarios on partitions of the parent matrix where interrelationships exist, self-consistent scenarios may be uncovered through a fraction of the computational effort. In the following subsections, for comparison, the results of a traditional CIB analysis across a large number of scenarios (243) are presented along with partitioned searches of smaller scenario spaces (9–27 scenarios).

From an assessment of the 15 × 15 matrix with 243 possible scenarios, CIB finds 5 scenarios that are perfectly internally consistent as summarized in Table 2
                        . In all self-consistent scenarios, Region A has high income per capita and high educational attainment. Outcomes for rates of technological change are more varied, as each rate is possible, but three scenarios have moderate technological change. Outcomes for Region B are also varied, as each state is possible for income per capita or for educational attainment; however, these states always co-vary for the descriptors. As explained by Weimer-Jehle (2006), the logic for why each of these scenarios is perfectly internally consistent can be investigated by tracing the net effect of direct influences. Income for Region A is always high because, as discussed in Supplementary information (and in further detail in Section 4.2 below), the educational infrastructure for Region A is well established. This means that even under circumstances where income is assumed to fall, norms for higher educational attainment prevent the overall income level from slipping below the high level. In turn, the high income level also reinforces high educational attainment for Region A. In Region B, because educational norms and infrastructure are less established, levels of income and education move in lockstep. Low income levels give rise to low educational attainment levels and vice versa. It may appear curious that identical socioeconomic outcomes for Regions A and B can give rise to two different rates of technological change (in Table 2, compare scenarios 1–2 and 4–5). The reason for this is that when income levels in Regions A and B are mixed such that the income level is high in one region and low in another, the economic drag of low income works against the high income effect. The opposing income trends result in a weak promotion of either the slow or medium rate of technological change. Similarly, when income is high in both regions, either the medium or fast rates of technological change are somewhat promoted. This is mostly due to the structure of the impact judgements, where the high income level in a region somewhat discourages the slow rate for technological change and equally slightly promotes moderate or fast rates for technological change.

As discussed in Section 3.2, three dissected partitions (Matrix A, B, and C) result from the pattern of the interrelationships in the traditional CIB matrix. In this subsection, the results for each partition are presented. Matrix A corresponds to the descriptor interrelationships that are innate to Region A. Among 9 scenarios possible for these interrelationships, the CIB algorithm finds only one internally consistent scenario as shown in Table 3
                        . An explanation for why this happens can be seen by looking more closely at the cross-impact judgements for Region A. The judgements for the direct influences of different income per capita levels on educational attainment generally show that at worst, low educational attainment would be slightly promoted when income per capita is low. However, when income per capita is also low, medium educational is also slightly promoted. This leads to an internal inconsistency for the scenario of low income and low educational attainment happening concurrently in Region A (industrialized countries). As discussed in Supplementary information, the reason for this is that industrialized countries have already established sophisticated educational infrastructures, and education is seen as a public good necessary for public welfare (Psacharopoulos and Patrinos, 2004). Thus even during times of protracted economic stagnation (or contraction), priorities remain high to make education accessible to as much of the population as possible, which prevents Region A from spiralling into a trap of low educational attainment and low income per capita.

Matrix B contains descriptor interrelationships that are innate to Region B (Rest of World). In the latter case, the CIB algorithm finds three internally consistent scenarios as shown in Table 4
                        . In this case, the cross-impact judgements are different, as low income per capita strongly promotes low educational attainment. Medium per capita income slightly promotes medium educational attainment but also only slightly discourages low educational attainment. As discussed in Supplementary information, the reason for this is that many developing countries are starting from lower (if not low) levels of educational attainment. In contrast to industrialized countries, for a variety of reasons (potentially due to lack of educational infrastructure or few economic opportunities requiring training), the priority of higher educational attainment has not yet been established (Ferreira and Schady, 2009). Thus during times of protracted low per capita income, there may be little opportunity or incentive to increase the educational attainment of the general population. Alternatively, when income per capita is high, the high educational attainment state is what is most strongly promoted. These judgements explain why the self-consistent scenarios for Region B have co-varying outcomes for per capita income and educational attainment.

Matrix C corresponds to interrelationships between descriptors operating at the regional and global levels. Among 27 scenarios possible for these interrelationships, the CIB algorithm finds 12 to be internally consistent scenarios as shown in Table 5
                        . A notable feature of the cross-impact judgements for Matrix C is that the direct influences of income per capita in Regions A and B on global rates of technological change are assumed to be the same. This assumption could be debated and is discussed further in Section 5.2. Nevertheless, from these assumptions, it can generally be seen that low income per capita strongly promotes a slow rate of technological change. However income effects at higher levels of income per capita are still tempered by other reasons that may hinder faster technological change, such as reluctance to prematurely retire technologies prior to the end of their useful lives. A general pattern of judgements for an income effect, however, is that slow technological change is less strongly promoted as income per capita increases. Even from these simple assumptions, a diversity of self-consistent scenarios is found because there are many possible scenarios where Regions A and B do not have the same level of per capita income. This can lead to scenarios where different levels of wealth in each region exert opposing influences on the rate of technological change, and when this happens, the slow or moderate rates of technological change are more strongly promoted.

In comparison to the results in Section 4.1, the results for the partitioned Matrices A and B replicate the findings of the traditional CIB analysis. In Region A, per capita income and educational attainment are always high, while in Region B, these descriptors can have any of the three states, but they must always co-vary. At first blush, the results for Matrix C appear to differ from the traditional CIB analysis. However, when one recalls that the traditional CIB analysis returns results for self-consistent scenarios according to all descriptors in the CI matrix, one realizes that Matrix C is less constrained than the traditional CIB matrix. This means that in order to have a proper interpretation of the dissected partitions of the CIB matrix, they must be interpreted together rather than in isolation.

To properly interpret the results for Matrix C, the results for Matrices A and B must also be considered as constraints, or boundary conditions. This means that the CIB results for Matrices A and B will screen out some of the results for Matrix C so that only a subset of the 12 self-consistent scenarios will be meaningful for our two-region world (Fig. 4
                        ). For the regional-level CIB matrices, the most constraining results are for Matrix A, where the only self-consistent scenario has high income per capita. Taking into account the results for Matrix A, any scenarios in Table 5 where the income per capita of Region A is not high lacks an important outcome for self-consistency across global and regional levels. Once this regional constraint is taken into consideration, the self-consistent scenarios relevant for our multi-level CIB analysis from Table 5 collapse to the same solutions presented previously for traditional CIB in Table 2.

The result in Section 4.3 from the reassembled partitions of the full parent CIB matrix demonstrates internal consistency across levels and replicates the result obtained from traditional CIB. This example shows that a larger cross impact matrix can be partitioned, dissected, and analysed in subsets as a collection of smaller CIB matrices. This approach, hereafter called linked CIB, may be particularly useful when a cross impact matrix would otherwise be sufficiently multi-dimensional to give rise to an intractably large number of possible scenarios that would be computationally infeasible to search comprehensively.
                        4
                     
                     
                        4
                        Regular CIB software can be run in a Monte Carlo mode when a cross-impact matrix is large. However there is the risk that a Monte Carlo search will skip over some internally consistent scenarios that would be of great interest to the analysis. Where a comprehensive search would be desired, linked CIB may offer a new strategy.
                     
                  

As discussed in Section 2, these analytical benefits may be transferable to the special challenges of multi-scale and multi-sectoral scenario analyses in general – especially for scenarios with qualitative elements. In the subsections below, we compare the capabilities of the linked CIB approach to currently prevalent approaches inspired by Zurek and Henrichs (2007), Kok et al. (2007), and Rotmans et al. (2000). We also discuss the requirement of a sparse CI matrix for performing linked CIB, which may pose limitations.

There are many examples of multi-scale qualitative scenario exercises with stakeholders in the environmental change literature (Herrero et al., 2014; Kok et al., 2006; Vermeulen et al., 2013). In these studies, commonalities across the participatory methods employed are that stakeholders develop new scenarios in a focus group setting through a discursive, or intuitive logics, approach. Stakeholders are also usually thinking about scenarios at a more localized scale consistent with their experience, although Dermawan et al. (2013) provide a promising departure in the direction of having stakeholders think of scenarios operating across scales. Nevertheless, in general, when the aforementioned studies must interface with high-level scenarios constructed for the purposes of global environmental assessment, they all fall back on ‘soft links’ interpretative approaches. As discussed in Sections 2 and 2.1, our qualm with the current reliance on ‘soft links’ approaches is that they artificially constrain the heterogeneity of futures considered across levels or scales. How problematic this is for local scenarios (at one level only) is not explored in this paper (nevertheless interested readers can find relevant epistemological discussion in Lloyd and Schweizer, 2014). Our concern in this paper is with the quality of multi-level or multi-scale impact and risk analysis.

For comprehensive multi-level assessments, such as for national assessments, scientific assessments, or international assessments, enhancing the rigour of scenario analytic approaches that have historically been interpretative is the main benefit of CIB. This is possible with CIB because it requires the translation of qualitative statements into quantitative values, which can be arranged into matrix form to enable systematic explorations of direct and indirect influences in complex networks. As discussed by Lloyd and Schweizer (2014), a powerful potential of CIB is that over time, scenario analyses can be updated and revised piecemeal rather than requiring entirely new scenario analyses; this quality may also lend CIB well to multi-level scenario studies and potentially to synthesizing scenario studies developed independently by different investigators. The main value of the latter would be to obtain rich, realistic, and comprehensive pictures of impacts and risks across levels or scales. This is important for coordinating networked environmental governance across levels (Feindt, 2012). These suggestions are appropriate directions for future work with CIB, since a variety of studies have already demonstrated CIB to be a useful and informative enhancement to ensuring the internal consistency of qualitative stories for exogenous assumptions applied in integrated assessment models (Kosow, 2011; Schweizer and Kriegler, 2012; Schweizer and O'Neill, 2014).

Through linked CIB, enhancing the rigour of the internal consistency of multi-level, multi-scale, and multi-sector scenarios may be the next frontier. It may be possible to extend, or expand, a global CIB matrix to ‘drill down’ to details that operate at more localized levels (an analytical approach that is top-down). Alternatively, through the nested dissection approach discussed in this paper, it would also be possible to assemble together already localized scenario studies to compile a very large CIB matrix mapping a rich but comprehensive picture of interactions and vulnerability points for cascading risks (an analytical approach that is bottom-up, scaling up the results of various local-level scenario studies). Together, these simultaneously top-down and bottom-up approaches can clearly delineate internally consistent multi-level pathways for multiple outcomes across levels or scales. An excellent example of this concept appeared in the award-winning infographic “512 Paths to the White House”, which was published by The New York Times during the 2012 US Presidential election (Bostock and Carter, 2012). The infographic applied a combinatorial approach to multi-level scenarios similar to linked CIB. Paths referred to simultaneous electoral outcomes across 9 swing states resulting in three high-level outcomes: an Obama victory, a Romney victory, or a draw requiring Congress to select the President and Vice President. In addition to making the 512 pathways visible, the infographic also made clear the boundary conditions for the seemingly impossible outcome of a draw. A draw was indeed possible in five different ways due to the electoral votes in play.

Global versions of scenarios typically look at the world as being comprised of one region, so the descriptors used are typically aggregated at the global level. Since it is recognized that globally aggregated descriptors may be too coarse to represent important future developments occurring at more localized levels, more localized and sector-specific scenarios are desired. The linked CIB technique offers a strategy for more clearly ensuring the internal consistency of scenarios across levels, scales, and sectors; however, the example described in this paper bears a number of simplifying properties. The world is represented in only 2 regions, and the descriptors lack cross-level influences (i.e. descriptor outcomes for Region A do not directly influence descriptor outcomes in Region B or vice versa). These properties produce a sparse CI matrix with many cells being comprised of 0s, which lends itself well to nested dissection.

In addition, our dissected partitions did not require the introduction of new aggregated descriptors. Dissected partitions can add useful structure for where additional assumptions could be introduced either for bridging or simplifying. In the former case, bridging assumptions may be needed to explore multi-level scenarios that would be internally consistent across single-level studies conducted independently (i.e. finding self-consistent scenarios across a global study and a regional study). In the latter case, a new aggregated descriptor may support computational tractability. Fig. 5
                         provides an example commensurate with the ‘bridging assumption’ case, where Matrix C could represent a simple global-level scenario system of technological change, where the only determinant directly influencing technological change is Average World Income. However, connecting this new globally aggregated descriptor to the regional level income descriptors introduces new assumptions.

For the new globally aggregated descriptor, the first question is how to account for the multi-level influences of purchasing power in Regions upon the global trend for Average World Income. The judgements in Fig. 5 assume income improvements in each region to be equally important for improving Average World Income. It would appear that such an assumption is equivalent to the example featured above in Sections 3–4 (hereafter referred to as the ‘parsimonious parent matrix’); however, the introduction of these new judgements slightly alters what scenarios are found internally consistent as discussed in Supplementary information. In Supplementary information, we also explore different arguments regarding whether the purchasing power of one region is more important than the other (where an extreme interpretation would be that the purchasing power of only one region really matters). Through our sensitivity analysis of these different assumptions, we found that 60%–80% of the linked solutions found with the parsimonious parent matrix are also found with new matrices including a new aggregate descriptor. In turn, however, matrices with the aggregate descriptor also found 1–2 new linked solutions that were not found by the parsimonious parent matrix.

These apparent disagreements in results may leave the impression that CIB and the linked approach will yield potentially spurious information regarding what scenarios are or are not internally consistent. We argue instead that arriving at these results is a feature of CIB, as CIB will report back internally consistent scenarios subject to input assumptions. Thus CIB requires vigilance in the recording of judgements and the exploration of any uncertainties behind said judgements. Interested readers can find further discussion of this topic in Supplementary information. The conclusion of the discussion is that similar to the sensitivity analysis employed by Schweizer and Kriegler (2012), the appropriate way to address such multi-level uncertainties may be to construct multiple versions of CI matrices and explore the ways in which their self-consistent scenarios differ and why.

Moreover, this iterative parsing of multi-level assumptions may provide a strategy for dealing with dense matrices; conceivably, dense networks of interactions could be interrogated and reformulated as ‘extensions’ of a more aggregated parent matrix. It may be possible to ‘unpack’ a dense network of interactions until a sufficiently sparse version of the influences is revealed. This is a topic for future research.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

This paper demonstrates a new technique, linked CIB, for ensuring the internal consistency of multi-scale scenario studies with qualitative elements. This new technique addresses a key limitation of existing multi-scale scenario approaches, which rely on interpretive arguments for why lower-scale scenarios should be considered complementary, comparable, coherent, or rigidly consistent across scales (Zurek and Henrichs, 2007). With a new framework recently developed for multi-scale scenario research in climate change (Ebi et al., 2014; Moss et al., 2010; O'Neill and Schweizer, 2011), ensuring that lower scale socioeconomic and impact scenarios are consistent with global version scenarios may become critical for the credibility and policy relevance of global environmental change assessments (Hewitson et al., 2014). We summarized that the CIB method (Weimer-Jehle, 2006) is a promising development in scenario analysis, as it enables the quantification and systematic exploration of scenario elements that have traditionally been expressed purely qualitatively.

Through this study, we take CIB further by explaining and demonstrating how sparsely distributed interactions that are common within multi-scale scenarios can be analyzed through an approach resembling nested dissection (George, 1973). This can result in significant computational savings that may enable the systematic analysis of rich multi-scale scenarios that would otherwise be computationally intractable. Through an example, we demonstrated that multi-scale scenario elements could be interpreted through a ‘linked CIB’ approach that replicated the results of traditional CIB analysis. We also discussed how linked CIB could be used to develop and interpret multi-scale scenarios from top-down or bottom up perspectives. Potential challenges for linked CIB, namely dense matrices and multi-level uncertainties, were also discussed. We concluded that the inherently iterative approach of linked CIB may be able to address these apparent limitations. Nevertheless the capabilities of linked CIB should continue to be investigated through future research.

ScenarioWizard. Developer: Wolfgang Weimer-Jehle. Contact address: ZIRIUS - Stuttgart Research Center for Interdisciplinary Risk and Innovation Studies, University of Stuttgart, Seidenstr. 36, 70174 Stuttgart, Germany. Telephone: +49 711 685 84301. Fax: +49 711 685 82487. E-mail: wolfgang.weimer-jehle@zirius.uni-stuttgart.de. Software currently available at http://www.cross-impact.de/english/CIB_e_ScW.htm. Hardware and software required: PC, Windows. Cost: Free.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This work was first inspired while VJS was at the National Center for Atmospheric Research in the Advanced Study Program. VJS would like to thank Brian O'Neill and Peter Backlund for helpful discussions as well as the National Science Foundation for supporting the Advanced Study Program. VJS would also like to thank Johanna Wandel for her advice to invite JHK to contribute to the paper. The work of JHK has been supported by a fellowship from the Energy Council of Canada and partially supported by the University of Waterloo Humanities and Social Sciences Endowment Fund.

The following is the supplementary data related to this article:
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

Supplementary data related to this article can be found at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.envsoft.2015.12.014.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

