@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Structural characterization of ANGPTL8 (betatrophin) with its interacting partner lipoprotein lipase

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Structural characterization of ANGPTL8 was performed.


                        
                        
                           
                           We used the computational strategy which includes sequence analysis, secondary structure prediction, comparative modeling and protein–protein interactions (PPI) analysis.


                        
                        
                           
                           The findings revealed that crystal structure of iSH2 domain of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase(PI3K) ß subunit (PDB entry: 3mtt) as a suitable template for predicting the structure of ANGPTL8.


                        
                        
                           
                           ANGPTL8 is predicted to interfere with regulation of proteolysis, motility and localization of LPL besides steric block of its catalytic site.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Comparative modeling

Betatrophin

ANGPTL8

Protein structure

LPL

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Angiopoietin-like protein 8 (ANGPTL8) (also known as betatrophin) is a newly identified secretory protein with a potential role in autophagy, lipid metabolism and pancreatic beta-cell proliferation. Its structural characterization is required to enhance our current understanding of its mechanism of action which could help in identifying its receptor and/or other binding partners. Based on the physiological significance and necessity of exploring structural features of ANGPTL8, the present study is conducted with a specific aim to model the structure of ANGPTL8 and study its possible interactions with Lipoprotein Lipase (LPL). To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt to predict 3-dimensional (3D) structure of ANGPTL8. Three different approaches were used for modeling of ANGPTL8 including homology modeling, de-novo structure prediction and their amalgam which is then proceeded by structure verification using ERRATT, PROSA, Qmean and Ramachandran plot scores. The selected models of ANGPTL8 were further evaluated for protein–protein interaction (PPI) analysis with LPL using CPORT and HADDOCK server. Our results have shown that the crystal structure of iSH2 domain of Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) p85β subunit (PDB entry: 3mtt) is a good candidate for homology modeling of ANGPTL8. Analysis of inter-molecular interactions between the structure of ANGPTL8 and LPL revealed existence of several non-covalent interactions. The residues of LPL involved in these interactions belong from its lid region, thrombospondin (TSP) region and heparin binding site which is suggestive of a possible role of ANGPTL8 in regulating the proteolysis, motility and localization of LPL. Besides, the conserved residues of SE1 region of ANGPTL8 formed interactions with the residues around the hinge region of LPL. Overall, our results support a model of inhibition of LPL by ANGPTL8 through the steric block of its catalytic site which will be further explored using wet lab studies in future.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Angiopoietin-like protein 8 (ANGPTL8) is a newly identified secretory protein and is also known as Lipasin (Zhang, 2012), RIFL (Ren et al., 2012), C19orf80 (Lin and Lin, 2014) and Betatrophin (Yi et al., 2013) due to its functional characterization in various studies. Specifically, its role in pancreatic beta-cell proliferation is still controversial and requires further investigation regarding its specific binding partners (Yi et al., 2013; Gusarova et al., 2014; Chen et al., 2015). The physiological regulation of ANGPTL8 is not fully comprehended yet and its precise mechanism of action along with the identity of its receptor is still a quest. To the best of our knowledge, the protein structure of ANGPTL8 and none of the other family members is predicted yet. Therefore, further studies which could elucidate the structural aspects of ANGPTL8 are required in order to identify its receptor and/or other binding partners to help increase our understanding of its mechanism of action and accelerate future studies for translation of this important discovery into clinical practice.

The human gene encoding ANGPTL8 is entitled C19orf80. Its physiological expression is nutritionally regulated; it is induced on refeeding and reduced upon fasting (Ren et al., 2012). It is expressed in both adipose tissue and liver of mice whereas its human expression is liver specific (Zhang, 2012). The thyroid hormone 3,3′,5-triido-l-thyronine (T3) upregulates the expression of ANGPTL8 in human liver cells (Lin and Lin, 2014). This induction occurs through thyroid hormone recptors alpha and beta (THR-α and THR-β) which make heterodimers with Retinoid-X Receptor (RXR), to transactivate ANGPTL8. The gene regulation of ANGPTL8 is comparable with similar family members such as ANGPTL3 and ANGPTL4 which are transactivated by the formation of heterodimers of different nuclear receptors (LXR-RXR for ANGPTL3 and PPAR-RXR for ANGPTL4) (Kersten, 2005). The expression of ANGPTL8 in adipocytes is upregulated by insulin and downregulated by cAMP (Ren et al., 2012). ANGPTL8 has been characterized as an atypical member of ANGPTL protein family because of the presence of only an N-terminal (coiled-coil) domain (Fu et al., 2013; Hato et al., 2008; Santulli, in press). The seven typical ANGPTL protein family members containing an N-terminal (coiled-coil) domain and a C-terminal (fibronogen-like) domain with different roles associated with each domain are comprehensively discussed in (Fu et al., 2013; Hato et al., 2008; Santulli, in press). The phylogenetic analysis of ANGPTL8 revealed that ANGPTL3 and ANGPTL4 are its closest family members while sequence alignments expressed significant similarity of ANGPTL8 with the N-terminal domain (region known for binding and inhibition of Lipoprotein lipase (LPL)) of these proteins (Zhang, 2012; Ono et al., 2003; Koster et al., 2005).

Several studies have demonstrated the role of ANGPTL8 in the lipid metabolism by regulating the level of plasma triglycerides (TG) and cholesterol through inhibition of LPL (Zhang, 2012; Ren et al., 2012; Wang et al., 2013). LPL is an enzyme which regulates lipid homeostasis by breaking down the dietary lipids for subsequent uptake in peripheral tissues. The physiological tissue specific distribution and activity of both LPL and ANGPTL8 are differentially regulated under different nutritional states to maintain plasma TG levels (Zhang, 2012; Ren et al., 2012; Kersten, 2014). Both gain- and loss-of-function studies consistently demonstrated the role of inhibition of ANGPTL8 as a therapeutic strategy for dyslipidemia by reducing the plasma TG levels in correlation with high LPL activity (Zhang, 2012; Ren et al., 2012; Wang et al., 2013; Fenzl et al., 2014).

(Yi et al., 2013) supported the role of ANGPTL8 as a potent stimulator of pancreatic beta-cells in insulin resistant mouse model and thus, regulating glucose metabolism. Their data provided substantial evidence that pancreatic beta-cell proliferation and improved glucose tolerance in response to ANGPTL8 induction is itself independent of insulin resistance and occurs as a compensatory mechanism. The ANGPTL8 mediated adult and aged pancreatic beta-cell proliferation in a rat model through targeted delivery of ANGPTL8 gene further augments this role, despite of the ongoing controversy on the role of ANGPTL8 in proliferation of pancreatic beta-cells (Chen et al., 2015; Gusarova et al., 2014). Therefore, the potential of ANGPTL8 in regenerative therapeutics of Diabetes Mellitus aiming the restoration of pancreatic beta-cell mass still exists.

In the light of above-mentioned studies, ANGPTL8 is emerging as a potential drug target for both Dyslipidemia and Diabetes Mellitus which necessitates the prediction of its structural aspects in order to enhance current understanding of its mode of action and identify its activity partners. The structural characterization of ANGPTL8 is thus a pre-requisite which may lead to subsequent studies in drug designing and development. Based on the physiological significance and necessity of exploring structural features of ANGPTL8, the present study is conducted with a specific aim to construct the structure of ANGPTL8 and to study the possible interactions of ANGPTL8 with LPL. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt to generate a 3-dimensional (3D) structure of ANGPTL8. We have used computational strategy which include sequence analysis, secondary structure prediction, comparative modeling and its validation through protein–protein interactions (PPI) analysis. The study provides few of the very first instances to understand and to elucidate some of the functional roles associated with ANGPTL8. The predicted model is in coherence with previous studies.

@&#METHODOLOGY@&#

Sequences of ANGPTL8 (Uniprot entries: Q6UXH0 and Q8R1L8 for human and mouse respectively), N-terminal domain of ANGPTl3 (Uniprot entries: Q9Y5C1 and Q9R182 for human and mouse respectively) and N-terminal domain of ANGPTL4 (Uniprot entries: Q9BY76 and Q9Z1P8 for human and mouse respectively) were aligned using multiple sequence alignment server ClustalW2 (McWilliam et al., 2013). Known binding and regulatory regions of ANGPTL3 and ANGPTL4 were investigated for their presence in ANGPTL8.

Secondary structure prediction of protein refers to a set of techniques which aim to predict the location and number of alpha helices and beta strands within a protein or protein family. It has long been recognized that patterns of residue conservation are indicative of particular secondary structure types. We used several secondary structure prediction methods to predict the secondary structure of ANGPTL8 which includes PSIPRED (McGuffin et al., 2000), Predict Protein Server (Rost et al., 2004), Jpred server (Cuff et al., 1998), ASPSSP2 (Advanced Protein Secondary Structure Prediction Tool) (Raghava, 2002), and Proteus2 (Montgomerie et al., 2008).

The complete methodological sequence of events followed in comparative structural modeling of ANGPTL8 is depicted in the flowchart below (Fig. 1
                        ). The details of each structure prediction method is given below in subsections.

Standard procedure for comparative modeling of ANGPTL8 using PSI-BLAST searches was proceeded by several other protein structure prediction servers including I-TASSER (Yang et al., 2015), PHYRE2 (Kelley and Sternberg, 2009), MUSTER (Wu and Zhang, 2008), QUARK (Xu and Zhang, 2012) and Robetta (Kim et al., 2004) due to the lack of optimal structure verification scores for generated models. The details of models generated from I-TASSER, PHYRE2, MUSTER and QUARK servers are not included here due to insignificant results and space constraints.

The human protein sequence of ANGPTL8 was retrieved from UniProt with accession number “Q6UXHO”. Next, sequence similarity search was performed using PSI-BLAST (Position-Specific Iterated BLAST) (Altschul and Koonin, 1998) against Protein Data Bank (PDB) (Berman et al., 2000) to retrieve similar protein sequences with known three-dimensional structures to serve as a template for homology modeling. Sequence alignment between the sequences of selected BLAST hits and ANGPTL8 were performed using multiple alignment tool Expresso (Armougom et al., 2006). These alignments were then used to predict the 3D structure of ANGPTL8 using MODELLER (Webb and Sali, 2014). One hundred models were generated by using MODELLER which uses variable target function method (VTFM) in Cartesian space with conjugate gradients (CG) along with molecular dynamics (MD) with simulated annealing (SA) (ali, 1995). The final model selection was based on structure assessment scores calculated by MODELLER, Qmean (Benkert et al., 2009) PROSA (Wiederstein and Sippl, 2007), ERRAT (Colovos and Yeates, 1993), and RAMPAGE server (Lovell et al., 2003)). ERRAT score provides a confidence score in terms of non-bonded atom-atom interactions in comparison with already reported highly reliable structures (Colovos and Yeates, 1993). PROSA evaluates the structure based on deviation of energy deploying distance-based pair potential in comparison with previously reported three dimensional protein structures (Wiederstein and Sippl, 2007). The Qmean scoring function evaluates the global quality of the model by taking into the account distance-based all-atom interaction potential as well as a torsion angle potential over three consecutive residues (Benkert et al., 2009). RAMPAGE server was used to obtain Ramachandran plots for assessing the stereo-chemical quality of the structures (Lovell et al., 2003).

Structure of ANGPTL8 was predicted using Robetta server (Kim et al., 2004). The FASTA sequence of a protein is given as input and the output include domain predictions and coordinate files of predicted structure. Robetta deploys an automated structure prediction method which is able to predict protein structure using either comparative modeling or de-novo structure prediction methods in the presence or absence of sequence homology to protein(s) of known structure respectively (Kim et al., 2004). Robetta uses GINZU as a domain prediction method (Chivian et al., 2003). GINZU utilizes different protein alignment servers including BLAST, PSIBLAST(Zhang et al., 1997), FFAS03 (Jaroszewski et al., 2000; Rychlewski et al., 2000) and 3D-Jury (Ginalski and Rychlewski, 2003; Ginalski et al., 2003) to detect the experimentally determined homolog templates in a hierarchical screening procedure (Chivian et al., 2003). The region of protein without a suitable homolog is modeled using de-novo protocol of Robetta (Kim et al., 2004).

Robetta server generated ten models based on the single template structure (PDB entry: 3na7_304) for prediction of ANGPTL8. All of these models were assessed using scores from Qmean (Benkert et al., 2009), PROSA (Wiederstein and Sippl, 2007), ERRAT (Colovos and Yeates, 1993), and RAMPAGE server (Lovell et al., 2003). The optimum model was taken further for protein–protein interaction (PPI) analysis.

Since the N-terminal domain of ANGPTL3 has been reported to be the closest phylogenetic neighbor of ANGPTL8 (with 50% sequence similarity) (Fu et al., 2013), the structure of N-terminal domain of ANGPTL3 was also predicted using Robetta server. Robetta identified a single template structure (PDB entry: 3mtt) for prediction of N-terminal domain of ANGPTL3. We used 3mtt as a template structure for ANGPTL8 and generated 100 models using MODELLER. Ten models with lowest MODELLER score were assessed using energy scores calculated by Qmean (Benkert et al., 2009), PROSA (Wiederstein and Sippl, 2007), ERRAT (Colovos and Yeates, 1993), and RAMPAGE server (Lovell et al., 2003). The optimum model was taken further for PPI analysis.

ANGPTL8 is reported as a regulator of LPL (Zhang, 2012). It inhibits LPL exhibiting similar behavior with respect to its family members ANGPTL3 and ANGPTL4 (Fu et al., 2013; Shan et al., 2009). The structure of LPL is not solved yet, however several previous studies have reported the homology models of LPL based on the structure of similar lipase family member. Reasonable data is present in literature with structure to function annotation of LPL (Wang et al., 2013; Holmes et al., 2011; Hosseinzade and Soheyli Azad, 2011; Kobayashi et al., 2002). Therefore, we constructed the homology model of LPL in order to conduct the protein–protein interaction (PPI) analysis of ANGPTL8 with LPL and increase our understanding of the underlying mechanism of LPL inhibition through ANGPTL8.

The human sequences of LPL was retrieved from the PubMed database (accession numbers EAW63764) and sequence similarity search was performed using PSI-BLAST against PDB. Human pancreatic triacylglycerol lipase (PDB entry: 1LPA) was used as reference structure for sequence alignments using Expresso (Armougom et al., 2006). MODELLER (ali, 1995) was used for generating one hundred models subsequently assessed for using energy scores from ERRAT (Colovos and Yeates, 1993), PROSA (Wiederstein and Sippl, 2007), Qmean (Benkert et al., 2009) and RAMPAGE server (Lovell et al., 2003). The optimum model was used for PPI analysis from ensemble of structures.

PPI analysis of different structures predicted for ANGPTL8 with predicted structure of LPL was performed using GURU level interface of High Ambiguity Driven Biomolecular Docking (HADDOCK) server (Dominguez et al., 2003; De Vries et al., 2007). HADDOCK web-server utilizes biochemical and biophysical interaction data to perform protein–protein docking which are evaluated using RMSD values of interface of each structure and desolvation energy. CPORT was used to predict the interface residues of each structure (de Vries and Bonvin, 2011). PPI analysis was performed based on both the CPORT predicted residues and known binding regions of ANGPTL8 (SE1-motif; see Section 3 for more details). The protein structures were protonated and energy minimized (using CHARMM22 force field implemented in MOE) before analysis of PPI. The structural illustrations were prepared using SwissPdb (SPDB) viewer (Guex and Peitsch, 1997), UCSF Chimera (Pettersen et al., 2004) and PyMOL (Schrödinger, 2010).

@&#RESULTS@&#

The sequence alignment of ANGPTL8 with N-terminal domain of both ANGPTL3 and ANGPTL4 revealed significant similarity with SE1 (Specific Epitope 1) region (see Fig. 2
                        A). SE1 region was mapped on N-terminal domain of ANGPTL3 and ANGPTL4 with a role in binding with LPL and its subsequent inhibition (Lee et al., 2009). Furthermore, Yau et al. (2009) identified a twelve amino acids long consensus motif present in SE1 region as necessary and sufficient for inhibition of LPL by ANGPTL3 and ANGPTL4 through his in vitro and in vivo experiments (Yau et al., 2009). This motif (will be referred as SE1-motif, from here onwards) is also conserved in ANGPTL8 (see Fig. 2B). Yau et al. (2009) specifically reported the indispensable role of three polar amino acids for inhibition of LPL which are also conserved across all sequences of ANGPTL3 (ASN48, GLN52 and HIS55), ANGPTL4 (HIS46, GLN50 and GLN53) and ANGPTL8 (HIS40, GLN44, and GLN47) (see Fig. 2B). GLN (48 in ANGPTL3; 50 in ANGPTL4) was prioritized in its contribution towards LPL inhibition based on its ultimate conservation in all species of ANGPTL3 and ANGPTL4 in (Yau et al., 2009) and now in ANGPTL8 (GLN47 in ANGPTL8)(see Fig. 2).

The secondary structure of ANGPTL8 predicted by using different secondary structure prediction methods were different from each other in terms of location and number of secondary structure elements. Most of predictions were in favor of two helices for ANGPTL8. This result is consistent with the secondary structure predicted for similar family members i.e. N terminal domains of both ANGPTL3 and ANGPTL4 using PSIPRED server (Yau et al., 2009). Secondary structure predicted for ANGPTL8 using PSIPRED server is given in Fig. 3
                        .

The comparative structure modeling of ANGPTL8 performed using homology modeling and Robetta server are discussed below.

The sequence similarity search against protein structures database i.e. PDB returned ten structural hits for ANGPTL8 representing four proteins (see Fig. 4
                           ). All of these structural hits showed different query coverage with maximum sequence similarity up to 51% (Table 1
                           ). Four protein structures (PDB entries: 1K25-chainA, 3O14-chainA, 1ZYQ-chainA and 3CQF-chainA) were selected as templates for predicting the structure of ANGPTL8. The multiple sequence alignment was performed using Expresso (Armougom et al., 2006) and one hundred models were generated using MODELLER. The energy scores of homology models of ANGPTL8 provided by MODELLER are shown in Fig. 5
                           . The energy scores of different structure assessment methods for the five models with lowest MODELLER energy scores are shown in Table 2
                           . Fig. 6
                            shows the secondary structure of one of the multi-template based predicted structure of ANGPTL8. It is composed of several small beta sheets and alpha helices interspersed with gamma and beta turns.

Following evidences do not qualify the predicted models for acceptance:
                              
                                 •
                                 The PROSA score and Qmean score of predicted models did not qualify them as valid native protein structures and therefore, none of the models resulted in optimum selection.

The secondary structure of ANGPTL8 is predicted to have two alpha helices (Section 3.1) similar to the secondary structure predictions for ANGPTL3 and ANGPTL4 (Yau et al., 2009). The predicted structure of ANGPTL8 using A1 is composed of several helices and beta sheets (Fig. 6).

Furthermore, the amino acids belonging to SE1-motif were predicted to be present in an alpha helix for ANGPTL8 (Section 3.1) and for ANGPTL3 and ANGPTL4 (Yau et al., 2009). However, the location of SE1-motif in predicted model for ANGPTL8 using A1 (Fig. 6) spans a beta sheet and an alpha helix.

The homology based approach (A1) could not produce an optimum structure and therefore, we extended our search for prediction of ANGPTL8 structure through Robetta server (A2). Ten models (PM_2_(1-10)) generated by Robetta server were based on single template structure (PDB entry: 3na7a_304). The structure verification scores using Qmean, PROSA, ERRATT and RAMPAGE servers of these models are given in Table 3
                           . The model no PM_2_1 was selected for further analysis as it shows the best score from the combination of all verification servers. Besides, it consists of two alpha helices which is consistent with the secondary structure prediction for ANGPTL8. The structures of PM_2_(1-10) are shown in Fig. 7
                           . All of the structures are composed mainly of alpha helices of different lengths and numbers. The structure of 3na7a_304 showed comparable energy scores including ERATT (3na7a_304: 100), PROSA (3na7a_304: −3.8), Qmean (3na7a_304: 0.79) and RAMPAGE server (3na7a_304: 96.6%, 2.4% and 0.0% for amino acids belonging to favorable, allowed and outlier regions respectively) with PM_2_1 (scores from Table 3).

Robetta identified a single template structure (PDB entry: 3mtt) for prediction of the N-terminal domain of ANGPTL3. Keeping 3mtt as a reference structure, one hundred models of ANGPTL8 were generated using MODELLER. Ten models with lowest energy scores provided by MODELLER were further assessed using ERRAT, PROSA, RAMPAGE and Qmean server (see Fig. 8
                            and Table 4
                           ). The models were narrowed down to one (PM_3_1) after verification for final selection (see Fig. 9
                           A). Structures of 3mtt(PDB entry) and super imposed structures of (PM_3_1) with 3mtt are depicted in Fig. 9B and C respectively. Both the secondary structure and 3D structure comparison of predicted structure of ANGPTL8(PM_3_1) with 3mtt showed good agreement with each other (Figs. 10
                            and 9C).

One hundred models of LPL were generated using pancreatic triacylglycerol lipase (PDB entry: 1-LPA) as a template structure. Ten models with lowest MODELLER energy function scores were assessed using ERRATT, PROSA, Qmean and RAMPAGE servers. The ERRATT score of all models were in range between 65 and 70, PROSA score in range between −6.8 and −7.8, and Qmean score in range between 0.5 and 0.6. Final model selection was based on the overall best scores from all servers. The structure of selected model (named PM_LPL (Protein Model of LPL) for reference in text) is depicted in Fig. 11
                        A. The sequence of human LPL (PubMed entry: EAW63764) annotated for important regulatory regions is shown in Fig. 11B which has been included for clarity of readers in the Section 4. The structure validation scores of PM_LPL shows better precision than previously reported model of LPL in (Wang et al., 2013) (see Table 5
                        ). PM_LPL was used for PPI analysis with predicted structures of ANGPTL8.

Two different predicted protein models of ANGPTL8 i.e. PM_2_1 and PM_3_1 showed best overall structure verification scores and were taken further for PPI analysis. The final model selection was based on the results of PPI analysis which satisfied the previously stated facts. The model showing maximum number of interactions from the SE1-motif of ANGPTL8 was selected finally.

CPORT was used to predict the binding interface of selected models for ANGPTL8 and LPL (de Vries and Bonvin, 2011). The active and passive residues were predicted and used for PPI analysis. The files containing active and passive residues for models PM_LPL, PM_2_1, and PM_3_1 are provided as “Supplementary File 1”, “Supplementary File 2” and “Supplementary File 3” respectively.

The docking analysis of PM_2_1 with PM_LPL using the GURU level interface of HADDOCK web-server returned 168 water refined structures in 9 clusters. The complex with −38.3 HADDOCK score was chosen from top cluster with highest probability among others. This complex was further refined to improve the energy and HADDOCK scores which returned 50 structures in one cluster. The refined HADDOCK score was −182.9.

Inter-molecular PPI analysis revealed existence of sixteen non-covalent interactions between both structures. There existed 10/16 hydrogen bond, 1/16 hydrophobic bonds and 5/16 ionic interactions. PPI analysis did not revealed the results in good agreement with known regulatory region (SE1 region) of ANGPTL8 and hence were considered insignificant. Fig. 12
                            of the selected complex is shown below. Complete list of interactions between both of these structures is provided as “Supplementary File 4”.

The docking analysis of PM_3_1 model of ANGPTL8 with PM_LPL using the GURU level interface of HADDOCK web-server returned 85 water refined structures in 12 clusters. The complex with −88.8 HADDOCK score was chosen from top cluster with highest probability among others. This complex was further refined to improve the energy and HADDOCK scores. The refined HADDOCK score was −259.

Analysis of inter-molecular interactions showed that 30 non-covalent interactions existed between the two structures. Seven residues from SE1 region of ANGPTL8 made interactions with LPL. Of note, HIS40, GLN44 and GLN47 of ANGPTL8 made contacts with different residues around hinge region of LPL. The hinge region of LPL contains the proteolytic cleavage site for proprotein convertase (Jin et al., 2005; Holmes et al., 2011). This is indicative of a possible role of ANGPTL8 in regulating some aspect of proteolysis of LPL. Eight residues from lid region, seven residues from thrombospondin (TSP) region and eleven residues from heparin binding site (Cluster4: Fig. 11) of LPL made contacts with different residues of ANGPTL8. The lid region of LPL covers its catalytic site and regulates lipid substrate binding (Winkler et al., 1990; Bourne et al., 1994). Therefore, the interactions corresponding to lid regions of LPL are suggestive of its non-competitive inhibition by ANGPTL8, which might act to sterically hinder the catalytic site of LPL. This result is comparable with the model of ANGPTL4 for inhibition of LPL proposed in (Yau et al., 2009). TSP region of LPL mediates its cell-to-cell and cell-to-matrix interactions and plays a role in its motility, localization and subsequently its activity (Wolf et al., 1990; Holmes et al., 2011). Heparin binding sites of lipases are important for their binding to heparin sulfate proteoglycans of the endothelial cells (Sendak and Bensadoun, 1998). Therefore, the binding interactions of TSP and heparin region of LPL reveal another possible mechanism for interference with its activity by ANGPTL8. Overall, the structure of complex revealed a model in which ANGPTL8 inhibits LPL by interfering with its proteolytic activity, and its localization besides sterically blocking the catalytic site for substrate binding. Fig. 13
                            of the selected complex is shown below. Complete list of interactions between both of these structures is provided as “Supplementary File 5”.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

ANGPTL8 is an emerging drug candidate for Dyslipidemia and Diabetes Mellitus. It has been associated with a potential role in pancreatic beta-cell proliferation (Yi et al., 2013), autophagy (Lin and Lin, 2014) and LPL inhibition (Zhang, 2012). However, the structure of ANGPTL8 and none of the other family members is solved yet. Thus, the structural characterization of ANGPTL8 is a prerequisite to investigate its receptor and downstream targets if any. We used various comparative modeling methods and tools to predict the structure of ANGPTL8. The final model selection was based on two criteria. First of all the predicted models were evaluated using structure verification and validation tools (Section 2). Secondly, the selected models from this phase were further analyzed through protein–protein interaction analysis with LPL (a known interacting partner of ANGPTL8 (Zhang, 2012)). The final model was selected based on the interaction data of the known binding region of both ANGPTL8 and LPL.

The finally selected homology model of ANGPTL8 is based on the structure of human p85β-iSH2 domain (PDB entry: 3mtt). The human p85β-iSH2 domain is one of the subunits of the regulatory domain (p85) of Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) protein. PI3K is a heterodimeric lipid kinase involved in cellular signalling pathways leading to cell growth, proliferation and survival (Cantley, 2002). PI3K comprises of a catalytic subunit (p110) and a regulatory subunit (p85) with different isoforms (Cantley, 2002). The kinase activity of PI3K is attributed to the p110 catalytic subunit which is stabilized through the p85 regulatory subunit (Vanhaesebroeck et al., 2010). There exists multiple isoforms of the p85 regulatory subunit (p85α, p85β, p55α, p50α and p55γ) which inhibit the catalytic activity of p110. The p85β-iSH2 domain is one of the five domains of the p85β regulatory subunit of PI3K and consists of amino acid residues 433–610 with a coiled-coil structure. Residues 439-511 and 515-583 form the two major helices and residues 588–594 forms another small helix at the C-terminus. Studies have reported the regulation model of PI3K in which the binding of iSH2 domain of p85β acts as a binding interface which holds the two domains (P110 and P85) and the inhibition of p110 is mediated by nSH2(p85)-p110 (Vanhaesebroeck et al., 2010; Hale et al., 2008). The iSH2 domain of p85β is an important regulatory region of PI3K due to its potential in forming contacts with other proteins (such as NS1) and interfering with inhibition of PI3K (Hale et al., 2010). Another study demonstrated that p85β has higher oncogenic potential as it is less effective inhibitor of the PI3K catalytic subunit than p85α (Ito et al., 2014). All of such studies are indicative of somewhat potential role of iSH2 domain of p85β in cellular proliferation. Thus, the homology of ANGPTL8 with the sequence of iSH2 domain of p85β and the analysis presented in this study are worth future investigation especially regarding to the role of ANGPTL8 in cellular proliferation. This study could act as a first structural clue of ANGPTL8 and further studies are needed to understand and resolve the mystery of its role specifically involved in pancreatic beta-cell proliferation.

Both in vivo and in vitro studies have demonstrated that ANGPTL8 acts to inhibit LPL (Zhang, 2012; Quagliarini et al., 2012; Wang et al., 2013). Our results also support the role of ANGPTL8 in inhibition of LPL. The sequence analysis of ANGPTL8 with the N-terminal domain of ANGPTL3 and ANGPTL4 revealed the presence of Specific Epitope 1 (SE1) region which was mapped on ANGPTL3 and ANGPTL4 as necesary and sufficient for inhibition of LPL (Lee et al., 2009; Yau et al., 2009). Our protein–protein interaction (PPI) analysis revealed the binding interactions between the predicted model of ANGPTL8 and LPL in important regulatory regions. These interactions provide novel insights in the mechanisms of action which might be involved in the inhibition of LPL by ANGPTL8 and will be further explored using wet lab studies in future. Overall, the structure of complex revealed a model in which ANGPTL8 inhibits LPL by interfering with its proteolytic activity and its localization besides sterically blocking the catalytic site for substrate binding. These results are supported by the proposed models for inhibition of LPL by ANGPTL4 (Lafferty et al., 2013) and ANGPTL3 (Shan et al., 2009). Lafferty et al. discussed the possibility of ANGPTL4 (Lafferty et al., 2013) induced inhibition of LPL by steric block and its binding on the lid region. ANGPTL3 has also been demonstrated to act as a reversible inhibitor of LPL (Shan et al., 2009).

The current study resulted in preliminary structural model of ANGPTL8 which might prove a good starting point for further exploration of ANGPTL8 in computer aided drug discovery and design studies. However, the limitation of the current study remains to be the wet lab verification of the revealed interactions between ANGPTL8 and LPL, which is intended to be verified in future studies.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The aim of this study was to predict three-dimensional structure of ANGPTL8 in order to increase our current understanding of its mechanism of action and aid subsequent studies in identification of its receptor and downstream target proteins. In this study, we have performed structural characterization of ANGPTL8 using computational strategy which include sequence analysis, secondary structure prediction, comparative modeling and protein–protein interactions (PPI) analysis. Our results have shown that the crystal structure of iSH2 domain of p85β subunit of PI3K (PDB entry: 3mtt) is a good potential candidate for homology modeling of ANGPTL8. Our PPI analysis supports the role of ANGPTL8 for inhibition of LPL which is in good agreement with previous wet lab studies demonstrating its functional characterization. A model of ANGPTL8 mediated inhibition of LPL through steric block is predicted which will be explored further through wet lab studies in future.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2016.01.009.

The following are the supplementary data to this article:


                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

