@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#A novel biological role for nsLTP2 from Oriza sativa: Potential incorporation with anticancer agents, nucleosides and their analogues

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Nonspecific lipid transfer protein (nsLTP2) binds with nucleosides and anticancer drugs.


                        
                        
                           
                           Hydrophobicity of the active site plays prominent role in this regard.


                        
                        
                           
                           Purine analogues drugs presented higher affinity than pyrimidine counterparts.


                        
                        
                           
                           Binding affinity is influenced by the modifications occurring in the base and sugar moiety of the ligands.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

NsLTP2

Anti-viral drugs

Anti-cancer agents

Drug delivery

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Development of a protein-based drug delivery system has major impact on the efficacy and bioavailability of unstable and water insoluble drugs. In the present study, the binding modes of a nonspecific lipid transfer protein (nsLTP2) from Oryza sativa with various nucleosides and analogous molecules were identified. The 3-D structure of the protein was designed and validated using modeler 9.13, Molegro virtual docker and procheck tool, respectively. The binding affinity and strength of interactions, key contributing residues and specificity toward the substrates were accomplished by computational docking and model prediction. The protein presented high affinity to acyclovir and vidarabine as purine-analogous drugs. Binding affinity is influenced by the core template and functional groups of the ligands which are structurally different cause the variation of interaction energies with nsLTP2. Nonetheless, all the evaluated analogous drugs occupy the proximity space at the nsLTP active site with high similarity in their binding modes. Our findings hold great promise for the future applications of nsLTPs in various aspects of pharmaceutical science and molecular biology.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Ligand-binding proteins are versatile carriers, can be combined with various ligands, have emerged as convenient platform for the development of protein-based drug carriers. Among these proteins plant non-specific lipid transfer proteins (nsLTPs) are, embody two main subfamily (LTP1 and LTP2), and function as vehicles in drug delivery systems due to wide association potential they exhibit relative to various molecules (Cheng et al., 2004; Kader, 1996; Pato et al., 2001; Samuel et al., 2002). They have turned out to have multiple biological and pharmacological activities. The multifunctional character raised considerable interest in evaluating their potential application for drug carrier systems. There are several examples in the literature covering this subject. It has been reported that wheat nsLTP1 can facilitate the transfer of BD56 (an azole derivative with antitumoral and/or antileishmania properties) through the same binding pattern of ether phospholipids (Cheng et al., 2004). This notion was further supported by the results of affinity binding assessment of skin lipids such as sphingomyline, sphingosine and cerebroside with the same protein. Appreciable affinity of the LTP1 with amphotericin B (an anti-fungal and anti-leishmaniasis drug) has also been evidenced (Cheng et al., 2004). Kwong and Wasan (2002) reported that “cholesteryl ester transfer protein” assisted the transfer of water insoluble drugs between different lipoprotein subclasses. Literature precedents have hinted at the complex formation of 2-(4,4-bis-phosphonooxy-benzhydryl)-pyridine with rice nsLTP2. Binding affinity is achieved by the triphenylmethyl moiety of the molecule which involved in the treatment of sickle cell disease and diarrhea (Wulff et al., 2000). More specifically, beta-sitosterol (a sterol-like drug) using in benign prostate hypertrophy (Berges et al., 1995; Ravenna et al., 1996) exhibited a satisfactory association with nsLTP2. Interestingly, while LTP1 is not able to bind with sterols, computational studies confirmed that the flexibility of triangular hollow box at the binding site of rice nsLTP2 is critical for association of sterols (Samuel et al., 2002; Buhot et al., 2001). In a recent report, we addressed that special chemical features of fatty acids facilitate the incorporation in the hydrophobic cavity of rice nsLTP2 (Tousheh et al., 2013). A key feature of nsLTPs is the high stability of overall fold, evolved due to the conserved eight cysteine residues affording a network of four disulfide bridges (Pato et al., 2001). Thanks to the large structural stability, the usefulness of nsLTPs is improved by providing stable atmosphere protecting drugs against oxidation or degradation. To this end, incorporation with prostaglandin B2 (Moindrot-Tassin et al., 2000) underlined that nsLTP1 efficiently shielded the ligand from the deleterious environment; highlights promise applications of LTP1 as a protective drug carrier.

The interplay between wide biological roles, binding properties and transporting machinery of nsLTPs provoked to probe the binding affinity of nsLTP2 from Oryza sativa for other class of therapeutic compounds, namely anti-cancer nucleosides and analogous molecules evidenced to have antiviral activity. Nucleosides and their analogues are a group of therapeutic compounds used as agents against common hyperproliferative diseases, including viral infections and cancer (Berdis., 2008; Jepsen et al., 2004; William et al., 1998). Their therapeutic utility is often hampered by the severity of side effects caused by killing of healthy cells. This highlights the importance of targeting strategies and efficient carrier systems. In this context, a proficient drug carrier system may confer desired achievements. Despite computational and ligand binding studies, no clues were available that would have provided hints of nature and extent of the attractive interactions, if any, between nucleosides and nsLTP2, and how may these interactions impact the functional assignment. Modeling approaches provide the best means of establishing topology and entity of such interactions. Provided that one has fundamental knowledge of the mechanism of nsLTP–nucleoside interaction, successful and efficient rational design in molecular biology to reconstruct and engineer nsLTP structural properties can be achieved. The major aims of such an approach would be to optimize formulation and development for a protein-based drug carrier and may have important repercussions in the therapeutic efficacy of such molecules.

Analysis, manipulation and translation of the nucleotide sequences were performed using Expasy Molecular Biology Server (www.expasy.ch). Pairwise and multiple sequence alignments were carried out respectively with BLAST in NCBI server and CLUSTALW (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/clustalw/) (Altschul et al., 1990; Johnson et al., 2008). Amino acid sequences of nsLTP2 from O. sativa (Indica group, Accession No. A2XBN5.2) were obtained from SWISS-PROT database and verified according to the data of Protein Data Bank (PDB) (www.rcsb.org). The protein possesses 96 amino acid residues, of them 27 residues removes during the post translational modification.

The 3D model of the protein was generated using Modeler v.9.13 software (Eswar et al., 2007; Prajapat et al., 2014) based on the sequence [A.N: Q10ST8] and the crystal structure [PDB: 1L6H] of nsLTP2 (A2XBN5.2) from O. sativa (Indica group) as template, which has 97% identity with Q10ST8. The ESPript server (http://espript.ibcp.fr/ESPript/) (Gout et al., 1999) was applied to obtain alignment file between query and template sequence with PIR format (Meshram et al., 2010; Chauhan and Shakya., 2009; Krieger et al., 2009). Due to the limitations in loop modeling, the ModLoop (https://modbase.compbio.ucsf.edu/modloop/) server was used to improve the accuracy of loop predictions (Rodriguez et al., 1998). Finally, to obtain a stable structure before further studies, the energy of model was minimized using YASARA server (http://www.yasara.org/minimizationserver.htm) (Kaistha and Sinha., 2009; Fernandez-Fuentes et al., 2007; Manikandan and Malik, 2008; Eastwood et al., 2001).

A set of tools including PROCHECK, ERRAT and VERIFY3D were adopt (http://nihserver.mbi.ucla.edu/SAVES) to verify the 3D model (Manikandan and Malik, 2008; Kumar and Carugo, 2011; Laskowski et al., 1993; Vinay and Reema, 2011; Colovos and Yeates, 1993; Bowie et al., 1991). The stereo chemical qualities of the model, the statistical accuracy of non-bonded interactions between different atom types and plots and the symmetry of the atomic model with its own amino acid sequence were studied (Table 1
                        ). The quality of the model was also validated by Qmean server (http://swissmodel.expasy.org/qmean) (Benkert et al., 2009, 2008). Molegro Virtual Docker 2011.4.3.0 (MVD) was used to final validation of the obtained model. To this purpose, the charge was calculated by MVD and added to the model. Explicit hydrogen bonds created and explicit bonds assigned (Thomsen and Christensen, 2006).

The DrugBank database is a unique bioinformatics and cheminformatics resource which combines detailed drug data (i.e., chemical, pharmacological and pharmaceutical) with comprehensive drug target (i.e., sequence, structure, and pathway) information. Both 2D and 3D structures of anti-viral drugs and nucleic acid subunits were studied using the ChemSpider (http://www.chemspider.com) (Pence and Williams., 2010), comprehensive medicinal chemistry (CMC) and PubChem Database, which is available through the NCBI World Wide Web server (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) (refer to Figs. 1 and 2
                        
                        ).

Molecular docking is a key tool in structural molecular biology and computer-assisted drug design. Studies were performed using Molegro software (http://www.molegro.com). This docking program is based on a new hybrid search algorithm, called guided differential evolution. The guided differential evolution algorithms combine the differential evolution optimization technique with a cavity prediction algorithm, which is dynamically used during the docking (Ratnavali et al., 2011; Thomsen and Christensen, 2006; Zhao et al., 2009). Binding affinity (kcal/mol) was calculated on the base of known experimental data. The MolDock scoring functions takes into account directional hydrogen bonding and charges. The following parameters (are listed in Table 2
                        ) were fixed throughout virtual screening survey.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

Computational approaches are being developed along with experimental techniques to analyze and integrate in vitro and in vivo data. Total energy and optimized conformation of nsLTP2 were uncovered by molecular dynamics simulation using Yet Another Scientific Artificial Reality Application (YASARA) (Tousheh et al., 2013). The optimized model was obtained based on the similarity to the model template via Qmean score. Such molecular models are required to represent and understand the amount of conformational flexibility and highlight the promise and challenges ahead in function assignment and apparent applications. Modeller and MVD specialize to predict the spatial position and size of the hydrophobic cavity in the rice nsLTP2. A close-up of tertiary structure shows the spatial position of some elements of the secondary structure and the situation of the active site (Fig. 3
                        ). The protein is made up by single monomer of α-helix building blocks. The geometry of water molecules directs the protein to dynamic active conformation (Fig. 4
                        ). Shell features include number of atoms, Van der Waals volume, the extent of hydrophobicity and solvent accessibility. Homology modeling studies revealed a high level of superimposition of native 3D structure and the predicted conformation (Fig. 5
                        ). The key residues are positionally conserved. These structural observations are consistent with the results of NMR and modeling studies (Samuel et al., 2002), indicating that the predicted structure of nsLTP2 functions much like the canonical native protein.

ChemSpider is a free access database established as a resource for biochemical compounds. The ID-number of the nucleosides and their derivatives and natural counterparts manually collected from ChemSpider database, are listed in Tables 3–7
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        . To assess the potential of nsLTP2-binding drugs, the detail of the molecular structure was obtained from CMC database. To determine whether each of nucleoside moieties play prominent role in association with nsLTP2, a comparison was conducted between binding affinities of four nucleoside analogues that differ in their base moiety (Table 3). At the level of chemical structure, these compounds reveal a common feature that distinguishes them from their natural counterparts (Fig. 2B), the altered base at C-1′ that is required for subsequent primer elongation. Comparison of the binding score values (kcal/mol) imply to the prominent role of the guanine base (Table 7, Figs. 9B and 10A). The base moiety would most likely be determinant to favorable loading, since it would be energetically encouraging for the sugar moiety to pass through the binding pocket. To examine this possibility we set out to evaluate the binding affinity of normal nucleosides as well as deoxynucleotide triphosphates (dNTPs). Purine nucleosides presented higher score than pyrimidine counterparts (Tables 4–7, Fig. 10). The observations could partly be attributed to the more hydrophobic feature of purine nitrogenous bases, brings about major forces for interaction with an apolar region of nsLTP2 (Fig. 7). Previous studies have suggested that such region is located adjacent to the hydrophobic cavity, containing a cluster of apolar residues including L8, A14, I15, F36, F39, Y45, Y48, V49, P52, A54, L65 and P66 (Cheng et al., 2004). This site serves to help bind ergosterol in rice nsLTP2, through the same binding pattern in the hydrophobic cavity. Hence, it is rational to assume that dominated hydrophobic-interactions between apolar residues of the region and nitrogenous base moiety of the nucleoside drugs confer apposite binding interactions. The presence of hydroxyl groups of sugar moieties have strong influence on adjustment in the flexible triangular hollow box of nsLTP2, contributing to the interactions originated from hydrogen binding with critical residues (Figs. 6 and 8
                        
                        
                        ). A similar trend was observed for natural purine nucleotides (ATP and GTP), which presented fairly equal affinity, comparable to the tendency of pyrimidine nucleotides (Fig. 10B, Tables 4–7). This expectation is consistent with the experimental results that interaction of sterol-like drugs with rice nsLTP2 originates from the association with the adjacent apolar binding site (Fig. 12) (Cheng et al., 2004).

Nucleoside analogues are therapeutic agents approved as antiviral agents against HIV or herpes simplex virus (HSV) as well as cancer (Berdis, 2008; Jepsen et al., 2004). In the course of ongoing nsLTP2 binding affinity evaluation, computational docking of a number of nucleoside and non-nucleoside analogous drugs was accomplished to the relevant binding site (Fig. 9
                        
                        ). Binding affinity measurements demonstrated comparable efficiency upon accommodation of sugar modified nucleoside in the nsLTP2 active site (Table 3). The binding efficiency of purine analogues such as vidarabin and abacavir is notably higher than the pyrimidine analogues (Figs. 9A and 6, Table 3). Vidarabin differs significantly from the other analogues as is highly similar to that of natural guanosine with simple change at C-2′OH (Fig. 2A). Decrease in the binding affinity is evident when the ribose is replaced with an open chain structure in a drug such as tenofovir. Thus, ribose emerges to be determinant, but not as much the base moiety as evidenced by the scores obtained for the base modified nucleosides. As for a pyrimidine-analogue, whose base moiety is extremely similar to that of natural pyrimidine (Fig. 2B), no increase is observed in the binding affinity for zalcitabine in spite of holding a sugar moiety similar to that of natural ribose (Fig. 9A, Table 3). These results provided that the base moiety does not play important role in interactions as degree as the sugar moiety. The scores for nsLTP2-drug complexes are quite different in that purine-based analogues presented the highest record, as evidenced for vidarabine (Fig. 9A). The results show that binding model for sugar moiety is more complicated. The base ring system may be critical for loading. We posit that purine-like moieties may impose subtle positioning effects, facilitate the precise rearrangement by alteration of nsLTP2 conformation and thus drive the higher specificity and affinity. Similar mode of action was observed with didanosine (Figs. 9B and 11 
                        ). Our results are consistent with experimental observations of Pato et al. who reported on the binding of wheat LTP1 with two bulky non-lipid molecules, conazole BD56 and amphotericin B, as antileishmania drugs (Pato et al., 2001). They proposed that BD56 could not be fully loaded within the protein cavity due to steric hindrance of imidazole bulky group of the molecule. Despite these compounds differed from normal lipids, due to the lack of long acyl chains, they present high affinity toward both members of nsLTP superfamily. Based on the loading behavior of vidarabine (Fig. 6), a similar trend is supposed to be occurred. Nonspecific van der Waals interactions and probe-occupied volume bring about flexibility to the binding site; explain the efficient associations of the therapeutic compounds (Samuel et al., 2002). These results imply that rice nsLTP2 have highly potential applications in pharmaceuticals. Contribution of the aromatic side chains of F39, Y45, and Y48 and the hydrophobic residues L8, I15, and V49 of rice nsLTP2 would be another explanation for sterol association. Y48 is involved in planar sterol binding but not linear lysophospholipid association (Cheng et al., 2007). These residues are near a long flexible region assisted with R44 which provides a major electrostatic interaction with a ligand (Cheng et al., 2004). In the same way, A1, A5, Y45 and Y48 create a strong hydrophobic environment to interact with the hydrophobic part of triphenylmethane derivatives. Accordingly, we posit that the residues around the hydrophobic cavity are key players for the specificity of nucleoside association. A similar trend was also observed for wheat nsLTP1 (Douliez et al., 2000). Such binding affinity of nsLTP2 demands further investigation, corroborating the capability of the protein to be used as an efficient drug carrier.

It is well known that of the two possible binding sites for drug molecules in the structure of rice nsLTP2, hydrophobic cavity rather than long flexible region at the surface, serves binding site for sterol-like molecules (Cheng et al., 2004; Lindorff-Larsen and Winther, 2001). Our computational results confirmed that the binding site for cholesterol in nsLTP2 resemble the model reported by Cheng et al. (2004), which is identical to the position of vidarabine (Figs. 6 and 12
                        ). Two of the molecules were characterized in detail both with respect to their score of binding and principle differences in or near the active sites of nsLTP2. Comparison of cholesterol and vidarabine binding sites revealed that of the residues: L8, A14, I15, F36, F39, Y45, Y48, V49, P52, A54, L65 and P66 known to be involved in the cholesterol-complex formation (Lindorff-Larsen and Winther, 2001), only Y67, C11, L29, A64, S59 residues are different (Fig. 6). However, while the affinity of vidarabine is comparable with that of cholesterol (Tables 3 and 8
                        ), molecular interaction analysis illustrated that the sugar moiety deeds very much like the cholesterol, might be incorporated into the lipophilic core (Fig. 6). The values of MolDock scores for nearly all tested nucleosides determined to be greater than the cholesterol (Tables 3–8). Thanks to the high flexibility of internal hollow box surrounded by four α-helices (Samuel et al., 2002), nsLTP2 displayed significant interactions with various nucleosides without major changes in the secondary or tertiary structure. These structural features for substrate specificity have helped to extend the substrate profile for other members of this protein super family and similar drug molecules.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The present study demonstrated, for the first time, the binding capability of rice nsLTP2 with nucleoside-based drugs and analogous molecules having pharmaceutical applications. We have attempted to develop the utilization of nsLTP2, as a prominent drug carrier, to nucleoside ligands. Bioinformatics investigations and computational docking arrived at the conclusion that there are a large capacity of rice nsLTP2 for a variety of anti-cancer nucleosides and analogous molecules as novel substrates. Molecular docking studies of the nucleoside analogous molecules show that purine-based drugs dock more favorably to the nsLTP2 active site. Depending on the values and relationships of hydrophobic properties of the evaluated molecules, binding into the hydrophobic cavity is suggested. Remaining challenges include the need to develop assays that will specifically detect the association of nucleotides and/or their analogues with nsLTP2 and the need to delineate their incorporation mechanisms. Though, bioinformatics approaches are presently facing some hurdles, mining the nsLTP2 potentials for drug delivery using bioinformatics can provide to optimize formulation for a protein-based carrier and have important repercussions in the therapeutic efficacy of nucleoside-based drugs. In practical terms, nsLTP2 gives a novel opportunity as drug delivery vehicles to dNTPs, can be used in the cell, molecular and pharmaceutical researches. Accordingly, the great need for multifunctional carriers in the context of drug delivery vehicles could be cover by implementation of extra functionality of nsLTP2.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This work was supported by Grants from Iran National Science Foundation (INSF), Grant number 87041496 and Research Council of University of Isfahan.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

