@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#On origin and evolution of carbonic anhydrase isozymes: A phylogenetic analysis from whole-enzyme to active site

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Phylogenetic analysis of isozymes of carbonic anhydrase family was carried out.


                        
                        
                           
                           Kingdom-specificity of the members of the family was explored.


                        
                        
                           
                           All the members of the family were discovered to be present in all three forms of life.


                        
                        
                           
                           Evolution of active site across different classes of the members was carried out.


                        
                        
                           
                           Similarity of sequences in the proximity of Zn ion was proposed to be responsible for functional similarity.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Kingdom-specificity

Active site

Sequence alignment

Carbonic anhydrases

Biological function

Structural similarity

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Genetic evolution of carbonic anhydrase enzyme provides an interesting instance of functional similarity in spite of structural diversity of the members of a given family of enzymes. Phylogenetic analysis of α-, β- and γ-carbonic anhydrase was carried out to determine the evolutionary relationships among various members of the family with the enzyme marking its presence in a wide range of cellular and chromosomal locations. The presence of more than one class of enzymes in a particular organism was revealed by phylogenetic time tree. The evolutionary relationships among the members of animal, plant and microbial kingdom were developed. The study revises a long-established notion of kingdom-specificity of the different classes of carbonic anhydrases and provides a new version of the presence of multiple classes of carbonic anhydrases in a single organism and the presence of a given class of carbonic anhydrase across different kingdoms.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The name carbonic anhydrase (CA) represents a family of enzymes which is found in all three forms of life, i.e., animals, plants and micro-organisms. The classical notion about CA described it to be derived from a single gene, now known as the α-CA gene, which later proved to be wrong with the acceptance of β- and γ-CA as genetically distinct. A comparison of amino acid sequences and crystal structures of three main classes of CA, viz., α-, β-, and γ-CA, shows that the three classes are evolutionarily different and have evolved independently (Tripp et al., 2001). Yet, interestingly, all of them catalyze the reversible hydration of CO2 to a bicarbonate ion and a proton (CO2
                     +H2O↔HCO
                        
                           
                           3
                           −
                        
                     
                     +H+). The interchange CO2
                     ↔HCO
                        
                           
                           3
                           −
                        
                      in a human body under different biological conditions has been reported as early as in 1930s by Meldrum and Roughton (1933), an era when α-CA was synonymous to CA. However, with the discovery of β-CA in plants (Hewett-Emmett et al., 1984) and γ-CA in micro-organisms (Alber and Ferry, 1994), the genetic characteristics and diversity of CA became a subject of interest. It is needless to say, however, that due to interesting structural and functional spectra provided by carbonic anhydrase isozymes, newer classes of this enzyme are continuously being discovered with δ-, ζ-, and η- carbonic anhydrases (Zimmerman and Ferry, 2008; Kumar and Ferry, 2014; Del Prete et al., 2014) reported in the recent past. However, the we confine the scope of the present study to α-, β- and γ- carbonic anhydrases mainly due to the fact that the current study is based upon bioinformatics tools and only these three classes of carbonic anhydrases have been reported well-enough in the literature to have the critical mass for the database to be worthwhile for any bioinformatics study.

The CA family is distinct from other families of enzymes because of the diversity exhibited by them both in cellular distribution and in the putative or biological functions of its member enzymes which range from photosynthesis, to respiration, pH homeostasis, and ion transport (Tashian, 1989). Although α-, β- and γ-CA have no amino acid sequence similarity, they are functionally identical biocatalysts. The sixteen isozymes of α-CA possess an active site consisting of a Zn2+ ion coordinated tetrahedrally to three His residues and a water molecule (Eriksson et al., 1988). The X-ray structure of β-CA, derived from red alga Porphyridium purpureum, reveals that the dimeric enzyme consists of two identical structural motifs with each motif carrying three projecting α helices (Mitsuhashi et al., 2000). It also consists of a Rossmann fold and an anti-parallel β-strand. This motif is remarkably different from those in α and γ-CA. Two zinc binding are sites present on both sides of a monomer of β-CA. The zinc atom is coordinated to Cys, Asp, His and Cys residues. No water molecule is present within the coordination radius of the zinc ions. X-ray crystallographic structure of γ-CA from archaeon Methanosarcina thermophila (Kisker et al., 1996) reveals a unique structure. The trimeric molecule has a completely different fold when compared to α and β-CA. Each subunit of the trimeric molecule is dominated by seven turns of a left handed β-helix, with three short strands per turn. The zinc ions are located between the subunits and the ions are coordinated by two His residues from one subunit and another His residue from the neighboring subunit. A water molecule is also present in the active site.

Since the reversible hydration of CO2 catalyzed by CA has been of widespread adaptive value to the early organisms, it is possible that it was one of the first enzymes to appear (Tashian, 1989). The original gene family of CA probably arose before the divergence of prokaryotes and eukaryotes more than half a billion years ago and for this prolonged period in the evolutionary history of CA, the CA genes underwent several rounds of erroneous duplication resulting in new genes. While most of the CA of animal kingdom fall under one gene family referred to as the α class, CA from several plant chloroplasts were observed to fall under a distinct category of gene family known as the β-CA gene family. In 1990, Miyachi and co-workers (Fukuzawa et al., 1990, 1990) showed that Chlamydomonas reinhardtii possessed α-CA linked CAH1 and CAH2 genes. Alber and Ferry (1994) later introduced another CA gene family which was characteristically distinct from other CA gene families. Hewett-Emmett and Tashian (1996) analyzed the evolutionary history of the genes by phylogenetic analysis and functional similarities of the CA encoded by three individual gene families known then. Their analysis involved ten types of CA under α-CA gene family. The authors concluded that α-CA are restricted to animal kingdom and green algae, β-CA are restricted to plants and eubacteria and γ-CA to archaebacteria and eubacteria. However, today, after nearly two decades, sixteen types of α-CA genes have been discovered. β-CA have also evolved and studied extensively, numerous new entries now being added. Therefore, it is important to carry out a thorough phylogenetic analysis of these ubiquitous enzymes to understand the evolutionary relationships among them. Further, as pointed out earlier, despite structural differences, the functional similarity of the enzymes remains. Therefore, it is also interesting to comment upon the similarity/differences in their active sites. In this paper, we analyze the protein sequence data of sixteen isozymes of α-CA, forty six different protein sequences of different species of β-CA and ten γ-CA protein sequences and analyze the evolution of each family, their evolutionary relationships and their active site evolution.

@&#METHODS@&#

All the sequences were collected from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) database. Protein sequences of all three classes of carbonic anhydrases (α-, β-, and γ-CA) with different encoding genes from different species were collected. Putative sequences were not considered in this study. The sequences were grouped according to their class. Multiple sequence alignment of proteins was carried out with the BioEdit package (Hall, 1999). The alignment was done using the blocks substitution matrix number 62 (BLOSUM62) (Henikoff and Henikoff, 1992). The resulting aligned sequences were saved in FASTA format. From the aligned sequences, further analysis of evolutionary relationship was carried out. The alignment of sequences revealed the positions in the sequences which were conserved and the divergence from a common ancestor sequence.

Phylogenetic trees were constructed using the MEGA package (Kumar et al., 1994) available from Institute of Molecular Evolutionary Genetics, The Pennsylvania State University (University Park, PA). The neighbor-joining time trees were constructed from p distance and Poisson-corrected distance matrices (Saitou and Nei, 1987). The maximum-likelihood trees were built with well defined statistical basis.

All three classes of CA contain Zn2+ ion where CO2 hydration reaction takes place. It was desired to compare sequences around the active site to know the structural similarity/differences. The Zn-binding active sites (from 1Åto 10Åat an interval of 1Å) of enzymes were isolated using a python code developed in our lab. Then the FASTA sequences of these specific regions were locally aligned by Bioedit tool for similarity search and comparison of active site evolution. Methods used for global alignment of whole-enzyme cited in the previous sub-sections were implemented for the analysis of active sites also. The authors find it important to mention here that there are reports in the literature on γ-CA with Fe2+ ions in the active site rather than Zn2+ ions (Macauley et al., 2009; Tripp et al., 2004). This study, however, considers only those sequences which use Zn2+ ions in the active site for catalyzing the reaction. The presence of Fe2+ ion for catalyzing the reaction is yet another important and interesting instance of the structural spectrum exhibited by CA family. This study, however, considers only the affect of amino acid sequence, hence the selection of sequences.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

α-CA is the most populous member of the CA family. Table S1 (see supporting information) gives the details of all the α-CA genes used in this study along with their source. A total of one hundred and sixteen α-CA sequences were aligned and compared in this study. The α-CA amino acid multiple sequence alignment is given in Table S2 (see supporting information). The phylogenetic time tree constructed using the neighbor-joining method is shown in Fig. 1
                        . The tree was derived from distances calculated after removing the sites of missing data or gaps in the alignment after the distances were corrected by Poisson correction method. As can be seen from Fig. 1, the tree consists of a large number of species. Two major clusters, A and B, can be seen to be emerging at the early stages of evolution (Fig. 2
                        ). The first major cluster can be seen to consist of four sub-clusters, A1, A2, A3, A4. From the sub-cluster A1 (see sub-tree A1 of Fig. 2), it can be observed that the genes CA2 and CA3 are very closely related and the species mainly present in the A1 cluster are from animal kingdom. Though the genes are closely related, they are from different chromosomal location (Homo sapiens chromosome 8q21.2, Mus musculus chromosome 3, Rattus norvegicus chromosome 4, Bos taurus chromosome 14, Danio rerio chromosome 24). CA2 gene of Arabidopsis thaliana and CA of Oryza sativa also resemble the CA2 and CA3 genes of all the animal kingdom but gene duplication occurred for the CA of Oryza sativa Japonica group and CA2 of A. thaliana. Again after gene duplication, the next most closely related genes are CA8, CA1 and CA13. These genes map to human chromosome 8, but in different bands.

The second sub-cluster, A2 (see sub-tree A2 of Fig. 2), of the first major cluster consists of diverse genes. CA6 of the Xenopus tropicalis (amphibia) and CA of Microcystis aeruginosa (cyanobacteria) are closely related and form a separate clade. From this we can see a clear evolutionary relationship between animal α-CA and bacterial α-CA. The gene duplication occurs from this clade forming a separate clade of the periplasmic and intracellular CA of C. reinhardtii sequence which are very similar to that of H. sapiens CA7. CA4 of D. rerio and car15 of R. norvegicus form a separate clade, and from that, after gene duplication, CA15 of D. rerio, CA4 of R. norvegicus and M. musculus evolve.

From the third sub-cluster, A3 (see sub-tree A3 of Fig. 2), of the first major cluster a clear evolutionary relationship between bacterial and animal kingdom is visible. CA10 of B. taurus and H. sapiens and CA9 of D. rerio are closely related and CA6 of A. thaliana is related with these genes but gene duplication occurs for the case of A. thaliana. CA14 of D. rerio forms a separate clade. CA of Laccaria bicolor and Lactobacillus species are closely related. CA6 of B. taurus and CA of Vibrio cholera remain in the same clade. The CA6 of H. sapiens are similar to the CA6 of M. musculus and CA12 of X. tropicalis but duplication occurs for the case of CA6 of H. sapiens. CA of Helicobacter pylori, CA2 of Drosophila melanogaster and CA15 of M. musculus also fall in the same sub-cluster. CA4 of H. sapiens and B. taurus are also closely related.

The last sub-cluster, A4 (see sub-tree A4 of Fig. 2), of the first major cluster also consists of different categories of species and they are interconnected with one another. CA14 of X. tropicalis and CA of M. aeruginosa SPC777 are in same clade. On the other hand, M. aeruginosa PCC 9808 is similar to that of CA1 of A. thaliana. CA5A of M. musculus forms a separate clade. CA3 of A. thaliana and CA12 of animal species taken for this phylogenetic study evolve from the gene duplication from CA9 gene of animal kingdom.

The second major cluster B (see sub-tree B of Fig. 2) of the phylogenetic tree gives the most closely related genes as CA14 and CA11. CA of Zea mays and CA of C. reinhardtii form a separate clade after the gene duplication. The next closely related genes from this major cluster are CA5 and CA7. CA16b of D. rerio, CA1 of X. tropicalis, CA8 of A. thaliana, CA of Streptococcus mutants and CA of Aspergillus species also present in this cluster. This cluster, however, can be seen to be smaller than the cluster A consisting of fewer species when compared to those present in cluster A.

The phylogeny of β-CA is shown in Fig. 3
                         (see Table S3 for sequence alignment). Two major clusters are visible in the phylogenetic tree of β-CA family. In the two clusters plant, animal and organisms from bacterial kingdom are present. In the first major cluster, eudicot plants are the major species present. The four distinct genes viz., CA1, CA2, BCA3 and BCA4 in A. thaliana are all in the same major cluster though the chromosomal location for these genes are different. The gene duplication occurs mainly after the eudicot species present in the phylogenetic tree. The Flaveria genus plants fix CO2 by different routes but they are almost identical and closely related according to the phylogenetic tree developed in this study. All the eudicot β-CA sequences are closely related. The monocot plant Hordeum vulgare and O. sativa form a separate clade. Gene duplication occurred from eudicot plants for monocot plants. Escherichia coli PCN033 forms a separate clade but in the same major cluster. The arthropodas from animal kingdom Anopheles gambiae and Daphnia pulex are in separate clade because of the gene duplication in the first major cluster. C. reinhardtii β-CA genes belong to different cellular locations as well as different chromosomal locations. They are very similar in the sequence and form a separate clade in the first major cluster.

The second major cluster in the phylogenetic tree consists of viridiplantae kingdom which consists of green algae and proteobacteria. In the second major cluster Micromonas pusilla CCMP1545 green algae forms a separate clade and gene duplication occurs from this and the other bacteria (proteobacteria) forming a separate clade.

From the phylogenetic analysis of γ-CA in Fig. 4
                         a clear existence of γ-CA in the plant kingdom is visible (see Table S4 for sequence alignment). The γ-CA of O. sativa and CA1, CA2, CA3 of eudicot plant A. thaliana are very closely related. The γ-CA of C. reinhardtii of viridiplantae kingdom forms a separate clade because of gene duplication. The proteobacterial γ-CA forms a separate clade and they are closely related. But the archaeon M. thermophila are closer to proteobacteria Pseudomonas aeruginosa PA1R. M. thermophila shows a clear example of physiological role of CA in anaerobes growing on acetate. For the case of this archaeon the CA is present outside the cell membrane (Alber and Ferry, 1994). Its not known whether any cytosolic CA is also synthesized during the growth on acetate. So CA of M. thermophila can be functionally distinct from rest of the CA. The eudicot plant A. thaliana and monocot plant O. sativa possess γ-CA but the active site are different. An interesting fact about γ-CA is worthy to mention here. γ-CA's can be considered to belong to a larger set of structural family including left-handed beta helical acyltransferase enzymes which are involved in lipid synthesis. This evolutionary relationship has already been established using phylogenetic methods by Parisi et al. (2000). Therefore, in this study, we have focussed our attention only towards CA's and evolutionary relationships among them.

The phylogenetic analysis (Fig. 5
                        ) of human CA isozymes reveals several new facts (see Table S5 for sequence alignment). The structural diversity of CA can be appreciated by just visiting the spectrum of its isozymes in human beings. Fourteen human CA isozymes are located in seven different chromosomes. CA1, CA2, CA3 and CA13 are closely related and also located in the same chromosome. All these CA are cytoplasmic. Despite being in a same chromosomal location, the CA related protein CA8 is not functionally identical with CA1, CA2, CA3 and CA13. CA8 isozyme does not show the classical CA activity of hydration/dehydration of CO2 (Aspatwar et al., 2013). The conserved properties of the isozyme, however, reveals a very important role in vertebrates. The mitochondrial CA5A and CA5B are from chromosome 16 and are closely related to CA7 isozyme which is from chromosome 16q22.1. The membrane bound CA like CA4, CA9, CA14, CA12 are closely related but their chromosomal locations are different. The CA related protein CA10 and CA11 form a separate clade because of gene duplication. They are from chromosome 17 and 19, respectively. Their physiological role is also not known. But CA6 isozyme separately forms a clade and does not possess similarity with that of other isozymes. This analysis also reveals a fundamental information about multitude of CO2 hydration reactions in a human body. Although different genes of human CA encoding different proteins all catalyze the same reaction from different cellular and chromosomal location, the physiological role of CO2 hydration in a complex metabolic reaction network as a fundamental reaction in a complex organism is appreciated by this analysis.

From the above analysis it is clearly proven that the prevailing notion of α-CA being animal kingdom specific, β-CA plant and eubacteria specific and γ-CA only archaebacterial specific is not correct. Plants and eubacteria also contain α-CA and γ-CA. Some lower animal species contain β-CA also. The dicot plant A. thaliana and the monocot plant O. sativa Japonica contain α-, β-, and γ-CA. The presence of β-CA in A. gambiae (arthropoda) and D. pulex (arthropoda) from animal kingdom reveals that β-CA are not plant or eubacteria specific. O. sativa and A. thaliana are the only groups appearing in all three classes of CA. E. coli, the eubacteria, possesses both β-, and γ-CA. Therefore, this study revises the older version of Hewett-Emmett et al. of kingdom distribution in CA on the basis of thorough phylogenetic analysis.

Residues present within 10Åof the active site (Zn2+ ion) of CA encoded by CA1, CA2, CA4, CA14 and CAH1 genes are compared by local sequence alignment with the control CA encoded by CA2 gene. The comparison of the sequences is shown in Fig. 6
                         which is color-coded to reveal is sequence similarity/differences such that the green shade shows 100% similarity in sequence which the red shade through blue shades show the departure from CA2 gene sequence. Analysis of Fig. 6 reveals that within 4 Åfrom the Zn2+ ion, the residues are almost the same for all the CA. Despite being in the different locations like CA encoded by CA1 and CA2 are cytosolic and CA4 and CA14 are membrane bound, the active site residues are almost same for all the CA. But the crystal structure of CA of C. reinhardtii encoded by CAH gene active site residues are slightly different from that of the other CA's. Because of active site similarity it can be predicted that although evolutionarily different, different members of CA family are essentially functionally identical owing to structural similarity close to the active site.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

Phylogenetic analysis of α-, β- and γ-CA revealed the evolutionally relationships among the members of CA family from animal, plant and microbial kingdom. The presence of members from more than one kingdom was observed in all classes of CA enzymes, as was seen from the phylogenetic time tree. Further, the presence of more than one type of CA was also observed in several organisms. Therefore, this study conclusively provides a new version of kingdom-non-specificity of CA. The reason behind the functional similarity of the enzyme family despite the structural diversity was established and it was attributed to similarity in sequences up to 4Åfrom active Zn2+ center. The differences in the activities of different members, thus, potentially arise due to residues far from the active centre. Whereas the structural and functional relationships in CA family from an evolutionary perspective for CO2 hydration action has been conclusively achieved in this study, it will be interesting to divert further efforts towards understanding such relationships in this diverse family for other biologically important functions such as cellular signaling.

Conceived and designed experiments: PAD; performed the experiments: SB; analyzed the data: SB and PAD; wrote the paper: PAD and SB.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENT@&#

The authors thank the Department of Biotechnology of Ministry of Science and Technology, Govt. of India (BT/PT7054/BID/7/422/2012) for funding.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2016.01.003.

The following are the supplementary data to this article:


                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

