@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#A structural comparative approach to identifying novel antimalarial inhibitors

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We have used a computational structural comparative approach to identify compounds that can selectively target an essential malaria protein.


                        
                        
                           
                           We have used AutoDock Vina to compare the binding affinities of potential inhibitors against an essential enzyme in Plasmodium falciparum and its human homolog.


                        
                        
                           
                           We were able to identify two inhibitors of P. falciparum in the ng/mL range.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Virtual screen

Structural comparative approach

Malaria

Inhibitors

PfUCHL3

Computational

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Malaria continues to affect millions of people annually. With the rise of drug resistant strains, the need for alternative treatments has become increasingly urgent. Recently, PfUCHL3 was identified as an essential deubiquitinating enzyme. The increasing number of drug target structures being solved has increased the feasibility of utilizing a structural comparative approach to identifying novel inhibitors. Using AutoDock Vina, we recently screened the NCI library of about 320,000 compounds against the crystal structure of PfUCHL3. The top hits were subsequently screened against its human ortholog UCHL3 as to identify compounds that could specifically target the PfUCHL3 over its human counterpart. This method was used to identify small molecule inhibitors that can preferentially inhibit the parasitic enzyme. Several compounds were identified that demonstrated significant binding affinity preference for the malaria target over the human enzyme. Two of these compounds demonstrated ng/mL activity.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Malaria infects over 250 million people a year and claims the lives of nearly a million people annually (Global status report on road safety. Geneva W.H.O., 2009). Malaria is a severe infectious disease that continues to plague millions of people, with a large portion of the victims being from underprivileged areas (Fidock, 2010). Since the disease is most prominent in disadvantaged areas it has been under studied. Thus, no new antimalarial compounds with a novel mechanism have been approved for use since 1996, which has not kept up with Plasmodium's progression in drug resistance (Gamo et al., 2010). The two main drugs used to treat malaria are chloroquine and pyrimethamin-sulphadoxine. Both of these drugs have been efficacious against the most virulent strain of Plasmodium, P. falciparum (Snow et al., 2005). However, the emergence of strains resistant to these first line antimalarial drugs has increased the urgency for the development of novel therapeutics. While much of the focus has been on the identification of quinoline analogs, the need for therapeutics with a novel mode of action has desirable, as the enzyme P. Falciparum Chloroquine Resistance Transporter (Pfcrt) has made chloroquine much less effective at treating malaria (Zishiri et al., 2011; Bray et al., 2005; Djimde et al., 2001; Fidock et al., 2000).

Traditionally, researchers have targeted proteins with no human homologs. While this method has been very advantageous, the rise of drug resistant strains has resulted in the need for novel drug targets (Ekland and Fidock, 2008). An alternative strategy is the structural comparative analysis method, where structural insight is used to selectively target homologous proteins or proteins within a family. Using high-resolution structures, subtle structural differences can be exploited for the identification of selective inhibitors, even between highly conserved proteins (Eswaran et al., 2006). It has previously been shown that inhibitors can have drastically different inhibitory profiles even among isoforms (Frederick et al., 2009). Other researchers have emphasized the importance of being able to use computational methods to selectively target an enzyme or a set of enzymes. Two approaches that have previously been utilized to compare the binding affinities of ligands with various structures are serial docking, and in situ cross-docking (Fernandes et al., 2004; Cosconati et al., 2009). Serial Docking sequentially docks ligands into a series of enzymes and based on its predicted binding affinity the compounds is either passed to the next enzyme for docking or eliminated from the screen (Chang et al., 2007; Muller et al., 2006; Kairys et al., 2006). In situ cross-docking sets a group of enzymes to have similar search areas so that they can quickly be screened as a set (Sotriffer and Dramburg, 2005; Zentgraf et al., 2006). Comparing ligands’ binding affinity has been used for various applications, such as identifying off target binding, which would lead to unwanted side effects, repurposing current therapeutics, for the identification of a single ligand that can synergistically target multiple enzymes in a pathway, and for screening compounds against high flexible targets (Keiser et al., 2009; Rockey and Elcock, 2002; Oprea and Matter, 2004; McInnes, 2007). This supports the idea that evenly highly homologous proteins can be selectively targeted. This approach aims to identify selective leads at the beginning of the drug discover process. Currently there are 86,487 protein structures in the protein data bank (PDB) and the number of structures deposited annually continues to increase at an astonishing rate (8368 in 2012 alone). With this structural insight, it has become increasingly feasible to utilize a structural comparative approach to exploit structural discrepancies in homologous or closely related proteins for therapeutic applications. In addition, the increasing accessibility to computing power allows for thousands, if not millions of compounds to be screened in a matter of days. This method was employed herein to identify two novel antimalarial compounds.

An enzyme that has shown promise as a drug target is PfUCHL3, a deubiquitinating enzyme that was recently shown to have strong evidence of being essential for the parasite's survival. Using endpoint reactions PfUCHL3 was identified to have dual activity as a deubiquitinating and deNeddylase (neural precursor cell expressed, developmentally down-regulated 8). A mutagenesis study, converting the catalytic Cys 92 to an Ala rendering the enzyme inactive, and had a dominate negative affect on expression making it highly likely that the enzyme is essential for the parasites survival. Previous work has been shown that enzymes with deubiquitinating activity could be essential for host-targeted immune invasion as well as general interaction with its host (Isaacson and Ploegh, 2009). Previous studies have shown proteasome inhibitors can have a lethal effect on malaria parasites (Artavanis-Tsakonas et al., 2010). While these promiscuous inhibitors validate the viability of target proteasomes their lack of selectivity prohibits their feasibility a drug candidate. The crystal structures for both PfUCHL3 and its only human ortholog, UCHL3, have been solved, allowing a structural comparative analysis approach to be implemented to identify inhibitors that can selectively target PfUCHL3.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

We used the molecular docking program, AutoDock Vina, to identify several compounds that can preferentially bind to the P. falciparum enzyme over it its human counterpart (Trott and Olson, 2010). The scheme used to identify several inhibitors is shown in Fig. 1
                     . The process began with the screening of the National Cancer Institute (NCI) molecular library against PfUCHL3 using AutoDock Vina. The hits from the screen were subsequently visualized using PyMOL, as to only select the compounds with the correct binding conformation. The search grid in AutoDock Vina was set to encompass the catalytic triad, the recognition site, which UB and Nedd8 bind to, and the hydrophobic region adjacent to the active site. The catalytic triad was selected for targeting, as compounds binding in this site would utilize a competitive inhibitor strategy. The recognition site used causing the natural substrate to bind to the recognition channel, inserting the peptide into the active site for hydrolyses. Lastly the hydrophobic region adjacent to the active site was also included, since compounds binding to the active site extending into the hydrophobic region could also be viable inhibitors. Thus, while compounds that solely bind in the hydrophobic region leading to the active site have not been shown to inhibit activity and would not compete with the natural ligand, it was included so that if a compound bound in the active site and extended it to that region, its binding affinity would be correctly predicted. The compounds with the highest binding affinity and the correct predicted binding conformation needed for inhibition were subsequently screened against the human ortholog, UCHL3. The binding affinities of the two screens were compared and compounds displaying a preferential binding affinity for the PfUCHL3 enzyme were selected for empirical testing. Ten compounds were selected for testing against the chloroquine sensitive NF54 strain of P. falciparum. Two of the ten compounds demonstrated ng/mL activity.

The distribution of the compounds’ binding affinities displays a typical bell curve (Fig. 2
                        ) with largest percentage of compounds having a predicted binding affinity between −6.5 and −4.0kcal/mol. Compounds in this binding affinity range typically do not have activity with the targeted protein. Compounds that bound to the active site were identified with binding affinities as high as −9.5. There were other compounds that bound with a high binding, but they were predicted to bind solely in hydrophobic pocket adjacent to the active site (Fig. 3
                        ). The large percentage of compounds predicted to bind in the alternative site is most likely due to the hydrophobic nature of the site. Compounds binding in the alternative hydrophobic site were removed from further consideration as no previous evidence has shown this to be an affective druggable site. The two ligands known to bind to PfUCHL3, UB and PfNedd8, were also docked using AutoDock Vina. UB and PfNedd8 exhibited binding affinities of 5.5kcal/mol and 5.2kcal/mol, respectively. The predicted binding configuration of UB matches that of co-crystal between UB and PfUCHL3. The Nedd8 conformation matches the computationally predicted structure. All of the inhibitors selected for empirical screening exhibited significantly higher predicted binding affinities for PfUCLH3 than the two natural substrates. To date the most effective inhibitor of PfUCHL3 is a ubiquitin-based suicide substrate, ubiquitin vinyl methyl ester (Borodovsky et al., 2002). Since these inhibitors use the natural substrate as its scaffold would not give the desired selective and has been shown to target UCHL3 and UCHL1. The binding affinity of this inhibitor was not calculated using the molecular docking program since it uses the covalent strategy for inhibition.

The compounds displaying a high binding affinity and the appropriate predicted binding were subsequently screened against its human counter part, UCHL3. Using this method we were able to identify numerous compounds that were computationally predicted to preferentially bind to the PfUCHL3 over its human counterpart, UCHL3.

The top 500 compounds based on binding affinity were evaluated using PyMOL to ensure that they were computationally predicted to have the correct binding orientation needed for inhibition. The majority of the compounds bound to an adjacent hydrophobic pocket in the structure shown in magenta in Fig. 3. In Fig. 3, the active site and recognition site are colored orange and the alternative-binding site is colored magenta. The active site of PfUCHL3 has previously been identified by Artavanis-Tsakonas et al. (2010) using small reactive electrophilic compounds that were covalently attach to the catalytic Cys 92 residue (Frickel et al., 2007). The cysteine protease forms a groove that recognizes the substrate and leads to the catalytic triad consisting of residues Cys 92, His 164, Asp 179. While both the human and plasmodium enzymes utilize the identical catalytic triad, the residues in the recognition groove can be exploited to identify a small molecule that can selectively bind to PfUCHL3 instead of the human UCHL3. The recognition groove is made up of nineresidues, Phe 165, Leu 10, Asp 157, Glu 11, Ser 12, Ser 219, Pro 14, Asp 33, and Thr 163. With five of the residues being conserved between PfUCHL3 and UCHL3 (Table 2). The variants in the groove provide an opportunity for selectively targeting the Pf enzyme over the human. This groove is known to interact with UB and PfNedd8 (Frickel et al., 2007). The ten most promising compounds were selected for empirical screening and are shown in Table 1
                        
                         and Fig. 4
                        . The binding preference ranged from 1.5kcal/mol to 3.7kcal/mol.

Compound Zinc 17465979 displayed a 46.6% preferential binding affinity for the parasitic enzyme, with its binding affinity for the human counterpart falling in the indiscriminate binding range. Compound, ZINC 17465979, which had the highest binding affinity, had a 2.6kcal/mol binding preference for PfUCHL3 over the human ortholog. Zinc 17465979 is bi tricyclic compound with one set of the tricyclic ring seating along the recognition groove. The other tricyclic ring sits face to face with the loop region overpassing the catalytic triad. Compound Zinc 17465979 is predicted to form a hydrogen bond with the backbone of residue Leu 10. The amide of the residues forms a hydrogen bond with two of the alcohols on the compound. The carbonyl and alcohol of Zinc 17465979 form a hydrogen bonding interaction with Ser 12. In the human ortholog the Ser is an Ala, which would remove one of the key hydrogen bonding interactions. Also, the discrepancies in the residues in the recognition site create several bad steric interactions. The lack of hydrogen bonding and steric repulsion could account for the calculated preferential binding of Zinc 17465979. This compounds effectively space fills the groove and the opening the tunnel for the catalytic triad.

ZINC 04792034, the compound with the second highest predicted binding affinity, also displayed a high preference for PfUCHL3. This compounds is computationally predicted to form two hydrogen bonding interactions with Ser 12 and two of the amines in compounds. In the human ortholog, this residue is an Ala, which accounts for the large difference in binding energy. The compound also forms a hydrogen bond with Ser 219 on the opposite wall of the groove. The fused tricyclic aromatic ring is projected into the tunnel leading to the catalytic triad, with the inhibitor effectively spatially filling the groove. When modeled with its human counterparts, the inhibitor is void of any hydrogen bonding interactions. Both tricyclic rings of the two inhibitors have very analogous binding orientations to each other. Both of these compounds display binding affinities that could potentially selectively inhibit enzymatic activity for the Pf enzyme.

The structures of the ten compounds empirically examined are shown in Fig. 4. Of the ten compounds screened, two of the compounds display high ng/mL activity against the parasite. The other eight compounds did not demonstrate activity, in large part due to the lack of solubility of the compounds under the necessary assay conditions. Four of the compounds had log
                        P values over 6.47, which violates Lipinski's rules. However, compounds were not excluded as numerous compounds have been identified that lay outside the parameters of Lipinski's rules. Since these compounds were screened using a cell-based assay, it is not surprising that only two of the compounds inhibited growth.

The two most promising leads are Zinc 17465979 and Zinc 04366855, which had an MIC of 378.5ng/mL and 603.1ng/mL respectively (Table 3
                        ). Zinc 17465979 obeys Lipinski's Rule of 5 in the number of hydrogen bond acceptors and is just slightly above the number hydrogen donors, molecular weight, and log
                        P. Zinc 04366855 hydrogen bond acceptors and molecular weight are both with the parameters of Lipinski's Rule of 5. However, it contains several extra hydrogen bonding donors and has a large log
                        P value. The log
                        P value of Zinc 04366855 can be greatly altered based on the pH, thus allows this compound to be come more hydrophilic. Both of these compounds were predicted to bind in the recognition groove leading into the catalytic triad (Fig. 5
                        ). The periphery of the tricyclic portion of the two inhibitors projects in toward the catalytic triad of the enzyme. Thus these two leads are promising scaffolds for constructing covalent inhibitors, by attaching an electrophilic handle to these two compounds. The increased activity of the Cys in of the catalytic triad makes it very reactive toward electrophilic groups such as a b unsaturated ketone, alkyl halide or an ester, all of which could be adhered to the two inhibitors identified here.

The NCI library was obtained from the Zinc Database with the compounds already converted to pdbqt format, which is required for AutoDock Vina (Irwin and Shoichet, 2005; Irwin et al., 2012). The 3-dimensional structure of PfUCHL3 was obtained from the Protein Data Bank (PDB ID 2WE6). This structure is of PfUCHL3 is in the absence of any inhibitor or substrate. The closest human enzyme is UCHL3 whose structure as also been solved. The crystal structure of UCHL3 was also downloaded from the PDB (ID 1UCH). Molecular docking was conducted on the Ranger supercomputer, which shortened the time to test all of the compounds from about a month to just a couple of days. Supercomputing time was provided as an educational grant from XSEDE. The molecular docking was conducted using AutoDock Vina, which uses a unique algorithm that implements a machine learning approach to its scoring function. It also utilizes an iterated local search global optimizer as part of its optimization algorithm. Using AutoDock Tools, the PDB (2WE6) structure was converted from a pdb file to a pdbqt file and the search grid was identified as x-center: 19.941, y-center: −30.814, and z-center: −66.648 with dimensions x-size: 26, y-size: 28, and z-size: 30. The search was conducted with an exhaustiveness of 8 (Dave Toth, 2012). The entire NCI library of approximately 320,000 compounds was screened against the PfUCHL3 structure. The compounds were sorted by binding affinity and visually analyzed using PyMOL.

The second screen was accomplished as described for PfUCHL3 with the human ortholog, UCHL3 (PDB 1UCH). The grid site and dimensions are x-center: 42.1, y-center: 27.763, and z-center: 53.408 and x-size: 22, y-size: 30, and z-size: 28, respectively. The molecular docking program used an exhaustiveness value of 8.

The top ten compounds were selected for empirical screening. The samples were prepared as 20mg/mL stock solutions in DMSO. The test samples were then tested in triplicate against the chloroquine sensitive NF54 strain of P. falciparum (DTP, in press). A modified Trager and Jensen method was used for the continuous in vitro culture of the asexual erythrocytic stages of P. falciparum. And quantitative assessment of antiplasmodial activity was determined via the parasite lactate dehydrogenase assay using the method described by Makler (Makler et al., 1993; Trager and Jensen, 1976).

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

Utilizing a comparative structural analysis approach, we have been able to identify several compounds that could potentially selectively inhibit an essential Pf enzyme while leaving its human ortholog unaffected. This has become increasingly important, as drug resistant strains of malaria have become increasingly common and the need for a novel approach to targeting this deadly parasite has become more urgent. Targeting PfUCHL3 would circumvent the current modes of drug resistance in the parasite.

One of the largest problems inhibitors have, besides ineffectiveness, is promiscuity among other targets. Herein we have described a structural comparative approach for identifying novel leads based on preferential computational binding affinities of the desired target verse the human ortholog. With the increasing number of crystal structure being deposited in the PDB (86,344 structures currently) and access to increased computing power, this approach has become increasing feasible for a variety of drug targets. This approach will allow for the exploitation of minor structural difference between homologous proteins in different species.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This research was supported in part by the National Science Foundation through XSEDE resources with grants MCB120071: “Using Supercomputing in a Medicinal Chemistry Course” and MCB120043: “Virtual Screening of Pathogenic Drug Targets” and by the Texas Advanced Computing Center, where the supercomputer we used is located. The educational grant enabled our students to learn to use a supercomputer for drug discovery and their promising results from that led us to screen the remaining compounds with our research grant. This research was also supported by the Drug Synthesis and Chemistry Branch, Developmental Therapeutics Program, Division of Cancer Treatment and Diagnosis, which provided the compounds.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

