@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Computational modeling of acrylodan-labeled cAMP dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit unfolding

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Structure of acrylodan-labeled protein kinase A catalytic subunit was modeled.


                        
                        
                           
                           Calculations were made at temperatures from 300 to 700K to model protein unfolding.


                        
                        
                           
                           Positioning of the reporter group was significantly changed during protein unfolding.


                        
                        
                           
                           Molten globule formation was observed between the native and unfolded protein structures


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Protein kinase A

Acrylodan label

Fluorescence assay

Protein unfolding

Intermediate

molten globule

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Structure of the cAMP-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit, where the asparagine residue 326 was replaced with acrylodan-cystein conjugate to implement this fluorescence reporter group into the enzyme, was modeled by molecular dynamics (MD) method and the positioning of the dye molecule in protein structure was characterized at temperatures 300K, 500K and 700K. It was found that the acrylodan moiety, which fluorescence is very sensitive to solvating properties of its microenvironment, was located on the surface of the native protein at 300K that enabled its partial solvation with water. At high temperatures the protein structure significantly changed, as the secondary and tertiary structure elements were unfolded and these changes were sensitively reflected in positioning of the dye molecule. At 700K complete unfolding of the protein occurred and the reporter group was entirely expelled into water. However, at 500K an intermediate of the protein unfolding process was formed, where the fluorescence reporter group was directed towards the protein interior and buried in the core of the formed molten globule state. This different positioning of the reporter group was in agreement with the two different shifts of emission spectrum of the covalently bound acrylodan, observed in the unfolding process of the protein.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Acrylodan (6-acryloyl-2-dimethylaminonaphthalene), when covalently bound to a cystein residue of a native or mutated protein, is a useful fluorescent probe for investigation into the protein structural dynamics, as the emission spectrum of this dye is highly sensitive to changes of its environment (Prendergast et al., 1983). In water the emission spectrum of the acrylodan adduct with model thiol compounds was characterized with the λ
                     max value 540nm (Prendergast et al., 1983), and significant blue-shift was observed if this dye was transferred into water-free polar organic solvents acetone (λ
                     max
                     =465nm), dimethyl formamide (λ
                     max
                     =470nm) and acetonitrile (λ
                     max
                     =468nm) (Kawski et al., 2002). The fluorescence spectrum of acrylodan, which was covalently attached to cAMP-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit (PKAc), was characterized by the λ
                     max value 496nm (Lew et al., 1997; Kivi et al., 2013). This result was similar to the spectral data for acrylodan-labeled parvalbumin (λ
                     max
                     =498nm) and papain (λ
                     max
                     =491nm) (Prendergast et al., 1983). Therefore it could be suggested that the reporter group was only partially accessible to water if bound to these proteins. Moreover, the emission spectrum of the protein bound acrylodan was red-shifted in the presence of specific ligands of these enzymes, indicating that conformational changes induced by ligand binding partially extruded the fluorophore from the protein interior into surrounding water (Prendergast et al., 1983). This conclusion was in agreement with the fact that transfer of the acrolydan-labeled troponin into 6M guanidine hydrochloride solution, where the protein structure was completely unfolded, shifted the λ
                     max value to 532nm that was close to the emission spectrum of the dye in water medium (Prendergast et al., 1983). In the case of acrylodan-labeled PKAc similar shift of λ
                     max to 520nm occurred in 4M guanidine hydrochloride solution (our unpublished data).

In this study we performed computer modeling of the acrylodan-labeled PKAc structure and characterized positioning of the reporter group in the native enzyme, and also in protein structures modeled at high temperatures, where partial or complete destabilization of the secondary and tertiary structure elements emulated the protein unfolding process. It was found that dissolution of protein structure was, indeed, accompanied with alteration of positioning of the covalently attached acrylodan molecule, and these changes revealed formation of an intermediate state on the protein unfolding pathway, which could be characterized as a molten globule of this protein.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

The model of cAMP-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit (PKAc) was built up as was described before (Izvolski et al., 2013), proceeding from the X-ray structure of the protein ternary complex with ATP analog AMP-PNP and the peptide inhibitor PKI(5–24) (Zeng et al., 1993). This structure was listed under the codename “1ATP” in the PDB database (www.pdb.org). For our analysis both bound ligands were deleted from this complex to produce an input file describing the apoenzyme.

Further, the asparagine residue in position 326 was replaced with the acrylodan-cystein conjugate to implement the fluorescence ligand into the protein, and thereafter structure of the covalently labeled enzyme was optimized by means of MD calculations taking into consideration the influence of a number of shells of surrounding water molecules. This location of the label was chosen proceeding from other studies with this fluorophore (Lew et al., 1997).

Calculations were performed at temperatures from 300K to 700K. It was suggested that at high temperature the energy of thermal motion overcomes interactions, which are responsible for formation of the secondary and tertiary structure of the protein, and the appropriate conformational transitions model unfolding of PKAc. The time-course of these structural transformations was characterized by alteration of the gyration radius of the protein. This approach has been successfully applied for computational modeling of different proteins as well as their unfolding process (Kaushik et al., 2011; Koshy et al., 2010; Lin et al., 2009; Paschek et al., 2008; Wang et al., 1999; Yan et al., 2010).

The MD calculations, performed at 300K (27°C), revealed that “soaking” of the protein X-ray structure into water medium caused some increase in gyration radius of the protein (Fig. 1
                        , left panel), indicating that small changes in dimensions and compactness of the protein occurred due to additional solvation. The average structure of the dye-labeled protein was obtained from these MD calculations and was shown in Fig. 1(right panel). This structure revealed no principal differences from the average structure and dynamic properties of the native enzyme as was discussed before (Izvolski et al., 2013). Analogously, similarity between the catalytic and binding properties of the native and the dye-labeled enzymes was demonstrated experimentally (Lew et al., 1997; Kivi et al., 2013).

The structure of the acrylodan-PKAc adduct revealed that the covalently attached fluorophore was posed on the surface of the protein (Fig. 1, right panel), where part of the dye molecule was embedded into the protein structure. More explicitly this positioning of the dye was characterized by the solvent accessible surface area SASA 1.64nm2, comprising of hydrophilic (0.39nm2) and hydrophobic (1.25nm2) components. This value was significantly smaller than the SASA value 5.0nm2 for the cysteine-dye conjugate in water, also comprised of hydrophobic (3.68nm2) hydrophilic (1.32nm2) components. Therefore the positioning of the reporter group on the protein surface definitely hindered its solvation by water and this result was in agreement with the blue-shifted λ
                        max value for the protein bound fluorophore at 496nm, if compared with the λ
                        max
                        =540nm for the acrylodan-thiol adduct in water (Kivi et al., 2013). On the other hand, this peripheral location of the fluorophore has made this label sensitive to the conformational changes of the protein that accompany binding of different ligands into the nucleotide binding pocket of the enzyme (Lew et al., 1997).

Structure of the unfolded acrylodan-labeled PKAc was generated in silico proceeding from the X-ray structure of the unliganded protein as was described above and using the system temperature as high as 700K. These extreme conditions could be applied under the virtual conditions, and by analogy with other studies (Kaushik et al., 2011; Koshy et al., 2010; Lin et al., 2009; Paschek et al., 2008; Wang et al., 1999; Yan et al., 2010) it was suggested that at this high temperature complete unfolding of the protein molecule should occur. Indeed, significant restructuring of the protein molecule was observed at this temperature, as could be concluded on the basis of significant increase in the value of the gyration radius before the new stable state of the protein was formed (see the insert, left panel of Fig. 2
                        ). This new state, shown in Fig. 2 (right panel), has lost all secondary structure elements, as could be expected in the case of the unfolded protein structure, but was still rather compact, as its gyration radius was comparable to the same parameter of the native protein.

It can be seen in Fig. 2 that the loss of the folded structure was accompanied by a significantly change in positioning of the covalently attached fluorophore. This dye molecule was almost completely expelled from the protein interior into the surrounding medium that should made it accessible to water and cause the red-shift of the excitation spectrum. This conclusion was in agreement with the increase in the solvent accessible surface area (SASA) of the protein coupled dye molecule to 3.19nm2 under these conditions.

It can be seen in Fig. 2 that a fast increase in gyration radius value was observed immediately after the MD calculations were started at 700K. However, this “swelling” of the protein molecule was temporary, as the gyration radius dropped soon and leveled off at about 2nm. Therefore this structural fluctuation could be explained as a temporary “opening” of the folded structure that was probably needed for collapse of the secondary and tertiary structure elements before formation of the unfolded state. In other words, this opening probably implies formation of one or several intermediate states during the unfolding process, as has been discussed since the idea about the existence of folding/unfolding pathways for globular proteins was proposed (Levinthal, 1968).

For closer look at the structure of the putative unfolding intermediate of the acrylodan-labeled PKAc MD simulations of the protein structure were made at temperatures below 700K and data for 500K were selected to exemplify this process. It can be seen in Fig. 3
                         (left panel) that the increase in the gyration radius was observed also at this temperature. However in this case the increase started after some lag-period and leveled off when a new and a relatively stable protein structure was formed (Fig. 3, left panel). The structure of this “swollen” protein was illustrated in Fig. 3 (right panel). It can be seen that most of the secondary and tertiary structure elements have disappeared in this state, except for the characteristic bundle of beta-structures on the top of the molecular model, which was still organized by analogy with the native molecule. Most importantly, however, it can be seen that positioning of the fluorescent reporter group was drastically changed, as it was oriented towards the protein interior in this conformational state. This different positioning should inevitably change solvation and excitation spectrum of the reporter group, and is in agreement with the increase in the hydrophobic component of the solvent accessible surface area of the protein coupled dye from 1.25nm2 at 300K to 1.46nm2 at 500K. At the same time the number of water molecules surrounding the reporter group in solvation shell of 4.5Å thickness decreased from 25 at 300K to 12 at 500K. Indeed, blue-shift of the excitation spectrum from the λ
                        max value 496nm for native state to the λ
                        max value 468nm was observed at mild denaturing conditions (Kivi et al., 2013), pointing that the dye molecule was shifted into microenvironment that resembles polar non-aqueous solvents (Kawski et al., 2002).

These structural changes were in agreement with understandings about formation of the “molten globule”, which was assumed to include dynamic hydrophobic core and some elements of the secondary and tertiary structure (Arai and Kuwajima, 2000; Chakraborty et al., 2001; Demarest et al., 2001; Ramboarina and Redfield, 2003; Redfield, 2004; Baldwin and Rose, 2013; Neira, 2013). Following the proposal of Arai and Kuwajima (2000), the “molten globule” was expected to have the gyration radius up to 30% larger than that of the native protein. This enlargement can be observed in Fig. 3 (left panel). Further, the formation a loosely packed hydrophobic core was often studied by dye binding experiments (Baldwin and Rose, 2013). Similarly, movement of the acrylodan label towards the protein interior was clearly seen in Fig. 3 (right panel). Taking together, the structure shown in Fig. 3 has several features which allow its classification as the “molten globule”

Proceeding from the modeling results above, the existence of at least one intermediate state on the unfolding pathway of the acrylodan-labeled PKAc can be suggested:
                           
                              (1)
                              
                                 
                                    N
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                ⥂
                                             
                                             
                                                
                                                   K
                                                   D
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    D
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             ⥂
                                             
                                                
                                                   K
                                                   U
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    U
                                 
                              
                           
                        where N is the native enzyme, U is the unfolded protein, D is the denatured (inactive) intermediate, and transitions between these states were characterized by equilibria (KD
                         and KU
                        ). Most importantly, differentiation between the states N, D and U was made on the basis of different positioning of the fluorescence reporter group, as transitions between these states transfer the dye molecule from the surface layer of the native protein (Fig. 1, right panel) into the hydrophobic core of the intermediate state D (Fig. 3, right panel), and finally expel the reporter group into the water environment in the unfolded structure U (Fig. 2, right panel).

The possibility of formation of specific folding/unfolding intermediates along the folding/unfolding pathways was postulated by Levinthal in 1968 (Levinthal, 1968) and evidence for their presence was obtained for different globular proteins already in 1970s (Wong and Tanford, 1973; Nozaka et al., 1978). Later these intermediates were suggested to be similar or even identical to the “molten globule” state of proteins (Ikeguchi et al., 1986). Interestingly, the main general characteristics of the “molten globule” state, including the increased gyration radius, formation of the dynamic hydrophobic core that allows penetration of dye molecule, and the remnant elements of the secondary structure were all present in the case of the intermediate D. Therefore this state could also be ranked as the “molten globule” of PKAc.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

In the present work MD simulations were made to differentiate the “molten globule” and unfolded state of cAMP-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit, covalently labeled with acrylodan. The attached dye molecule acted as a reporter group, which fluorescence properties were sensitive to its micro-environment. Therefore it would be possible to compare the results of computational analysis with changes of experimental excitation spectra of the fluorophore. It was concluded that the folding/unfolding pathway of the enzyme should include intermediate, which has lost the enzymatic activity, but retained hydrophobic core and several elements of the enzyme secondary structure, as is expected in the case of protein “molten globule” intermediates.

The main details of the computational work were published previously (Izvolski et al., 2013) and were briefly summarized below. The data for modeling of PKAc were taken from entry “1ATP” of the PDB database, where the atomic coordinates for PKAc ternary complex with AMP-PNP and PKI(5–24) were listed. This complex included two Mn ions (Zeng et al., 1993). Write errors in the PDB database for this complex were adjusted using the WHAT_IF software suite (Hooft et al., 1996). For MD modeling the Mn ions were replaced by Mg ions in all calculations. To obtain atomic coordinates for modeling the free enzyme, the nucleotide and peptide atoms were removed from the structure and the set of atomic coordinates was used for structure optimization.

For modeling of the acrylodan labeled protein, the Asn326 residue was replaced by Cys moiety, covalently modified with acrylodan. The atomistic model of the acrylodan-Cys adduct was constructed by ChemSketch version 12 software (Advanced Chemistry Development, Inc., Canada). The initial geometry and atom charges of the acrylodan-Cys adduct were calculated by using the Spartan version 4.0 software suite (Wavefunction, Inc., USA). Conformational searches were carried out by using molecular mechanics with additional condition of aqueous medium for finding stable geometry. Final conformational search was done by semi-empirical method AM1. Atomic charges were calculated by using Hartree–Fock method with 6-31G(d) basis set. Parameterization of bond lengths, planar and dihedral angles for the fluorophore molecule was done manually using GROMOS53a6 force field parameterization set.

The molecular dynamic simulations of the protein were realized by GROMACS version 4.5.4 simulation package (Hess et al., 2008) that included analysis tools of protein dynamics. The routine of MD simulations was defined in our previous work (Izvolski et al., 2013). The constrained bond lengths and angles, torsion angles, atomic point charges, and van der Waals parameters for the molecules were assigned using the GROMOS53a6 force field parameter set (Oostenbrink et al., 2004). The GROMOS53a6 force field was expanded by two phosphorylated amino acids – phosphorylated serine (SEP) and phosphorylated threonine (TPO) – which was needed to evaluate the presence of these two physiologically important phosphorylated amino acids in the PKAc structure. The temperature values 300K, 500K and 700K were selected to set up the thermostat for modeling of the enzyme unfolding. Analysis of MD trajectories was used to follow up the denaturation processes. This analysis was carried out by the gyrate tool of the GROMACS package that calculated the average size of protein globule at every point of molecular dynamics.

The SAS tool of the same CROMACS package was used for calculation of the solvent accessible surface area values for the protein coupled acrylodan and for the same dye coupled to cysteine residue.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This work was financially supported by the Estonian Ministry of Education and Research, Grants SF0180064s08 and IUT14-20, by Graduate School “Functional materials and technologies” receiving funding from the European Social Fund under the project 1.2.0401.09–0079 in the University of Tartu, Estonia. MD simulations were carried out in the High Performance Computing Center of the University of Tartu.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2016.01.004.

The following are Supplementary data to this article:
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

