@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#The optimization of running time for a maximum common substructure-based algorithm and its application in drug design

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We optimize the running time of the MCS-based algorithm.


                        
                        
                           
                           15–30s is a reasonable range for selecting a candidate time threshold.


                        
                        
                           
                           We evaluate the statistical relationship between an MCS coefficient and functional similarity.


                        
                        
                           
                           The potential biological activity of small molecules with unknown functions can be predicted using our methods.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Running time

MCS

Optimization

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  In the field of drug discovery, it is particularly important to discover bioactive compounds through high-throughput virtual screening. The maximum common substructure-based (MCS) algorithm is a promising method for the virtual screening of drug candidates. However, in practical applications, there is always a trade-off between efficiency and accuracy. In this paper, we optimized this method by running time evaluation using essential drugs defined by WHO and FDA-approved small-molecule drugs. The amount of running time allocated to the MCS-based virtual screening was varied, and statistical analysis was conducted to study the impact of computation running time on the screening results. It was determined that the running time efficiency can be improved without compromising accuracy by setting proper running time thresholds. In addition, the similarity of compound structures and its relevance to biological activity are analyzed quantitatively, which highlight the applicability of the MCS-based methods in predicting functions of small molecules. 15–30s was established as a reasonable range for selecting a candidate running time threshold. The effect of CPU speed is considered and the conclusion is generalized. The potential biological activity of small molecules with unknown functions can be predicted by the MCS-based methods.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Drug discovery is a highly complex and multidisciplinary process whose goal is to identify new drugs. Furthermore, it is time consuming and costly to search for new biologically active compounds using traditional high-throughput screening (Carnero, 2006). With the development of organic synthesis in recent years, more and more compounds have been synthesized and traditional high-throughput screening can no longer meet the needs of novel drug discovery (Dobson, 2004). Therefore, it is in urgent need of developing the quantity of drug-like compounds through computer-based predictive methods, such as similarity study and cluster analysis used in identification of drug-like compounds, and druggability prediction of small molecules using computational filtration technology and models (Bender and Glen, 2004; Cheng et al., 2007). Computer-Aided Drug Design (CADD) has become an integral part of drug discovery and development since 1980s (Marshall, 1987; Richards, 1994). Currently, high-throughput screening methods have been developed into integrated approaches that combine both computer-based in-silico and traditional in vitro screening to reduce the time of R&D and increase the success rate of drug discovery projects (Engels and Venkatarangan, 2001; Shen et al., 2003; Sirois et al., 2005).

There are a number of computational methods for comparing the similarity of two chemical structures (Cao et al., 2008; Quintus et al., 2009). Methods based on substructure and superstructure relationships are commonly used in structure similarity studies of CADD. These types of methods use substructure related to a particular biological activity as the keyword to search an existing database, and the resulting compounds that contain the substructure may share similar activities. However, this comparison strategy is too strict, and does not provide quantitative scores, which leaves the problem of meaningful ordering of the computational results unaddressed.

An alternative type of approach, based on structural descriptors, is also commonly used in structural similarity search and activity prediction. Using these methods, structure descriptors are used to represent chemical structures and generate a quantitative measure of structural similarity. It is worth noting that not structure alignment, but rather comparison of structure descriptors, is used to calculate the similarity score. Examples of the commonly used structural descriptor-based methods include fingerprint, atom pair, etc. (Carhart et al., 1985; Chen and Reynolds, 2002). Although in practice this type of approach is simple and effective, one of the major drawbacks is that they cannot directly reflect the overall structural similarity between two compounds.

Maximum common substructure (MCS) refers to the largest substructure shared by two compounds. First, MCS of drug structures is very likely to be the key structural element related to their activity. Second, this method allows the common part of a pair of chemical structures to be easily visualized. In addition, it avoids the disadvantages of many traditional methods, such as an overly strict comparison strategy or being limited to global similarity.

There have been a number of theoretical studies on MCS. Despite the fact that it has long been seen as a promising method in comparing structural similarity between compounds, MCS has drawn far less attention than others, mostly due to the high intrinsic complexity of MCS computation (Conte et al., 2004). Searching for MCS is a very computationally intensive task, and the running time complexity increases exponentially with the number of atoms in the structure of the two molecules. Therefore, for molecules with large structures, the running time that is required to compute the MCS structure can be prohibitively long.

The MCS toolkit developed by Cao et al. is an effective and easy-to-use implementation of an efficient MCS algorithm, and it provides a new avenue for the prediction of bioactive compounds (Cao et al., 2008). In Cao's MCS toolkit, a time-based cap can be applied to the MCS computation, and when the cap is reached and the optimal MCS has not been found, the computation is terminated and the best result searched is returned. In practice, there has always been a trade-off between computational speed and the accuracy of the result. What should be the optimal running time threshold? In this paper we will perform running time evaluation on this MCS algorithm to optimize this method.

All ligand-based activity-prediction methods are built on a commonly accepted principle: the similar property principle (Johnson, 1990), which is based on the experimental observation that structurally similar compounds often exhibit similar physical and chemical properties and biological activities. Based on this principle, many quantitative similarity measures have been proposed to effectively represent the similarity between the compound structures and to predict their potential biological activities. In our study, a structural score of MCS will be characterized and its relationship to biological functions will be explored.

@&#METHODS@&#

The source code for the MCS-based algorithm developed was obtained from Dr. Cao, University of California Riverside. The structural similarity between two small-molecule compounds was represented by the MCS coefficient:
                           
                              
                                 
                                    MCS coefficients
                                    =
                                    
                                       
                                          MCS
                                          (
                                          G
                                          1
                                          ,
                                          G
                                          2
                                          )
                                       
                                       
                                          min
                                          (
                                          G
                                          1
                                          ,
                                          G
                                          2
                                          )
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        where MCS(G1, G2) is the number of atoms in the MCS of two small molecules, and min(G1, G2) is the number of atoms in the smaller molecule of G1 and G2.

As shown in Table 1
                        , the structural and functional information on the small molecule drugs used in the computation was from essential drugs defined by WHO (Laing et al., 2003) and the FDA-approved small-molecule drugs published by Drugbank (Knox et al., 2011).

To perform running time evaluation, we first conducted tests using WHO essential drugs as the training set. These drugs were divided into pairs and the solver included in the MCS toolkit was used to calculate the score; the running time threshold was set as 5s, 15s, 30s, 45s, 60s and 80s, respectively.

We performed the analysis in two ways: first, we calculated the average MCS score at different running time thresholds; and second, assuming that the MCS score calculated at 80s was final, we computed the difference between the MCS scores obtained at different running time thresholds and the final MCS score. With the confidence interval set to 95%, an independent samples t-test was then performed.

Based on the above calculations, we increased the statistical sample size, and paired the FDA-approved small-molecule drugs published on Drugbank website for comparison. Running time threshold was set to 30s, and the distribution of all computation running times was analyzed. For molecules whose computational running time exceeded 30s, a new running time threshold was set and the impact of the computation running time cap on the result was evaluated.

The data above is based on our server, whose CPU is an Intel® Xeon® E5620 CPU with 2.40GHz processor. As running time depends on the computer's CPU speed, can the running time threshold set as 30s be long enough for different machines? To evaluate this, we used two additional machines to evaluate the effect of CPU speed. The CPU of two additional machines are Intel® Xeon® E5620 CPU with 2.00GHz processor, and AMD® Opteron® 244 with 1.75GHz processor, respectively. We randomly selected 10 molecule pairs with computational running times longer than 30s.

In drug design, the function prediction of chemical compound is very important. In order to explore the relationship between structural similarity and function, we performed statistical analyses on FDA-approved small-molecule drugs. First, we sampled molecule pairs from the drug set for similarity comparisons, with the computation running time capped at 30s. Next, the function of each small molecule was labeled. We calculated the proportions of molecule pairs that shared the same functions at MCS score intervals of 1–0.95, 0.95–0.9, 0.9–0.85, 0.85–0.8, respectively. As drugs may have multiple functions, we considered two small molecules in a pair as having the same function if they share one common function when compared.

Furthermore, by studying the listed drugs, we can find their common substructures. Designing compounds on this basis is likely to find more effective and safer drugs.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

We conducted tests using essential drugs published by WHO as the training set, in which there are 291 essential drugs.

First, we selected Bacitracin, whose structure file is relatively large (Molecular weight (M
                        w) 1423, sdf file 21KB), and performed MCS comparisons against the other 290 drugs.

As shown in Fig. 1A, after 30s, we saw little change in the average MCS. Only three out of the 10 compounds most similar to Bacitracin at 15s were different from those at 5s; in addition, after 15s, there were no further changes in the MCS score ranking.

Based on this information, we performed paired comparisons among the 291 WHO compounds (42,195 computations in total). Fig. 1B shows the plot of average MCS score vs. computation running time, and Fig. 1C is the visualized instance of running time evaluation.

The N–N average MCS score changed with running time in a way similar to the 1–N average MCS score. After 30s, changes in the average MCS score diminished substantially. Compared to 30s, the MCS score was only optimized by 0.2% at 45s. Therefore, there was no practical advantage to further extending the computation running time.

By assuming the score at 80s was final, we calculated the error in the MCS scores between those at 15s or 30s and the final MCS score. The confidence interval was set to 95%, the maximal error allowed at 0.005, and an independent samples t-test was performed.

From Table 2
                         we can see that under these statistical thresholds, the null hypotheses for both Δ(S80–S15) and Δ(S80–S30) were rejected. In addition, the absolute value of T at 30s was higher, suggesting a more reliable result.

To obtain results of higher accuracy, we set the confidence interval at 95% and the maximal error allowed at 0.002. Here the null hypothesis was that the error was no less than 0.002. As shown in Table 3
                        , under these conditions, the null hypothesis for Δ(S80–S15) could not be rejected. The null hypothesis for Δ(S80–S30) was rejected; i.e., the error was less than 0.002.

To further examine the reliability of our results, we expanded our statistical sample size and performed the test using 1405 FDA-approved small-molecule drugs as the training set. In total, 986,310 computations were performed for all possible paired comparisons with a running time threshold set as 30s.

Using the captured computation running time data for these 986,310 comparisons, a histogram illustrating the distribution of computation running times was created and included in Fig. 2
                        . It can be seen that most of the comparisons were completed in 5s, and for 16% of the molecule pairs, the computation running times exceeded 30s.

Additional computations on the molecule pairs with computation running times longer than 30s were performed, and the running time threshold was set to 1s, 5s or 15s. For these computations, we focused on the number of atoms in MCS in the result. The distribution of the atomic number ratio of MCS obtained at the two running time thresholds (new running time threshold vs. 30s) was plotted (Fig. 3
                        ).

The abscissa in this ratio mostly fell in the range (1, 3); values outside this range were discarded. The higher the ratio, the more different the result at 5s (or 1s) was from that at 30s.

As Fig. 3A and B shows, when the running time threshold was set to 1s or 5s, most of the atomic number ratios were greater than 1, suggesting that the difference between the number of atoms in MCS at 1s or 5s and that at 30s was relatively large. When the running time threshold was set to 15s (Fig. 3C), 76.3% of the result ratios were about 1; i.e., the results were not significantly different from those at 30s.

We randomly selected 10 molecule pairs with computational running times longer than 30s. Computations on the molecule pairs were performed in three different machines. The result is shown in Table 4
                        . The number of atoms in MCS is the same in three different evaluations. Even for the machine of lowest processing power, with 1.75GHz CPU, the running time threshold set as 30s can satisfy the requirement. The conclusions are therefore capable of being generalized to other systems.

The activity-prediction model based on ligands is built on the similar property principle. There are currently many similarity methods that can accurately quantify the structural similarity between compounds, yet quantitative study on the correlation between the structural similarity and the biological activity of the compounds is still lacking (Martin et al., 2002). To address this problem, we applied MCS-based similarity study on 1405 FDA-approved small-molecule compounds published on Drugbank.

The 1405 small-molecule compounds were divided in pairs and the running time threshold was set as 30s. The proportions of molecule pairs that shared the same functions at MCS score intervals of 1–0.95, 0.95–0.9, 0.9–0.85 and 0.85–0.8 were calculated. For comparison of small-molecule compounds that exhibited multiple functions, if at least one function was shared by a pair of compounds, we considered the two small molecules to have the similar function. The result is shown in Fig. 4
                        , in which the abscissa represents the MCS coefficient and the ordinate represents the ratio of small molecule pairs with the similar function in each score range.

The statistical results show full compliance with the similar property principle. The higher the MCS coefficient is, the higher the probability of the pair sharing the similar function. When using the MCS algorithm to predict the function of small molecules with unknown activity, the probability of function similarity could be predicted based on the MCS coefficient (see Fig. 4).

To demonstrate the effectiveness of this method in practical application, we used amoxicillin (Drugbank ID: DB01060) as an example. Amoxicillin is a broad-spectrum antibiotic. The MCS coefficients of amoxicillin and 1404 FDA-approved small-molecule drugs were calculated. As shown in Table 5
                        , the top 10 drugs all exhibited an MCS coefficient higher than 0.85, and nine of these drugs possessed antibiotic activity similar to amoxicillin. When the MCS coefficient was lower than 0.75, the probability of function similarity decreased drastically.

Lung cancer is one of the most common types of cancer. Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounts for about 80% of all lung cancers, with 1.2 million new cases worldwide each year (Schiller et al., 2002). EGFR tyrosine kinase (EGFR-TKI) has become a drug target for treatment of EGFR mutations in advanced NSCLC (Lynch et al., 2004; Paez et al., 2004). Gefitinib and Erlotinib are FDA-approved drugs for the treatment of advanced NSCLC (Mitsudomi et al., 2005). Their structures are similar and their MCS score is calculated as 0.65. The MCS is shown in Fig. 5
                        . In 2011, China listed a new drug Icotinib. We find that its structure is very similar to theses two drugs, especially with Erlotinib (MCS score of 0.9). By further calculation, we found that the structure of Icotinib contains the MCS of the previous two drugs. This indicates that compounds with this substructure may have a promising biological activity. Based on the MCS of them, especially between Erlotinib and Icotinib, a series of compounds, such as Erlotinib-like I and Erlotinb-like II (Fig. 5), were designed and synthesized by our partners. The results of preliminary in vitro antitumor test showed that the IC50 values of A549 (human lung cancer cell line) and BXPC3 (human pancreatic tumor cell line) were less than 1μM and 3μM, respectively. The in vitro antitumor potencies against cancer cells were similar to positive control group, Erlotinib.

Therefore, the applications of MCS in drug design can greatly accelerate the pace of research and development of new drugs.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

This study focuses on how to optimally apply an MCS-based algorithm for drug design. Although the required processing can be time-consuming, the computational efficiency of the MCS-based algorithm could be greatly improved by setting the proper running time threshold. For choosing running time thresholds, one needs to consider the required accuracy level of the result and the average complexity of structures in the dataset. Based on our calculation, 15–30s is a reasonable range for selecting a candidate running time threshold. In this range, even for large molecules whose computation is terminated before an optimum can be found, and the difference between the returned result and the actual optimum is already small. The effect of CPU speed is evaluated and our conclusion is generalized.

The MCS-based method can be used in many applications including database searching, high-throughput screening and functional prediction of small molecules (Song et al., 2009). Setting a proper running time threshold can alleviate the disadvantage of large running time complexity. By evaluating the statistical relationship between an MCS coefficient and functional similarity, the potential biological activity of small molecules with unknown functions can be predicted.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This work was funded by grants from the 863 Hi-Tech Program of China (2009AA02Z308 and 2012AA02A602), National Key Technology R&D Program in the 11th Five year Plan of China (2008BAI64B01), National Scientific Basic Special Fund (2009FY120100) and the Shanghai Project (B111). The authors would also like to thank Prof. Tao Jiangand Dr. Yiqun Cao of the University of California, Riverside for their valuable supporting. Thank for Pro. Weili Zhao and Dr. Xiaochun Dong for the results of Erlotinib-like I and Erlotinib-like II. Thank Mr. Matthew Jessulat and Mr. Ashwani Kumar (University of Regina, Canada), and Dr. Ke Jin (University of Toronto, Canada) for critical readings of the manuscript.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

