@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Improved homology model of cyclohexanone monooxygenase from Acinetobacter calcoaceticus based on multiple templates

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We build an improved model of cyclohexanone monooxygenase from Acinetobacter sp.


                        
                        
                           
                           The developed homology model includes the nicotinamide cofactor for the first time.


                        
                        
                           
                           We examine the enzymatic mechanism describing key residues during the reaction.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#




                     Acinetobacter calcoaceticus




                  

Cyclohexanone monooxygenase

Homology models

Baeyer–Villiger reaction

Enzymatic oxidation

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  A new homology model of cyclohexanone monooxygenase (CHMO) from Acinetobacter calcoaceticus is derived based on multiple templates, and in particular the crystal structure of CHMO from Rhodococcus sp. The derived model was fully evaluated, showing that the quality of the new structure was improved over previous models. Critically, the nicotinamide cofactor is included in the model for the first time. Analysis of several molecular dynamics snapshots of intermediates in the enzymatic mechanism led to a description of key residues for cofactor binding and intermediate stabilization during the reaction, in particular Arg327 and the well known conserved motif (FxGxxxHxxxW) in Baeyer–Villiger monooxygenases, in excellent agreement with known experimental and computational data.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The Baeyer–Villiger (BV) reaction of ketones to yield esters or lactones is a valuable synthetic methodology, which can be applied in the preparation of building blocks, pharmaceutical intermediates and final products (Renz and Meunier, 1999; Strukul, 1998). The traditional chemical BV reaction is carried out with an organic peroxyacid. The use of such reactants is not considered environmentally friendly. In addition, the chemical oxidation using peroxyacids does not always lead to asymmetric esters and lactones. Therefore, the development of an enzymatic BV oxidation scheme is extremely attractive. The enzymatic rearrangement is catalyzed by flavin-dependent monooxygenases known as Baeyer–Villiger monooxygenases (BVMOs) (Turfitt, 1948). These enzymes introduce one atom from molecular oxygen into the substrate, whereas the other oxygen is reduced to water at the expense of NAD(P)H (Roberts and Wan, 1998; Walsh and Jack Chen, 1988). Among the BVMOs, the enzyme cyclohexanone monooxygenase (CHMO) from Acinetobacter calcoaceticus NCIMB 9871 (EC 1.14.13.22) (Donoghue et al., 1976; Donoghue and Trudgill, 1975), is the most extensively studied (Kamerbeek et al., 2003; Leisch et al., 2011; Mihovilovic, 2006; Mihovilovic et al., 2002; Stewart, 1998). The currently accepted enzymatic mechanism is shown in Fig. 1
                      (Leisch et al., 2011; Ryerson et al., 1982; Sheng et al., 2001).

The initial state involves the tightly bound FAD prosthetic group (1). NADPH binds to the enzyme (2) and transfers a hydride ion to FAD to yield the NADP+·FADH−·E complex 3 (where E stands for enzyme). This complex reacts with molecular oxygen to form a flavin-peroxide intermediate (C4a-peroxiflavin intermediate 4), which accepts the ketone substrate (cyclohexanone) (5) and finally undergoes nucleophilic attack on the carbonyl group to produce the tetrahedral intermediate 6. This intermediate rearranges to the corresponding hydroxyflavin and ɛ-caprolactone (7). After the release of both water and lactone (8 and 9) the catalytic cycle is finally closed by NADP+ release. It is worth mentioning that CHMO is strictly NADPH-dependent, meaning that the use of the isolated enzyme in organic synthesis would require an efficient coenzyme recycling system, as NADPH is extremely expensive to use in stoichiometric amounts (Koeller and Wong, 2001; Woodyer et al., 2004). In fact, NADPH is more expensive and less stable than NADH (Wu et al., 1986).

In order to increase the synthetic value of CHMO by changing the substrate profile, enantioselectivity, stability, and also the coenzyme specificity (from NADPH to NADH), the analysis of the three-dimensional structure of the enzyme becomes essential. The first crystal structure of a BVMO was reported by Malito et al. (2004), corresponding to the so-called phenylacetone monooxygenase (PAMO) from the thermophilic actinomycete Thermobifida fusca (Fraaije et al., 2005). However, the coenzyme is missing in the determined crystal structure of PAMO (PDB ID: 1W4X), hampering a detailed analysis of NADPH–enzyme interactions. More recently, two crystal structures of CHMO from Rhodococcus sp. strain HI-31 in complex with NADP+ were reported by Mirza and co-workers (PDB ID: 3GWD and 3GWF), providing valuable structural information (Mirza et al., 2009). Several crystal structures of wild-type and mutated PAMO in complex with NADP+ were described in 2011 (PDB ID: 2YLR, 2YLW, 2YLZ and 2YLX) (Orru et al., 2011), allowing the investigation of the structural basis of the enzymatic mechanism. Finally in 2012, a new crystal structure of CHMO from Rhodococcus sp. strain HI-31 was reported (PDB ID: 3UCL) (Yachnin et al., 2012). This structure represents the first crystal structure of CHMO bound to cyclohexanone, as well as NADP+.

Even though CHMO from A. calcoaceticus NCIMB 9871 is the most employed BVMO, both in academia and in industry, there is no crystal structure available for this enzyme. Thus, it becomes essential to determine the 3D structure employing different approaches, such as homology modeling, based on the assumption that the tertiary structure and folding of two proteins are similar if the sequences are related (Krieger et al., 2003). A homology model of CHMO from Acinetobacter sp. NCIMB 9871 has been described (Bocola et al., 2005). However, this model also lacks the NADPH cofactor. Therefore, it is not possible to analyze the role of the coenzyme in the mechanism using this model. The use of good quality models, in particular of the active site, is essential for reliable predictions.

Prompted by the need of more accurate models, we have carried out homology modeling of CHMO from Acinetobacter sp. NCIMB 9871 using multiple templates in order to improve the quality of the models. In addition, starting from the best homology model calculated in this work, we built, refined, and analyzed the different steps of the enzymatic mechanism (see Fig. 1). In particular, we have focused our attention on the substrate–enzyme and cofactor–enzyme interactions.

The crystallographic coordinates of phenylacetone monooxygenase (PAMO) from T. fusca wild type (1W4X) and mutations (2YLR, 2YLW, 2YLZ and 2YLX) and of cyclohexanone monooxygenase (CHMO) from Rhodococcus sp. (3GWF and 3UCL) were obtained from the RSBC Protein Data Bank (PDB). The protein sequence (FASTA sequence) of CHMO from A. calcoaceticus was also obtained from the NCBI server (no. 6277322).

Homology model of CHMO was built using crystal structures of selected templates employing the YASARA program (Krieger, 2004; Krieger et al., 2009). When using multiple templates (i.e. 
                        2YLR, 2YLW, 2YLZ, 2YLX and 3GWF), alternative alignments were created for each available template through a stochastic approach (Mückstein et al., 2002), and the models built from these. When templates contain ligands (such as FAD and NADP+), these were parameterized and considered in the homology modeling procedure. After the side-chains were built in, the loops were optimized by exploring a large number of different conformations. Loops and side-chains were then subjected to a combined steepest descent and simulated annealing minimization (i.e. the backbone atoms were kept fixed). Finally, a full unrestrained simulated annealing minimization was run for the entire model.

The final models were evaluated employing different programs, such as Verify 3D (Bowie et al., 1991; Lüthy et al., 1992), ERRAT (Colovos and Yeates, 1993), ProSA-web (z-score) (Sippl, 1993; Wiederstein and Sippl, 2007) and PROCHECK analysis (Laskowski et al., 1993), which allow checking the stereochemical quality (local and overall) of the models and calculating the percentage of conformations in favored regions obtained from Ramachandran plots (Ramachandran and Sasisekharan, 1968).

All structures of ligands, CHMO and enzymes in complex with ligands were energy minimized using the AMBER03 (Duan et al., 2003) molecular mechanics force field to within an rms gradient of 0.1kcalmol−1
                        Å−1. Each system was solvated in a periodic box with TIP3P (Jorgensen et al., 1983) water molecules extending 10Å outside the enzyme, followed by simulated annealing minimization. The solvated system was neutralized by randomly adding sodium and chloride atoms to reach a NaCl concentration of 0.9% (corresponding to physiological solution). Protonation states were assigned according to the pK
                        a values and a simulation pH of 7 (Krieger et al., 2006). Independent MD simulations were conducted for each intermediate in the reaction mechanism (model structures 3–7 and 9; cf. Fig. 1) to obtain relaxed geometries, as well as to check the quality of the homology model, and were followed by a final energy minimization step. The MD simulations were performed for each system for 10ns at 298K, using the canonical ensemble (NVT) and the AMBER03 force field. Partial atomic charges of the ligands were initially calculated using AM1 charges with the COSMO solvation model (Klamt, 1995), and improved by the application of AM1-BCC (Jakalian et al., 2002) (AM1-Bond Charge Correction) which takes into account the electrostatic potential around the molecule to calculate charges (such as RESP charges). Long-range electrostatics were calculated using the particle mesh Ewald (PME) (Essmann et al., 1995) summation method with a cutoff of 7.86Å. The simulations were carried out with multiple time steps, namely 1.25 and 2.54fs for intra- and intermolecular forces, respectively. The MD trajectories were sampled every 10ps, resulting in 1000 snapshots per simulation. The RMSD of Cα atoms for the protein was monitored for each simulation trajectory.

Docking studies were performed using the Molecular Operating Environment 2009.10 program (MOE). Cyclohexanone was docked computationally into the active site of the CHMO model (model structure 4 in Fig. 1), assigning the appropriate ionization state at pH 7. 500 poses were retained using the alpha triangle placement methodology with affinity ΔG as scoring function, as implemented in MOE. In the docking studies, flexible ligand structures were generated using a Monte Carlo algorithm, whereas the receptor was held fixed according to its minimized geometry. The best scored orientation for the ligand was selected, the whole system was energy minimized and then subjected to MD simulation in YASARA using the same settings as above.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

In order to test the quality of the new hybrid homology model based on multiple-templates, we first built a structural single-template model of CHMO NCIMB 9871 (541 amino acids) based on the crystal structure of wild-type PAMO (PDB ID: 1W4X, 524 amino acids). The sequence identity of the two systems is 38.4% (Uniprot). The overall similarity between the 3D structures of the template and the model can be visualized from the backbone superposition (Fig. 2
                        ).

The RMSD between the initial model and the PAMO template calculated in MOE was 1.04Å, which is within the acceptable range. The Verify 3D analysis calculates the compatibility of the atomic model (3D) with its own amino acid sequence (1D). Negative scores are indicative of potential problems (Bujnicki et al., 2002). A compatibility score above zero, as shown in the graph, corresponds to an overall self-consistency in terms of sequence-structure compatibility (Fig. S1, Supplementary data). ERRAT is a protein structure verification algorithm that is based on the statistics of non-bonded interactions between different atom types (compared to a database of reliable high-resolution structures). The program provides an “overall quality factor” value which is defined as the percentage of the protein for which the calculated error falls below the rejection limit. If this percentage is larger than 90% (meaning that the 90% of the protein can be accepted at a 95% confidence level), the protein structure is acceptable (Colovos and Yeates, 1993). The ERRAT score of the homology model (template 1W4X) was 96.604%. In addition, the assessment of the homology model of CHMO was performed by calculating the z-score, which indicates overall model quality, displayed in a plot that contains the z-scores of all experimentally determined protein chains in the current PDB. Groups of structures from different sources (X-ray, NMR) are distinguished by different colors (Fig. 3
                        ) (Sippl, 1993; Wiederstein and Sippl, 2007).

It can be seen that the z-score value of the template (1W4F) was −11.60, while the value of the model was −9.98. Similar z-scores of model and template suggest high similarity between the template and the query structure, which increases the reliability of the 3D model (Pontius et al., 1996; Wiederstein and Sippl, 2007). Even though the difference between the z-scores of the model and the template is good (−1.62), it is not optimal. Finally, a Ramachandran plot for the model was obtained as a quality assessment. The plot showed that 91.0%, 8.4%, 0.4% and 0.2% of the residues were located in the most favored, additional allowed, generously allowed and disallowed regions, respectively. These results indicate that the backbone dihedral angles in the model were reasonably accurate.

Although the quality assessment of the model obtained from template 1W4X showed that the model is satisfactory, the homology model possesses the same drawback as the template, since it lacks the nicotinamide cofactor.

In order to improve the overall quality of the homology model, the amino acid sequence of CHMO (no. 6277322) was used to search for new templates using BLAST. The BLAST search results yielded four X-ray structures of PAMO (2YLR 533 amino acids, 2YLW 532 amino acids, 2YLZ 533 amino acids, and 2YLX 530 amino acids) and one crystal structure of CHMO from Rhodococcus sp. (3GWF, 511 amino acids). The latter structure corresponds to the so called “open” crystal structure of CHMO, and it is likely to represent the enzyme in the resting state (structure 9 in Fig. 1) (Yachnin et al., 2012). Therefore, for the current model building, this “open” structure was chosen as template. Even though the crystal structure of CHMO from Rhodococcus sp. bound to cyclohexanone (3UCL) (Yachnin et al., 2012) was not employed as a template, the homology model reported herein was compared with the 3UCL structure in order to take into account the newest results available. In addition, the new homology model was compared with the QM/MM study on the mechanism of the enzymatic BV reaction, reported by Thiel in 2012 (Polyak et al., 2012). The sequence identity of the target system and the templates was 38.4% for all PAMO structures, and 55.6% for CHMO template. Fig. S2 (Supplementary data) shows the results of the initial multiple-sequence alignment among the five templates and CHMO from A. calcoaceticus NCIMB 9871, using ClustalX (Larkin et al., 2007).

CHMO from Rhodococcus sp. (3GWF) amino acid sequence is more closely related to the CHMO NCIMB 9871, and it is thus clear that using the CHMO from Rhodococcus sp. as template may improve the quality of the final homology model of CHMO from A. calcoaceticus.

Eleven models were built, employing all five templates. When the alignment was uncertain, additional high-scored alignments were created, and homology models built from these. For 3GWF, only one alignment was employed. Two different alignments were used for 2YLX and 2YLR, and three different alignments were employed for 2YLW and 2YLZ (results not shown). The z-score difference value between each model and its template was estimated in YASARA in order to rate the models according their overall quality (Table 1
                        ).

The results clearly show that the best model was derived using the CHMO from Rhodococcus sp. as template. However, further refinement was performed combining best parts of different models in YASARA, aiming to increase the accuracy of the final model. Thus, starting from the model ranked as number one, a fragment (the segment from Met319 to Leu323) was taken from the model generated using 2YLR as template. The resulting hybrid model was then subjected to a simulated annealing minimization obtaining an overall z-score difference of −0.468. As the best hybrid model showed the highest quality, further studies in this work were carried out using this model only.

Regarding the structural quality of the model, the RMSD between the closest template (3GWF) and the hybrid model was 0.66Å, which is better than the RMSD obtained for the homology model generated using a single template. The backbone superposition of the 3D structures of the closest template and the model is shown in Fig. 4
                        .

The Verify 3D analysis for the newly derived model is shown in Fig. 5
                        . The compatibility score in the graph corresponds to an overall good 3D-1D compatibility.

The hybrid model scored 97.928% in the ERRAT analysis, illustrating that the protein structure is highly acceptable. Structure analysis was also performed by calculating the z-score in the ProSA server. The z-score of the model was −10.72, while the score of the closest template resulted to be −10.65 (Fig. 6
                        ). A difference in z-scores of 0.07 is in the range considered as optimal, and indicates that the homology model is reliable.

A Ramachandran plot was computed as a quality assessment method. PROCHECK analysis displayed the 89.9% of residues in the most favored region, and 9.2%, 0.4% and 0.4% located in the additionally allowed, generously allowed and disallowed regions, respectively. These results show that the model presents a good percentage of residues in the most favored and additionally allowed regions, indicating that the backbone dihedral angles were sufficiently accurate. All structural and stereochemical parameters of the hybrid model thus meet the level of quality expected when using a template structure with a resolution of 2.20Å (Mirza et al., 2009). Moreover, the newly derived homology model contains both FAD and NADP+, thereby being superior to previous available models. Further studies in this work involves only this last homology model, which corresponds to the structure of structure 9 in the accepted mechanism of the enzymatic catalyzed BV reaction (Fig. 1).

Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of the model were performed to further examine the quality of the structure by checking its stability over a 10ns simulation. The Cα RMSD between the initial model and each structure obtained along the 10ns trajectory, showed that the system was equilibrated at ca. 3ns and remained stable thereafter (Fig. S3, Supplementary data).

The amino acid sequences of the BVMOs of Type I (such as CHMO) are characterized by the presence of a conserved “fingerprint” sequence: FxGxxxHxxxW, where x can be any amino acid (Fraaije et al., 2002). In the structure of CHMO from Acinetobacter sp., this conserved motif is located from Phe158 to Trp168 (PheLysGlyGluLeuHisHisThrSerArgTrp, where conserved residues are highlighted in bold font). It has been described that this sequence plays a prominent role in cofactor binding, yet the exact functional role of the conserved motif remains unknown. Taking into account that the fingerprint sequence is somewhat far from the active site, its role has been considered to be structural (Mirza et al., 2009).

A detailed examination of the newly derived homology model 3D structure reveals that the signature sequence is indeed connecting the FAD and NADP+ binding domains, in agreement with the available experimental information on similar systems (Fig. 7
                        ) (Leisch et al., 2011; Mirza et al., 2009).

His164, in the middle of the conserved sequence, forms a hydrogen bond with Gly379, positioning Phe380 in a proper orientation to form a hydrogen bond to the NADP+ cofactor, while Thr378 provides favorable steric interactions. At the end of the motif, the guanidine moiety of Arg167 displays a favorable arene–cation interaction with the side chain of Trp48, placing this residue in a proper position to establish hydrogen bond interactions with the ribose moiety of the FAD coenzyme. All these interactions are important in positioning both NADP+ and FAD. Thus, the fingerprint motif is significant in CHMO catalysis from a structural point of view despite not providing a direct interaction between the motif and the NADP+/FAD cofactors. Further examination of the structure showed that the nicotinamide and isoalloxazine rings of NADP+ and FAD are parallel to each other, resulting in a favorable arene–arene interaction. The distance between the rings was 3.83Å, as shown in Fig. 7c, in good agreement with the 3.4Å observed in the crystal structure of CHMO from Rhodococcus sp. (Mirza et al., 2009).

We present here models of the most representative structures of the mechanism shown in Fig. 1, namely structures 3–7. These models were built starting from the homology model of CHMO (structure 9). Upon reduction of FAD by NADPH (structure 3), the flavin coenzyme is oxidized by molecular oxygen yielding the C4a-peroxyflavin intermediate (structure 4). At this stage, cyclohexanone was computationally docked into the active site of model structure 4 giving structure 5, which contains the ligand docked properly to allow for a nucleophilic attack on the ketone, giving the Criegee intermediate (structure 6). The Criegee intermediate rearranges to give the corresponding C4a-hydroxyflavin and ɛ-caprolactone (structure 7). Each model was energy minimized and subjected to MD simulation as described in the Materials and methods section. The RMSD of the Cα atoms for the protein was monitored for each simulation trajectory (Figs. S4–S8, Supplementary data). In each case, except structure 3, stable trajectories were obtained after ∼1ns simulation, whereas for 3, it took ∼3.5ns for the structure to stabilize.

The structure 3 (E·FADH−·NADP+) corresponds to a conformation in which Arg327 shows a strong interaction with the nicotinamide cofactor through hydrogen bonding (Arg327 is closer to the amide nitrogen of NADP+ in structure 3 than in structure 9, the homology modeling derived structure; Fig. 8
                        ). This conformational change locates Arg327 in a proper position to stabilize the reduced coenzyme through interaction with the isoalloxazine ring, in accordance with experimental information (Mirza et al., 2009).

Further analysis of the structure 3 model showed that Asp57 and Arg327 form hydrogen bonds to both FADH− and NADP+, resulting in a stable intermediate. In addition, the triad Thr433, Asn434 and Leu435 establishes a hydrogen bond network that holds Arg327 and the prosthetic group ring in an appropriate position to interact with each other (Fig. 9
                        ).

Aiming to validate the newly derived homology model by taking into account the most recent described crystal structure, we docked cyclohexanone into the structure 3 model (E·FADH−·NADP+). The crystal structure reported in 2012 corresponds to cyclohexanone docked into structure 3 system (3UCL) (Yachnin et al., 2012). After the docking of the substrate into the active site of CHMO, structure 3′ was obtained (E·FADH−·NADP+·cyclohexanone), and superposed to the crystal structure 3UCL. The RMSD between the two structures was 0.840Å, which is highly acceptable (for details, see Fig. S9, Supplementary data). These results show that the model derived herein is in agreement with available experimental information.

Once molecular oxygen reacts with the enzyme, the flavin-peroxide structure 4 is obtained (E·FADHOO−·NADP+). The main structural change involves Arg327. It has been suggested that this residue, which is conserved among the BVMOs, plays an important role in catalysis by stabilizing the negatively charged C4a-peroxiflavin intermediate (Malito et al., 2004). In our structure 4 model, Arg327 displays a bent conformation instead of the extended form observed in structure 3 (Fig. 10
                        ). This conformation allows Arg327 to form a favorable hydrogen bond with the peroxide moiety. The formamide side chain of the nicotinamide cofactor interacts with the peroxide through a hydrogen bond, showing that the cofactor also plays a stabilizing role in the enzymatic mechanism.

According to Thiel (Polyak et al., 2012), including water molecules in the active site destabilizes the forming Criegee intermediate. No water interactions were thus taken into account in the model reported here. After the binding of cyclohexanone into the active site of CHMO, structure 5 is obtained (E·FADHOO−·NADP+·cyclohexanone). The conserved Arg327 hydrogen bonds both the cyclohexanone substrate and the peroxide moiety (Fig. 11a). As described for PAMO, this residue has a key role during catalysis. On the one hand, by hydrogen bonding the substrate, the reactivity of the carbonyl group is increased, and on the other hand, Arg327 also stabilizes the negative charge of the flavin-peroxide (Orru et al., 2011).

The substrate is held in a favorable position for nucleophilic attack to occur, mainly through hydrogen bonding between the carbonyl oxygen atom and the side chain of Arg327. The reactive carbon atom of cyclohexanone is located at 3.51Å (Fig. 11b) from the terminal oxygen of the peroxide moiety, in perfect agreement with available information on similar systems (Polyak et al., 2012).

The substrate, properly located, then reacts with the peroxide moiety yielding the “Criegee-like” intermediate, structure 6. In this model, Arg327 stabilizes the negative charge of the Criegee intermediate, while the amide moiety of NADP+ and CHMO residues Asp57 and Leu435 interact with the isoalloxazine ring through hydrogen bonds (Fig. 12a).

As shown in Fig. 12b, the cyclohexanone oxygen atom is pointing toward Arg327 and forms a stabilizing hydrogen bond (dOHN=1.60Å).

The last snapshot of the enzymatic mechanism evaluated was the deprotonated structure 7 (E·FADHOH·NADP+·ɛ-caprolactone). The Criegee intermediate rearranges to give the conjugate base of C4a-hydroxyflavin and ɛ-caprolactone (Fig. 13
                        ). Arg327 hydrogen bonds the lactone product as well as the oxyflavin anion, acting as a proton donor to give the C4a-hydroxyflavin intermediate.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

We have developed an improved homology model of CHMO from A. calcoaceticus, aiming to provide a reliable structure with which to study the key structural features of the BV catalyzed mechanism, and to investigate the role of a range of residues in the cofactor preference and stereochemical outcome of the reaction. The new model has a high acceptance profile for each structural analysis performed.

In particular, we have evaluated the critical amino acids in the CHMO-catalyzed BV reaction. Our results show that Arg327 is a key residue in several steps of the enzymatic mechanism, stabilizing the oxidized nicotinamide cofactor, the negatively charged peroxide group, the substrate in the active site (i.e. cyclohexanone) and the Criegee-like intermediate. Furthermore, we found structural evidence for the role of the fingerprint motif in CHMO catalysis, particularly in positioning both NADP+ and FAD for their catalytic roles. The results are in complete agreement with available experimental information on similar systems.

Further studies regarding the substrate and cofactor specificities, and detailed exploration of the enzymatic mechanism, are currently in progress.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

We thank PEDECIBA and Facultad de Química in Uruguay and the Faculty of Science at the University of Gothenburg for financial support. We also gratefully acknowledge the economic support from CSIC (UdelaR) for acquisition of computers.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2014.01.012.

The following are the supplementary data to this article:
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

