@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#In silico study of potential autoimmune threats from rotavirus infection

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Rotaviral outer capsid protein VP6 shares two eight amino acid regions with ryanodine receptor 2, a target in myasthenia gravis, a neurodegenerative disorder.


                        
                        
                           
                           These two regions remain conserved among most circulating rotavirus strains isolated from all over the world.


                        
                        
                           
                           These regions are potential B cell with considerable relative surface availability and antigenecity.


                        
                        
                           
                           These regions are potential T cell epitope with respect to HLA subtypes associated with myasthenia gravis.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Rota virus

Molecular mimicry

Myasthenia gravis

Autoimmunity

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Rotavirus, the major cause of infantile nonbacterial diarrhea, was found to be associated with development of diabetes-associated auto-antibodies. In our study we tried to find out further potential autoimmune threats of this virus using bioinformatics approach.
                  We took rotaviral proteins to study similarity with Homo sapiens proteome and found most conserved structural protein VP6 matches at two regions with ryanodine receptor, an autoimmune target associated with myasthenia gravis. Myasthenia gravis, a chronic neurodegenerative autoimmune disorder with no typical known reason, is characterized by fluctuating muscle weakness which is typically enhanced during muscular effort. Affected patients generate auto antibodies against mainly acetyl choline receptor and sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium-release channel protein ryanodine receptor. Further, we observed that two regions which matched with ryanodine receptor remain conserved in all circulating rotaviral strains and showed significant antigenecity with respect to myasthenia gravis associated HLA haplotypes.
                  Overall, our study detected rotaviral VP6 as a potential threat for myasthenia gravis and enlighten an area of virus associated autoimmune research.
               
            

Myasthenia gravis

Acetylcholine receptor

Ryanodine receptor

Inusulinoma antigen 2

Glutamic acid decarboxylase

Immune Epitope Database and Analysis Resource

Major histocompatibility complex

Artificial neural network

Stabilized matrix method

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Autoimmune disease is a state of over reactive immune system. It is triggered due to the deterioration of immunologic tolerance to auto-reactive immune cells resulting in attack on self molecules. Myasthenia gravis, a chronic neuromuscular disorder, can lead to various degrees of neurologic dysfunction characterized by fluctuating, fatigable weakness of muscles under voluntary control (Thanvi and Lo, 2004). Although the basis of the disorder is not known, the involvement of immune responses in its pathogenesis is well established. Normally myasthenia gravis (MG) patients are found to produce antibodies against acetylcholine receptor (AChR), but some have antibodies against skeletal muscle antigens in addition (Meriggioli and Sanders, 2012). One major antigen for non-AchR antibodies in MG are the Ca2+ release channel of the sarcoplasmic reticulum, the ryanodine receptor (RyR) (Skeie et al., 2006). RyR antibodies are developed by mainly thymoma MG patients and a few late-onset MG patients and correlate with severe MG disease (Shelton et al., 2001). MG and other multiple human autoimmune diseases are also induced through various mechanisms such as molecular mimicry, epitope spreading, direct bystander activation, and release of cryptic epitopes (Olson et al., 2001).

Molecular mimicry is defined as sharing of similar linear amino acids stretch or conformational fit between two different protein molecules of two different origins. During microbial infection, if the organism shares cross-reactive epitopes with the host, then the immune response to the infecting agent will also recognize and attack host protein, which become worsen with second, third, or repeated infection(s) that potentiate the autoimmune assault (Oldstone, 2005).

Among the potential micro-organisms particularly viruses have been proposed as a cause of several autoimmune diseases in humans (von Herrath et al., 2003). For example, human T-lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV1) has been implicated in various autoimmune arthropathies (Nishioka et al., 1993); herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) are linked with keratitis (Zhao et al., 1998); hepatitis C virus has been proposed as a initiator of various rheumatoid diseases (Romero Portales et al., 1997; McMurray and Elbourne, 1997) and Epstein–Barr virus has been associated with systemic lupus erythematosus (Parks et al., 2005). Coxsackieviruses and rubella virus have been proposed as causative agents of Type 1 diabetes (Atkinson et al., 1994; Yoon et al., 1989) and many viruses have been proposed as the ‘cause’ of multiple sclerosis (Monteyne et al., 1998). Myasthenia gravis, our subject of study, also reported to have viral connection. Molecular mimicry of herpes simplex virus (HSV) type 1 glycoprotein (Gp) D (amino acid residues 286–293) with a chain of human (Hu) AChR (amino acid residues 160–167) was suggested as a probable cause of myasthenia gravis initiation (Schwimmbeck et al., 1989)

Rotavirus, a non-enveloped double stranded RNA virus belonging to the family reoviridae, is the major cause of severe gastroenteritis in children under age of 5 years (Gray et al., 2008; Kawai et al., 2012; Bhowmick et al., 2012) and causes two million hospitalizations and four hundred fifty thousand deaths per year worldwide (Kawai et al., 2012; Bhowmick et al., 2012). Although recent reports confirmed rotavirus infection may accelerate the progression of genetically-predisposed children to type 1 diabetes (Pane et al., 2014) but direct involvement of rotavirus with autoimmune diseases such as type 1 diabetes and celiac disease is contradictory (Honeyman et al., 2000; Blomqvist et al., 2002; Stene et al., 2006). In our study we have explored potential autoimmune threats to humans from rotavirus by analyzing presence of molecular mimicry in viral proteins with host proteome. In previous reports rotaviral structural protein VP7 was found to have molecular mimicry with IA2 and GAD 65, involved with type 1 diabetes. This study initiated with search of sequence similarity of viral proteins with human proteome and found no significant matches with host proteins other than in VP6 protein sequence. VP6 is a structural protein and form the second outer layer of the virus. It was found to possess two immunogenetically active epitope regions which share high similarity with ryanodine receptor 2, a target in myasthenia gravis. Other than relatively non-variability of VP6 protein sequences it is the most immunogenic among all the structural protein which substantiates the potentiality of our finding (Tang et al., 1997; Esteban et al., 2013).

@&#METHODS@&#

We have accessed NCBI protein data bank and retrieved sequences of rotavirus A VP6 and ryanodine receptor 2 of H. sapiens. We downloaded 16 complete VP6 protein sequences of four most circulating rotavirus subtypes G1P8, G2P4, G3P8, and G4P8 isolated from different countries. There are only 3 protein sequences of ryanodine receptor 2 of Homo sapiens that are present in NCBI data bank and we downloaded them for analysis (accessed on 18.07.2013).

We used Blastp server to determine similarities of rotavirus VP6 protein in human proteome. Only matches with most high score (ryanodine receptor) were taken for further analysis.

To determine conserved regions within a set of protein sequences and to determine matching regions between different families of protein sequences, CLUSTAL-X (http://www.clustal.org/) (Larkin et al., 2007 
                        Wang et al., 2013) and CLUSTAL-OMEGA (http://www.clustal.org/) (Sievers et al., 2011) software available on the web were used.

To visualize the protein structural residues we used the crystallographic structure from PDB database and the molecular visualization tool PyMOL (www.pymol.org) (Steinkellner et al., 2009).

To determine the antigenecity of our identified region of VP6 we used two epitope-prediction tools, viz., the IEDB (http://www.iedb.org/) (Immune Epitope Database and Analysis Resource) (Vita et al., 2010; Shehzadi et al., 2012; Kim et al., 2012) and ABCpred (http://www.imtech.res.in/raghava/abcpred/) servers (Saha and Raghava, 2006; Sun et al., 2012; Maksimov et al., 2012), which have given good results in several applications.

The IEDB server was also used for predicting T-cell epitope and MHC (major histocompatibility complex) binding predictions (Vita et al., 2010; Shehzadi et al., 2012; Kim et al., 2012). These tools predict IC50 values for peptides binding to specific MHC molecules of specific alleles. A lower number indicates higher affinity. Most known epitopes have high or intermediate affinity. MG has specific HLA haplotypes, HLA-DRB1*0301 and HLA-B*8:01. For detecting peptides binding with HLA-DRB1*03:01 allele NN-align (netMHCII-2.2), SMM-align (netMHCII-1.1) method and for detecting peptides binding with HLA-B*08:01 allel artificial neural network (ANN), stabilized matrix method (SMM) was used.

@&#RESULTS@&#

To find out any potential match of rotaviral protein VP6 in human proteome, we downloaded VP6 protein sequence of rotavirus A (accession: ACL93331) and using NCBI blastp suite (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi?PAGE=Proteins) we found that it has significant similarity with ryanodine receptor protein (data not shown). Then to further confirm the similarity between VP6 and ryanodine receptor we downloaded ryanodine receptor protein sequences from gene data bank (accession: NP_001026) and aligned it with VP6 protein sequence using CLUSTAL-OMEGA (http://www.genome.jp/tools/clustalomega/). Result revealed similarity at different regions throughout the ryanodine receptor sequence. Among them 2 regions (region A: 261–268, region B: 374–381) showed similarity along with a stretch of 8 amino acid (Fig. 1
                        A). Region A showed 75% similarity and 62.5% identity with 800–807 amino acid region and region B showed 87.5% similarity and 62.5% identity with 904–911 amino acid region of ryanodine receptor (Fig. 1A). These two specific regions of VP6 were represented in 3D space filling model where the two regions were colored (red: region A, yellow: region B) (Fig. 2
                        ).

The most circulating group of rotavirus are G1P8, G2P4, G3P8, and G4P8. To determine whether the two regions identified above are universally conserved in these circulating subtypes, we downloaded VP6 sequences (Supplementary file 3) of these subtypes isolated from different countries (USA, India, Bangladesh, Japan, Korea, Australia, Greece) aligned using CLUSTUL-X. Alignment data showed the two regions that have significant similarity with ryanodine receptor are conserved among the circulating subtypes of different countries (Fig. 1C). By downloading RYR2 sequences available in Gene Bank and aligning them using CLUSTAL-X, we found that the regions identified to have close similarity with regions A and B of the VP6 sequences are also conserved among available sequences of RYR2 in NCBI Gene Bank. Results (Fig. 1B) showed the region 800–807 and 904–911 are the conserved regions.

We have utilized epitope prediction servers to analyze potentiality of these peptide regions to induce immune response. IEDB server, which predicts antigenicity and surface accessibility with respect to B-cell, revealed that both region A and region B showed high score (Figs. 3 and 4 
                        
                        ) as a B-cell epitope. We further confirmed this result with ABCpred server also where both the regions are predicted as potential B-cell epitopes (Supplementary file 2).

There are specific classes of HLA haplotype that are associated with myasthenia gravis diseases. To know the probability of the two peptide regions to bind MHC molecules with high affinity we analyzed the whole sequence of VP6 with IEDB T cell epitope prediction tool for HLA-DRB1*0301 and HLA-B*08:01 alleles. The IEDB server prediction showed both the regions to have enough low IC50 value to act as a potential T cell epitopes (Supplementary file 1).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The specific mechanisms by which autoimmune diseases occur are mostly unknown, but the critical event that leads to autoimmune disease is breaking of tolerance of unresponsiveness to self-antigens which finally direct activation of auto-reactive lymphocytes (Davidson and Diamond, 2001). Among several other etiological factors (genetic predisposition), viral infection has been implicated as a potential threat (Von Herrath and Oldstone, 1996). There are several ways (molecular mimicry, epitope spreading, bystander activation, cryptic antigen) by which a viral infection triggers an autoimmune response by overwriting self tolerance and finally leading to the destruction of a specific cell type or an entire organ (Blank et al., 2007). There are several viruses such as measles virus (Adams and Imagawa, 1962), simian virus (Field et al., 1972), herpes simplex virus (Catalano, 1972), para influenza virus (Ter Meulen et al., 1972), human T lymphocyte retrovirus type 1 (Ohta et al., 1986), human herpes virus (Challoner et al., 1995) which are found to be associated with multiple sclerosis (Olson et al., 2001). Diabetes (McIntosh and Menser, 1992), stromal keratitis (Thomas and Rouse, 1997), myokarditis (Pauschinger et al., 1999) are diseases which are also known to have viral connection.

Rotavirus, a diarrhoeagenic virus which normally infects children of lower than 5 years of age, is known to have associated with autoimmune diseases such as coeliac disease (Stene et al., 2006) and type 1 diabetes (Honeyman et al., 2000, 2010; Pane et al., 2014). Although molecular level study was not done about coeliac disease and rotavirus connection, the relation with type 1 diabetes has been well researched (Honeyman et al., 2000, 2010; Pane et al., 2014) but still lacks circumstantial evidence and the relation is contradictory (Blomqvist et al., 2002). Molecular mimicry has been identified as the reason detected for rotavirus infection induced type 1 diabetes. Rotaviral structural protein VP7 was found to share similarity with inusulinoma antigen 2 (IA2) and glutamic acid decarboxylase 65 (GAD 65), two main targets in type 1 diabetes (Honeyman et al., 2000).

Our study to explore the potential of rotavirus as autoimmune disease inducer was initiated by blasting structural proteins using Blastp other than VP7 in human proteome. All proteins other than VP6 showed no match with any human protein or showed match with proteins that are not associated with any autoimmune disorder (data not shown) and as VP6 is the outer layer solvent accessible protein of rotavirus, it gets exposed to and activates immune system, so we constricted our study of auto immune threat search with VP6 protein only. VP6 showed match with ryanodine receptor, a target in mayasthenia gravis auto immune disease. To confirm this we aligned the sequences of ryanodine receptor 2 and VP6 (Fig. 1A). Two peptide regions are found which showed significant similarity with ryanodine receptor 2 like VP7 which is found to have similarity with IA2 and GAD 65 at one peptide region (Honeyman et al., 2010). Not only molecular mimicry is sufficient to serve as a potential autoimmune threat, antigenecity and probability of production of auto antibody specific to the two peptide regions during infection are important.

Rotavirus is found to circulate as many subtypes and they vary in sequence highly. To know the conservedness of the identified peptides in different circulating subtypes, we aligned rotaviral VP6 sequences of multiple strains of four highly circulating subtypes from different countries. Result revealed that identified regions (aa 261–268, aa 374–381) are highly conserved.

To be immunogenically active the two peptide regions must be epitopic in nature. Analyzing VP6 protein with B cell epitope search tools [IEDB and ABCpred (Supplementary table 1)] we found both the regions have antigenicity and surface accessibility that indicate their high probability to serve as B cell epitope (Figs. 3 and 4). T cells have both the capabilities of direct defence and influence B-cells to produce antibody against foreign molecules. The peptide regions must be represented by MHC molecules to T-cells so that T-cells can recognize them as potential T-cell epitopes. Each autoimmune disease as well as MG has their specific HLA haplotypes. MG is associated with HLA haplotypes B8 and DR3. In our experiment VP6 sequences are analyzed for antigenecity using HLA-DRB1*0301 and HLA-B*08:01 and both the regions showed enough potential to bind strongly with those haplotypes (Supplementary file 1). Thus the result confirmed them as highly antigenic regions.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

Overall our study detected two peptide regions which can serve to produce auto antibodies against ryanodine receptor 2 and exposes an area of further research exploring rotavirus as a potential threat to mayasthenia gravis, an uncommon autoimmune disease. An unrelated study with an objective to detect pathogenic mimicry of another myasthenia gravis target AchR, found that VP7 share an 8 amino acid long epitope with AchR (Deitiker et al., 2000). This previous study and our study indicate probable relation between myasthenia gravis and rotavirus infection.

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Tapati Sarkar conceived, designed and performed the study. Tapati Sarkar and Ashesh Nandy analyzed the data. Tapati Sarkar and Ashesh Nandy drafted the manuscript. Ashesh Nady, Papiya Nandy, Rahul Bhowmic and Sukhen Das revised the manuscript.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENT@&#

Tapati Sarkar is supported by junior research fellowship from council of scientific and industrial research (CSIR).

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2014.05.003.

The following are Supplementary data to this article:
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

