@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Visualization environment for reviewing and experimenting with compaction equipment trajectories in context

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Visualization Environments (VEs) usually aim either to review or simulate processes.


                        
                        
                           
                           Uniting both functionalities can support studying equipment trajectories in context.


                        
                        
                           
                           We suggest how to unite them within a VE for analyzing compaction processes.


                        
                        
                           
                           We developed an illustrative VE in consultation with asphalt paving professionals.


                        
                        
                           
                           Test results indicate that actual and demonstrated trajectories are commensurable.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Visualization environment

GNSS sensor

Asphalt layer temperature

Paving

Compaction

Equipment trajectories

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Visualization Environments (VEs) can assist construction professionals in studying intricate interrelations between construction equipment trajectories and their context. Such VEs typically support them in either reviewing earlier conducted work or experimenting with possible alternatives. In the first case, VEs represent equipment trajectories and their actual context sensed during actual construction processes. Trying out alternative trajectories in such VEs is problematic. In the second case, environments support experimenting with alternative equipment trajectories within an a priori defined context, but demand significant modeling efforts to reconstruct real-world projects. Although combining both functionalities within a singular VE will enable obtaining benefits pertinent to each of the visualization environments classes, such attempts were not made earlier. To overcome this gap, this study proposes a method for developing interactive simulation visualization environments suitable for both reviewing conducted and experimenting with alternative equipment trajectories. The suggested method concentrates on compaction operations and comprises two steps: (1) application of a “context-actions-trajectory-impact” framework to structure interrelations between compaction equipment trajectories and their context; and (2) operationalization of an organization scheme to devise a specialized VE with the desired functionality. To evaluate the applicability of the proposed method we applied it for the case of the asphalt compaction process. We developed a specialized visualization environment in consultation with asphalt paving professionals. Two test sessions with a paving specialist and two professional roller operators were conducted with the developed VE. The results from the sessions show that the environment developed according to the method offers the envisioned functionality. As illustrated by the test results, original and demonstrated equipment trajectories are commensurable and able to provide meaningful insights into compaction operations.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Nowadays, employing construction equipment is critical in literally all residential, commercial, industrial, or highway constructions projects [24]. With the increasing industrialization of construction work, the role of on-site equipment and machinery is vital in achieving productivity and efficiency [66]. This dependency on construction equipment grows with the size and complexity of construction projects.

Given the vital role of equipment during on-site construction, analyzing previously conducted construction projects can provide valuable insights about the process. Specifically, construction personnel and students at professional educational facilities through such an analysis of past processes, can improve their understanding of construction processes. In particular, the analysis can help students and professionals in identifying equipment activity- and safety-related information [43], work zone safety features [52], and near-miss events (as noted in Vasenev et al. [60]). The thorough understanding of how equipment might move within specific project conditions can also contribute to planning future construction activities (see for instance Huang et al. [27] and Li et al. [36]).

To meaningfully study equipment movements the documented construction equipment paths – in other words, equipment trajectories – need to be considered in relation to the context where the trajectories take place. This context is formed by multiple factors and can include other equipment and operations that characterize the situation of an equipment and influence decisions of the equipment operator. Some examples of particular context factors are ambient weather conditions or locations of other equipment.

Interactions between the trajectories and their context can be carefully studied and assessed with the help of 3D Visualization Environments (VEs) due to their capabilities to “provide insights and understanding and reduce complexity of the phenomena under consideration” [33]. In line with VEs available in other domains, construction-oriented environments can be classified as either oriented to review conducted equipment trajectories in context (e.g. [40,61,51]) or to experiment with alternative trajectories for specific contexts (such as Turkiyyah [55] and Fang et al. [19]). Each of these two VE classes possesses distinct characteristics. The first VE class hones in on reviewing conducted equipment trajectories. The corresponding data processing procedures can automatically reconstruct specific context factors, such as ambient weather conditions. The shortcoming of such environments is its inability to experiment with alternatives to the construction process. In contrast, the VEs of the second class can assist in experimenting with alternative trajectories for particular contexts, but demand dedicated efforts to model the context of a specific project.

Combining functionalities of both classes would resolve the limitations specific for each of the VE classes. Such a combination could enable VE users to both (1) review actual equipment trajectories shortly after the completion of the construction project and to (2) experiment with alternative trajectories within the context of the conducted project. However, despite the potential to combine the advantages of different VEs, the topic how such environments could be developed did not receive significant attention. According to the authors’ best knowledge, how to organize such VEs for the construction domain has not been proposed yet.

Two challenges seem to have hampered the development of environments with the combined functionalities for the needs of the construction domain. Firstly, because each construction process is unique, it is not easy to provide a suitable approach to disentangle intricate interrelations between the context of equipment trajectories, equipment trajectories themselves, and actions of equipment operators, which in a way link the context and the trajectories. Without structuring these interrelations the possibility to develop such VEs is hindered. Secondly, an adequate organization scheme of a VE consisting of components to acquire, process, and represent both actual and simulated data has not been suggested. Since these two challenges are closely interrelated, both should be dealt with simultaneously in the development of these VEs.

This research contributes to the development of such VEs by suggesting a method that provides a basis for future research and discussions. We investigate how to develop specialized interactive simulation visualization environments for compaction tasks (such as soil, asphalt, and waste compaction) as a particular type of construction activity. For this purpose, the paper presents: (1) a framework to assist structuring interrelations between equipment trajectories and their context; and (2) an organization scheme, which advises how a specialized environment can be arranged according to the framework’s concepts. The framework suggests disentangling intricate links between context, operator’s actions, and outcomes of these actions. Then, the framework’s concepts and their interrelations guide the organization of a specialized visualization environment.

To illustrate the proposed method we operationalized it for the case of the asphalt compaction process. The operationalized method guided the development of a corresponding VE, which was tested during two sessions. The tests investigated if the developed VE can be used to review actual roller trajectories as well as support experimentation with alternative trajectories within the context reconstructed from the documented sensor readings.

To provide the background of this research, the next section briefly reviews visualization environments focused on VEs developed for the needs of the construction domain. Afterwards, a method to organize VEs with the combined functionalities for compaction activities is suggested. Then, the paper describes how this method can be applied for the case of asphalt compaction. Finally, this paper portrays the details of the VE developed according to the operationalized methods, describes two test sessions conducted with the involvement of practitioners, and finishes with discussions and conclusions.

@&#BACKGROUND@&#

Numerous VEs were recently developed in a number of domains, including medical technologies (see, for instance a review by Vapenstad and Buzink [58]), aerospace (e.g. [5]), virtual manufacturing [34,14,41], and construction [7,9,23,69]. This section briefly overviews VEs from several domains, including those related to construction processes. The section points out why it remains difficult and how it can be beneficial to bridge the gap in representing sensed data and modeling alternative processes.

Although VEs can effectively support a number of diverse tasks in different domains, one can notice that aligning simulations to specific real world cases remains a common challenge. For instance, this can be observed in the medical domain. Even though multiple VEs were designed to support their users in simulating surgery activities, the question of reconstructing specific cases received much less attention. Functionality of patient-specific rehearsal, also known as mission rehearsal, is present only in a relatively small amount of environments [58]. The task of reconstructing a specific surgery process conducted in reality appears to be even more challenging. First, it requires collecting relevant contextual information about the process. Second, it demands investing significant efforts in reconstructing the process.

The same hampers reconstructing real-world events and processes in the aerospace domain. Even though flight recorders can provide an abundant amount of context data, only initial steps were made to fill in-flight simulators with data collected in the real-world. One example of such an attempt is described in Aragon and Hearst [5], where a helicopter flight simulator with accurate aerodynamic models was provided with actual airflow data from shipboard flight tests. Still, the task of reconstructing real-world trajectories of planes and helicopters in context appears to be a formidable modeling challenge. This can be partially explained in that significant efforts are needed to reconstruct airplane trajectories and their context on a scale that matches an airplane behavior model.

Similarly to the aerospace domain, the topic of generating simulations based on trajectories in the field of virtual manufacturing received attention only recently [64].

Altogether, these examples indicate that even for relatively ‘enclosed’ manufacturing and highly critical medical and aerospace domains, the topic of reconstructing specific trajectories in context has received only limited attention. It appears that the difficulty to track and relate sensed data to available models is the major challenge. In other words, the modeling task should account for the same type and level of context details, as the data collected in the field. This challenge is particularly relevant for the construction domain, because construction processes are often unique, less structured, and highly depend on decisions made by the field personnel. The next subsection illustrates this in more detail.

In the construction domain it is acknowledged that the development and utilization of specialized VEs is one of the promising research directions [7]. With regard to representing conducted processes, three-dimensional visualizations add an element of familiarity and realism into systems [33], helpful to better understand the documented projects. Also, visualizing simulations can substantially help in making optimal decisions where traditional methods prove ineffective or are unfeasible [31].

Recently, multiple specialized environments were suggested to support design and planning, simulations, and real-time visualizations of construction-related tasks. Some examples include VEs for conducting collaborative design in a virtual world [25], performing design and simulation analysis functions to support optimum road design [32], and considering construction safety needs [37]. Other authors suggested to plan construction site activities [45], integrate health and safety issues in the construction project planning process [15], or to employ VEs with simulation capabilities to help planners to identify an optimal construction plan [35]. Next to those examples, interactive visualizations were also suggested to assist visual impact assessment of housing developments [48] and demonstrate the impact of highway construction on the public [70].

With multiple environments developed to address diverse needs of the construction domain, a number of VEs specifically focus on construction processes and equipment trajectories in context. These environments can be seen as related to one of the two classes concerned with either representing conducted construction processes or simulating alternatives for the specific processes.

Several visualization environments were suggested to represent ongoing or already completed construction processes to VE users. For instance, specialized real-time visualizations can demonstrate real-time data from positioning sensors [16]. Also, dynamic visualizations of ongoing engineering can assist in remote monitoring and planning of construction operations [2]. Finally, VEs can assist in demonstrating conducted projects to construction professionals during education sessions organized after the completion of the project. Such VEs are available for reviewing steel-erection tasks performed in an indoor training center [51] or to examine asphalt compaction activities [40].

Another class of VEs can support simulating operators’ actions within specific contexts. Such specialized VEs are particularly useful in training or educating construction specialists, because construction processes are often unique, highly context-dependent, and can be too expensive or even dangerous to reproduce. This class of environments encompasses both industrial solutions and academic suggestions. To date, several large producers of construction equipment, e.g. John Deere, Caterpiller, and Komatsu, developed specialized environments to train operators of construction equipment. A wide range of such specialized environments is available, varying from affordable simulators (e.g. [47]) to highly sophisticated systems designed by world leaders in modeling, simulation and visualization (such as CAE Mining solution [13]).

Academic researchers also suggested and developed several education-oriented simulators, for instance to train students and workers involved in asphalt compaction [55] or concrete spraying [65] processes. In addition, some researchers advise to couple post-process visualization environments with discrete event simulators. Examples of such simulations include VEs to assess CO2 impacts related to the equipment movements during road construction [22], or to model equipment breakdown during earthmoving operations [44]. Broadly, environments that possess simulation abilities can be referred to as ‘serious games’.

However, our review shows that the listed environments only support one of two options. In the first case, VEs allow reviewing documented construction projects, but lack the functionality to assist in investigating alternatives to them. Other environments provide their users with possibilities to simulate specific construction processes by trying out alternatives relevant for a particular context. However, such VEs are less oriented to review real operations and would demand additional modeling efforts to reconstruct specific projects, thus reflecting the challenge mentioned in the previous subsection.

We envision that uniting functionalities of the two classes of VEs could benefit their users. For instance, having such environments could assist construction professionals in reviewing sessions of conducted work shortly after the completion of the project [10]. To enable this, it is necessary to reconstruct the sensed project in a relatively short time. Also, such environments could enrich education sessions where students can investigate how equipment behaved in real world cases or what plausible alternatives could be. Therefore, we consider that everyone who can benefit from reviewing and simulating construction processes in general could benefit from having a VE that also would have simulation capabilities. The next section introduces a method how such representation and simulation environments could be developed.

This section suggests a framework to structure interrelations between compaction equipment trajectories and an overall scheme how a specialized VE could be arranged according to this structure. The application of both the framework and the scheme form the suggested method.

Because compaction equipment trajectories and their context are heavily intertwined, equipment operators continuously react to the momentary context by relocating their equipment and thus contribute to shaping the future context of their actions. These intricate real-world interrelations between the context, operators’ actions, and equipment trajectories need to be structured prior to the development of specialized interactive simulation VEs.

This subsection suggests a framework to approach the interrelations between these concepts, which departs from the following considerations. During compaction processes, equipment operators make decisions how to act within the context. The context continuously changes and is different at every moment of time. The operators’ decisions are embodied as actions aimed toward a specific goal, for instance to obtain a uniformly compacted soil layer. By acting, equipment operators relocate the equipment they control, thus changing the context of operations. Regardless of being relocated or not, the equipment can also perform some work that contributes to the context at the next moment of time. The interrelation of these concepts form the “context-actions-trajectory-impact” framework demonstrated in Fig. 1
                        .

The major concepts of context, operators’ actions, trajectories, and impacts can be outlined as follows:
                           
                              –
                              
                                 Context can be considered as all factors that directly or indirectly influence specific actions [46, p. 59]. In practice, characterizing all factors is nearly impossible. Therefore, within the framework, we adopt the operational definition of context as provided by Dey [18]: “Context is information that can be used to characterize the situation of an entity”. We suggest to quantify the context, thus considering the context as formed by a list of context factors. The factors highlight specific measurable aspects of interest of the construction process under consideration.

The context factors may or may not depend on the actions of equipment operators. For example, equipment operators can directly influence the context by changing locations of their equipment, but have no control over the ambient weather conditions and locations of other workers on-site. Given these considerations, the context can be described as a multiplicity of different factors that characterize the situation of an equipment and influence decisions of the equipment operator.

A particular list of factors to be accounted for within the framework might depend on the type of construction process under consideration, as the list of context factors would be different in the case of asphalt or earthmoving compaction. Moreover, additional design decisions should limit the amount of factors for sensing in the real world (and modeling later), as it is hardly possible to account for all context factors. Ultimately, the decision which factors to include depends on the intended aspects that should be highlighted.


                                 Actions. To approach the goal of the construction process, equipment operators act by continuously controlling their equipment within the changing context. The actions are based on the operators’ decisions guided by considerations how to achieve a particular goal. The conducted operators’ actions are manifested as equipment trajectories and the work conducted by the equipment.


                                 Trajectory. Due to the context and the goal of the process, equipment operators might need to move their equipment from one location to another. The corresponding operator’s actions lead to changes of the equipment’s moving direction and its speed. If tracked by navigation sensors, equipment movements can be documented as equipment trajectories. Similarly, in case of experimenting with alternative trajectories within a VE, the trajectories can be documented as changes of locations of the virtual equipment over time.


                                 Impact. In addition to the changing location of the equipment, operators also conduct some work. This framework sees the corresponding work as the impact that a particular piece of equipment produces. In general, the impact is linked to the location of the equipment and depends on the actions of equipment operators. For instance, in addition to moving their equipment, roller operators can compact construction materials by applying specialized working modes, such as drum vibrations. As equipment trajectories and impacts are closely related, the described framework groups them within a single concept – the outcome of equipment operators’ actions.

With the outlined concepts and their interrelations, the “context-actions-trajectory-impact” framework enables separating equipment trajectories from their context. In other words, the framework suggests how to structure causal links between different context factors, operators’ actions, and their outcomes (equipment trajectories and the impacts the equipment make). Such structuring is important to develop integrated VEs as it provides an intermediate connection between the complexity of the real-world operations and the possibilities to simulate complex processes in visualization environments.

Structured interactions between equipment trajectories and the context permit the development of visualization environments to both represent and simulate equipment trajectories in context. The next subsection builds on the outlined concepts and suggests how to organize such VEs.

An overall organization scheme of a VE that incorporates the outlined concepts is shown in Fig. 2
                        . This scheme aligns data pre-processing and representation. The scheme utilizing the notation of IDEF0 (Integration Definition for Function Modeling) diagrams: inputs for specific components are associated with the left side of each box; outputs are on the right; mechanisms to enable functions at the bottom; and controls at the top.

The scheme organizes data processing and representation elements as follows: earlier acquired sensor readings characterizing real equipment trajectories and their context form the input for pre-processing. With data collection and processing aligned to specific tasks, as suggested for instance in Vasenev et al. [63], the data is to be sampled in a way suitable for future processing. Steps 1 and 2 (Fig. 2) deal with data pre-processing. Pre-processing is needed to filter outliers in the documented data and prepare it for the future use. This step can involve a human operator in case human reasoning would be desired for the task. Alternatively, to reduce the lag between acquiring sensor readings and representing documented processes in the VE, the step can be performed in an automated manner. This enables utilizing the environment shortly after the completion of the construction project.

After pre-processing, Step 3 creates a common context structure, such as a grid. This structure is intended to support the discretization of trajectories and impacts and enables unambiguous mapping trajectories and impacts to it. This context structure can be a digital terrain model for soil compaction or a triangular grid describing the road geometry for asphalt compaction. Geo-referencing real and alternative trajectories to this common context structure enables future cross-comparing. The advantages of reconstructing the context prior to the VE are twofold: (1) the calculation demands within the VE can be reduced to facilitate fluid interactions between the user and the environment, and (2) it becomes possible to carefully cross-compare real and alternative trajectories and their impacts within the same stabilized context.

Once the context structure is created for the whole tracked project, the sensed data is mapped to it within Steps 4 and 5. Specifically, Step 4 reconstructs all context factors excluding the impacts that the piece of equipment under study produces by itself. For instance, all trajectories and impacts of construction equipment that are independent from actions of the roller under consideration are reconstructed in Step 4. Then, trajectories and impacts of the roller of interest are constructed in Step 5. The corresponding dependencies between the compaction equipment under study and other equipment can be derived from the interrelations described by the framework’s concepts (operators’ actions, trajectories, and impacts).

After the completion of the pre-processing stage, the trajectories, context, calculated impacts, and the constructed context structure form the input dataset for the visualization environment. Provided with the dataset, the environment allows its users to both review the documented trajectories in context and to demonstrate (or try out) alternative equipment trajectories for the same context. In the first scenario, VE users could review and explore the documented process in detail. This exploration can be conducted, for instance, in a 4D manner. The VE user could change the point of view within the 3D visualization and also “fast-forward” the process represented in the VE. In the second scenario, a VE user can take control over a particular piece of equipment and simulate an alternative trajectory for the documented context factors. To support this, the VE would track operator’s actions and compute equipment trajectories and alternative impacts. These computations utilize the pre-calculated context structure as a data referencing mechanism. Then, the VE demonstrates the alternative impact to its users. Continuously receiving feedback on the outcome of their actions, the users can further proceed with simulating alternative trajectories. The first scenario is enabled by the pre-processing phase, when the acquired real trajectories and context are computed. The second scenario is mainly supported by computations performed within the VE.

Altogether, the suggested VE organization scheme incorporates the concepts identified using the “context-actions-trajectory-impact” framework. The scheme specifically suggests how the interrelations between different context factors, operators’ actions, and equipment trajectories, and impacts can be organized within specialized VEs.

The application of the suggested framework and the overall scheme form the method to develop specialized VEs for representing sensed and experimenting with alternative compaction equipment trajectories. The next sections illustrate the applicability of the proposed method by applying it for the case of the asphalt compaction process.

Although the outlined dichotomy of VE functionalities is relevant for the construction industry as a whole, a uniform solution how to develop a VE with the combined functionality can hardly be presented for the whole industry at once. Therefore, the scope of this paper mainly concerns developing VEs with combined representation and modeling functionality for a specific type of construction process. To further limit the scope, we concentrate on the case of asphalt compaction in particular. This process is relevant for illustration purposes, as it strongly depends on equipment trajectories conducted within a changing context.

To illustrate the method for asphalt compaction as a case of compaction operations, we adopted the following four-step routine:
                        
                           1.
                           By consulting with asphalt paving professionals, we selected several context factors relevant to asphalt compaction and applied the “context-actions-trajectory-impact” framework to structure interrelations between the context factors and roller trajectories.

We operationalized the proposed organization scheme based on the outcome of the first step.

The first author of this paper developed a visualization environment according to the operationalized scheme. The development followed the iterative procedure proposed by Hartmann et al. [26]. In agreement with the procedure, several meetings with paving specialists took place to discuss implementation options. During these sessions the experts provided their feedback on data processing and representation functionality of the environment.

The functionality of the developed VE was tested with the help of practitioners, including two roller operators, who were not consulted during the VE development. Firstly, the practitioners reviewed the documented asphalt roller trajectories, collected during real asphalt compaction projects. Then, the VE users demonstrated alternative roller trajectories within the documented context factors. We compared the real and alternative trajectories to identify if they stay commensurable.

The next section describes these steps in detail after illustrating how existing VEs for the asphalt compaction belong to one of the VE classes outlined above.

Similarly to other compaction operations, the asphalt compaction process heavily depends on the trajectories of equipment involved.

The asphalt paving process can be described in short as follows: First, a paver deploys a mixture along its moving path. After the deployment, the temperature of the newly paved asphalt layer continuously decreases [12,4]. Then, rollers travel, while continuously reversing their direction, over the layer to compact it to a desired degree. Because the temperature does not allow to discontinue the asphalt compaction process, the operators need to make timely decisions how to compact the deployed mixture within this continuously changing context. Thus, while the trajectories of pavers to a large extent shape the context of compaction, it is the decisions of roller operators, manifested as roller trajectories, that are crucial for the success of the compaction process.

Noticeably, although decisions of operators are linked to asphalt temperatures and the paver’s path, the amount of alternative rolling paths is unlimited. Even the compaction of a straight road can be performed in different rolling patterns [54]. If the geometry includes a curved road, the operators might need to choose either working from the inner side to the outer side throughout the turn or, alternatively, compact in tangential direction [21]. Moreover, different undesirable, although rather common, events can call for changing roller trajectories. For instance, rollers should continue moving, while the paver stays still and waits for an asphalt truck to arrive. In another case, if a roller departs to refill its water tanks, another roller should continue compacting.

To date, several VEs were suggested to represent the asphalt compaction process, mainly developed within the research trajectory of the Dutch ASPARi (Asphalt Paving Research and Innovation) network. In line with the outlined dichotomy, these VEs either support reviewing real roller trajectories or simulating alternative trajectories for specific cases. Examples of VEs to review the equipment trajectories in respect to their context include AsphaltOpen [40] and ProPave [39] solutions. Other VEs are more oriented to enable simulations of the compaction process than a review of conducted projects: SIMPAVE visualizes the paving process for simulation and education purposes [55], while a specialized VE was specifically proposed to explicate tacit knowledge of roller operators [62].

Combining the two outlined functionalities might provide additional benefits and open up new possibilities for utilizing advanced visualization environments. Specifically, such environments can assist training equipment operators and providing individualized feedback to the project participants [39, p. 244, 10, p. 10]. If the time to model the actual process is reduced, the feedback session can take place shortly after completion of asphalt paving projects. It is desirable, because it could support group discussions about particular operational strategies [10, p. 14]. Therefore, in our view, it might be beneficial if a VE user could freely choose a trajectory, which later can be analyzed.

Unfortunately, VEs with such functionalities were not developed yet and significant modeling efforts are needed in the absence of automated modeling procedures. To automate process modeling the proposed method can be applied. First, the framework can be applied to disentangle intricate interrelations between the context of compaction equipment trajectories, equipment trajectories themselves, and actions of equipment operators. Second, a VE should be organized utilizing these concepts by means of components to acquire, process, and represent both sensed and simulated data.

To illustrate the applicability of the proposed method, we operationalized the framework for the case of asphalt compaction. Several design decisions were made whilst operationalizing the proposed framework. These decisions aimed to keep the level of complexity of the illustrative VE manageable, while providing the intended functionality. For convenience, we illustrate the operationalized framework in Fig. 3
                        .

First, we decided to limit the amount of context factors to be demonstrated within the VE. These factors were selected based on our intention to: (1) highlight relations between roller trajectories and the location of the paver, (2) study compaction impact delivered across the geometry of the asphalt layer, and (3) relate equipment trajectories to the temperature of the asphalted layer. The intention to concentrate on these aspects was formed by our previous discussions with asphalt paving specialists and surveys of relevant aspects in academic manuscripts (e.g. [39,28,10]) and professional publications, such as the Asphalt Handbook [6], and educational materials for roller operators.

The three listed aspects can characterize the efficiency of the asphalt compaction process. For instance, the distance between the paver and the roller can indicate if the roller keeps up with the paver’s speed. The homogeneity of the compaction effort delivered to the paved layer is also an important characteristic, because if the layer is under- or over-compacted it affects the pavement quality. The last of the mentioned aspects – relation of the equipment trajectories to the asphalt temperature – is particularly important to consider, because it continuously redefines the compatibility of the mixture. In particular, given the nature of asphalt compaction, roller operators need to compact asphalt layers within specific temperature ranges [68,17,17,4] as suggested by asphalt mixture designers [49]. As the temperature of the layer continuously decreases after the deployment [12], it require operators to constantly relate their trajectories to it.

As a result of concentrating on the above-mentioned aspects, we selected four context factors. Two of them depend (at least partially) on the operator’s actions: equipment locations and the compaction effort delivered by rollers to the asphalted layers. The other two – the geometry of the working zone and the temperature of the asphalt layer – are independent from actions of roller operators.

After identifying the four context factors of interest, we investigated interrelations between them and the equipment trajectories in this context. To keep the task within a manageable scope, we assume that the actions of roller operators result in equipment trajectories that are seen as the compaction impact. Following generally accepted industry practice, supported by solutions like Trimble CCS900 or CCSFlex [53], this paper uses the amount of roller passes as surrogate for compaction. This approach is adequate if roller operators do not employ specific working modes, such as drum vibrations. This common simplification can be found in many specialized industrial solutions that calculate the compaction impact as amounts of roller passes. As a result of adopting this data processing logic, the operationalized framework omits the direct connection between the operator’s actions and the impact.

Altogether, during operationalizing the framework we limited the amount of aspects to consider, derived four context factors, and outlined interrelations between the framework’s concepts. The structured interrelations between the concepts enabled us to apply the proposed organization scheme for the case of asphalt compaction.


                        Fig. 4
                         shows how an interactive simulation and representation VE for the case of the asphalt compaction can be organized. This figure is based on the interrelations of the framework’s concepts outlined above and is introduced here for convenience purposes.

The input for the pre-processing stage is formed by data streams from multiple sensors. We utilize localization sensors to track trajectories of pavers and rollers to reconstruct two context factors: equipment locations and the compaction effort. Also, several temperature sensors provide data to recreate two other context factors (the geometry of the working zone and the temperatures of the paved layer at every moment of time). Some of those sensors are located on the paver to document temperature gradients across the deployed asphalt mixture. Others are imbedded into the asphalt layer to record its cooling rate. Because the operationalized framework sees roller trajectories as manifestations of operators’ actions, no additional data related to tracking operators’ action is collected.

The data pre-processing stage is organized as follows. Firstly, the outliers in the documented trajectories and context data are filtered out (Steps 1 and 2 in Fig. 4). For this purpose we utilize a moving average method, which appears to be suitable for the case of asphalt compaction operations [11]. Then, during Step 3 the context structure of the compaction is recreated as a geo-referenced area. Since one of our aspects of interest is the compaction effort delivered to the paved asphalt layer, we reconstruct the geometry of the paved layer that represents the rollers’ working area. We identified the geometry by combining the paver’s trajectory with the known geometrical disposition of temperature sensors situated on the paver. We obtain the geo-referenced model of the paved layer by combining these data and applying the assumption that the initial layer temperature is higher than a threshold [59]. This obtained geometrical structure is useful for mapping the temperature data and amounts of roller passes at specific locations. An illustration of a context structure with aligned context data is indicated in Fig. 5
                        .

Once the mesh representing the asphalt layer geometry is calculated, both temperature data and the amounts of roller passes are projected to it (Steps 4 and 5). In particular, Step 4 reconstructs the changing temperature of the asphalted layer by calculating the asphalt cooling rate and combining it with the initial temperature distribution of the layer. Afterwards, the rollers’ trajectories are projected to the context structure within Step 5. For this purpose, the geometry of each roller at every time step is related to the geometry of the paved layer (the context structure). The vertexes of the mesh that the rollers compact are identified by using a point-in-polygon algorithm. The amount of passes, assigned to these vertices, is then updated.

The processed data form the input dataset for the VE. The dataset is comprised of: trajectories of rollers and the paver, calculated compaction impacts, the asphalt temperature, and the geometry of the paved layer as a data referencing mechanism. This dataset is suitable to provide the first of the two desired functionality of the VE: to review the conducted equipment trajectories in the context of the documented real-world project.

To support users in demonstrating alternative compaction trajectories, the environment tracks the input from its users, transforms the input into trajectories, and calculates alternative equipment impacts. The user could thus review alternative impacts.

To ensure that a VE based on the operationalized organization scheme can indeed support reviewing and simulating construction processes, the authors of this paper developed and tested such a VE. The corresponding details are provided next.

Utilizing the operationalized method described above, the first author of this paper developed a VE with combined simulation and representation functionalities for the case of asphalt compaction. This section overviews the implementation details of the environment.

The data pre-processing stage was implemented as separate Matlab procedures that correspond to Steps 1–5 shown in Fig. 2. Within the procedures, the documented equipment trajectories are preprocessed and aligned to each other. Also, the geometry of the paved layer is reconstructed and the temperature and the rollers’ impacts are related to it. The trajectories, and the geo-referenced temperature and impact data form the input dataset for the visualization environment.

The developed VE, named PaVE (Paving site Visualization Environment), builds on jMonkeyEngine 3.0 – a Java-based game engine coupled with an integrated development environment. This engine is particularly suitable for the illustrative VE implementation due to its ability to support rapid development of 3D applications. Among other features, the engine supports interactions between the VE and its users, user-defined computations, and visualizations of large-scale meshes. The rapid development possibilities allowed us to iteratively develop the environment while continuously consulting with two asphalt paving specialists and one experienced roller operator, who provided their invaluable feedback.

An example of visualizing a documented compaction project within PaVE is demonstrated in Fig. 6
                        . The temperature values and compaction efforts at specific road locations at any moment of time show interpolated values between the defined points by means of mesh visualizations. The user of the environment can explore the progress over time by adjusting the time slider value. The user can freely navigate within PaVE by changing the position and the view direction of the virtual camera using a keyboard or mouse.

In addition to the functionality to review the sensed real roller equipment trajectories in context, the VE user can take control over a particular roller at any moment of time. The user can demonstrate (by using a mouse or pointing with a pen on the interactive whiteboard) in which direction the roller should move. The environment tracks these inputs and continuously calculates new locations of the roller.

PaVE continuously computes roller passes that can later be represented to VE users. Roller passes are calculated by projecting roller locations and geometry to the mesh nodes of the paved layer at every moment of time. A point-in-polygon algorithm identifies nodes that the roller travels over. This approach can be seen as a simplified machine–soil simulation, which does not account for the actual compaction made in terms of density, but stays on the level of roller passes. With the help of two selectors (shown in Fig. 6) the user can choose if, for instance, the actual or alternative impact progresses should be visualized.

The demonstrated alternative trajectories can be compared to actual ones to pinpoint differences between particular characteristics of the roller trajectories. We developed several indicators to highlight specific aspects of the asphalt compaction process. The indicators describe the consistency of trajectories of a single roller, consistency of changes in the distance between the roller and the paver, and the impact the roller makes to the asphalted layer. Firstly, the distances travelled in-between reversing roller moving directions are calculated. As rollers typically change their moving direction many times during a single compaction project, calculating such distances is useful to assess how consistently roller operators behave on an individual basis. Secondly, the distances between the roller and the paver over time are computed. This indicator demonstrates how roller operators act as members of a larger group. Finally, we calculate additional statistics about the homogeneity of amounts of roller passes. Visually, it can be represented in the format similar to the roller passes demonstrated in Fig. 6. Numerically, the calculated percentage of specific amounts of roller passes can indicate the homogeneity of the compaction effort. The developed indicators allow for quick reviewing and cross-comparing both actual and alternative equipment trajectories in context. The functionality of the environment was tested with the help of asphalt paving specialists, as described next.

To examine the applicability of the developed VE to review conducted roller trajectories in context and also to demonstrate alternative trajectories, we conducted two test sessions. The purpose of the test sessions was to identify if actual trajectories in context can be reviewed and alternatives to them can be demonstrated within the VE. These test sessions were organized as follows. Firstly, the sensor readings collected during two actual projects were pre-processed to form input datasets. Then, one asphalt-paving specialist was invited for the first test session and two professional operators participated in the second session. The asphalt-paving professionals reviewed actual compaction projects documented in the field and demonstrated alternative equipment trajectories for the sensed context factors. Afterwards, alternative equipment trajectories were exported from the VE and compared to the trajectories conducted during actual projects. To assist in cross-comparing roller trajectories and their impacts, we calculated the indicators mentioned in the previous subsection.

Noticeably, we did not ask operators to discuss the documented or demonstrate an alternative equipment trajectory without considering their context. We assume, based on our previous conversations with construction specialists prior to the PaVE development that a real trajectory can hardly be shown without a context. Therefore, during test sessions we presented original trajectories in context and then suggested to demonstrate alternatives for the same context factors.

For the first test session an asphalt-paving project was reconstructed that took place near the city of Apeldoorn in The Netherlands in July 2010. During the daylong working shift the paving team formed by one paver and two rollers, constructed two asphalt layers. An undesirable event took place during the construction of the first layer – the paver stopped for a long period of time. Roller operators continued with the compaction and conducted more roller passes behind the paver than desirable. This part of the construction process was selected as the first case to represent within the developed VE. We visualized movements of the paver and one of the rollers that participated in the project. The asphalt temperature distribution after the paver and the compaction effort performed by the roller were calculated. To test the environment, we invited an asphalt paving specialist to demonstrate an alternative roller trajectory within the VE.

After the VE user demonstrated an alternative trajectory for the roller, we calculated indicators for both actual and alternative trajectories. Fig. 7
                         represents the calculated indicators. The first and third graphs of the figure represent the distances that the actual and the virtual rollers travelled in-between reversing their moving directions. The second and fourth graphs indicate changes in distances between the paver and the actual (or virtual) roller. The comparable graphs in Fig. 7 differ within the highlighted zones. The zones highlight the time when the VE user was controlling the virtual roller, as well as corresponding time periods during the documented project.

As the third graph indicates, the alternative trajectory demonstrated by the VE user was more consistent than the actual trajectory, because the distances in-between switching rolling directions were more similar to each other. Likewise, according to the fourth graph, the VE user mostly kept distances between the roller and the paver within a more consistent zone, compared to the actual trajectory. These findings and the VE functionality were later discussed with the VE user. The user found the information insightful and indicated that the environment indeed permits to both review the conducted process and simulate alternatives to the actual roller trajectories on-site.

For the second test session we reconstructed another asphalt paving project conducted in The Netherlands. We selected a test case where the paver stopped and one of the two rollers participating in the project left to refill its water tanks. We invited two roller operators to participate in the second test session. The operators’ professional experience can be seen as comparable, as each of the operators worked for about 25years in the asphalt compaction domain. Noticeably, these operators were not previously consulted during the development of the VE.

Both operators reviewed the documented and demonstrated alternative roller trajectories suitable for the documented context factors. Then, we calculated indicators characterizing the actual and each of the two alternative roller trajectories in context (Fig. 8
                        ).

The graphs calculated after the second test session facilitate, similarly to the first test case, comparing the actual roller trajectory with the alternative trajectories. Several differences between the trajectories can be noted. In particular, the first column of Fig. 8 shows that the first roller operator demonstrated an alternative roller trajectory with consistently varying longer and shorter distances, as the roller travelled in-between switching its moving directions. These differences can be noted in Fig. 8 within the highlighted zones. Meanwhile, the second operator preferred a trajectory with longer distances in-between reversing roller’s directions. The second column indicates that both operators suggested to compact closer to the paver during the time they controlled the virtual roller. Similarly to the first column, the comparable trajectory elements are highlighted. Both alternative trajectories resulted in more homogeneous compaction efforts, as the third column demonstrates. This finding is confirmed by the last column of indicators, where alternative equipment trajectories resulted in more preferable distributions of amounts of roller passes over the deployed layer. Specifically, while the actual roller passed ten or more times over about 25% of the layer, impacts of both alternative trajectories led to less than 20% of such over-compacted road surface. Besides, a higher percentage of the compacted area received the compaction impact corresponding to three, four, or five roller passes. Also, less percent of the road received more than ten passes, as the last bar in the graphs indicate. As a result, the calculated impact distribution takes a more apparent bell-shaped form, which indicates a reduction in variability of the resulting compaction efforts. Noticeably, the alternative compaction impacts demonstrated by the operators differ between each other. Even though the delivered compaction was more homogeneous, apparently the operators followed different rolling strategies. Similarly to the first test case, these findings were discussed with roller operators. The operators suggested that the environment certainly permits demonstrating alternative trajectories, but do not provide the feeling of an actual compaction process.

Together, the two conducted test sessions indicated that the developed visualization environment indeed permits its users to review and simulate construction equipment trajectories in context. In addition, the equipment trajectories documented in the actual project and their alternatives demonstrated within the context, can be meaningfully compared. Therefore, based on the possibility to use the environment within the desired scope and the ability to cross-compare the summary statistics calculated for actual and alternative equipment trajectories in context, we consider the environment functional. To this extent, the suggested method for organizing such specialized VEs demonstrated to be practical. The next section discusses these findings in more detail.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Multiple compaction process stakeholders, including equipment operators and other construction personnel, can benefit from an environment that supports studying equipment trajectories in context. This study described such an environment oriented to support the analysis of asphalt compaction. Compared to other environments described in subsection 5.1, it supplies its users with clear visualizations of sensed projects and support them in experimenting with asphalt roller trajectories in context. The lack of the need to model sensed (actual) projects can be of use for feedback sessions organized shortly after the completion of the sensed project. We provided a method that can be used for developing other environments with the same functionality.

Our suggested method to develop such an environment departs from the assumption that interactions between equipment trajectories and their context should be carefully structured. This structuring needs to account for the operators’ actions and the impacts the equipment makes. The method suggests that the outlined “context-actions-trajectory-impact” framework should be applied first. Then, based on the framework concepts, a specialized VE can be arranged by operationalizing an overall organization scheme for such VEs.

To illustrate the proposed method we applied it to the asphalt compaction process. We concentrated on four context factors according to our intention to highlight specific aspects relevant to the process.

Participants of the test sessions noted that the functionality of the VE to review and simulate construction processes within one VE provides a specific level of abstraction in analyzing equipment trajectories in context. Specifically, it becomes possible to review and simulate continuous and lengthy construction projects because of the detachment from the second-by-second continuous visualizations and concentrating on trajectories with respect to particular context factors. Without direct connection to time and the visualization cues, the developed environment deals with the knowledge of equipment operators and how to compact the deployed asphalt mixture, rather than with the operators’ skills. Therefore, the introduced method can assist in bridging the gap between the corresponding on-site and off-site reasoning of equipment operators. By bridging the gap between knowledge-based and skills-based reasoning, the proposed method provides additional possibilities to exchange and build upon knowledge of construction professionals. The developed VE enables specific actions to be demonstrated in a particular context.

One of the major advantages of PaVE compared to other environments, in addition to combining functionalities of two VE classes, is the eliminated need to model conducted processes with large human efforts. Thus, it allows to reduce the time delay between tracking construction processes and simulating alternatives to the sensed projects within a VE. Given this possibility, VEs organized according to the proposed method could be used in education sessions organized shortly after the completion of construction. It can be envisioned that the training sessions could be organized as follows: (1) the documented actual process is reviewed by the project participants, (2) the feedback session participants discuss some indicators characterizing equipment trajectories, (3) the VE users demonstrate alternative construction processes, (4) and the indicators related to the alternative processes are examined. As a result, these sessions, formed around an interactive VE, can support construction professionals in developing deeper insights into construction processes and thus assist the transition from current implicit learning to explicit method-based learning.

Although the illustrative VE indeed showed the applicability of the suggested method, the decisions made during the operationalization of the method resulted in specific aspects of the developed environment. A number of improvements can be anticipated.

Specifically, both the framework and the method could be further elaborated. To enable separating equipment trajectories from their context, the framework adopts a particular perspective to approach construction process. For this purpose, the concepts of context, operator’s actions, trajectory, and impact are introduced. Applying these concepts to view construction processes implies a rather mechanical representation of the process. Additional elaboration of the components, particularly those related to human reasoning, can be useful for more advanced frameworks. For instance, answering questions how operators deal with the incoming information, including prioritizing and aggregating information flows, can assist in clarifying or adjusting the provided “context-actions-trajectory-outcome” framework. Also, the outlined organization scheme can additionally be tuned to adjust data processing arrangements. For instance, in the proposed scheme the context structure is reconstructed from the equipment trajectories to facilitate future comparison between the actual and alternative trajectories. Still, to further reduce the computation demands, a more generic mesh or grid representing the context can be used. Such a generic grid can represent the same pre-calculated data structure for several different projects.

Also, as a result of design decisions, only four of the context factors were chosen to be represented within the environment. Multiple other factors, such as the thickness of the asphalt layer, were left aside due to our intention to concentrate on specific aspects of the asphalt compaction process described in subsection 5.2. Other aspects could be of interest if other stakeholders with different goals are involved in the VE development. Noticeably, the process of selecting which aspects to concentrate on and which context factors should be accounted for is a complex task, which was left outside of the scope of this research. Specific methods from design science methodologies [67] or requirements engineering [29] literature can effectively inform this task.

The developed VE can be further improved. The data pre-processing and representation components, implemented using different programming languages, could also be embodied as a single software package. The interactions between the user and the environment can be organized using the set of controls typical for an asphalt roller. Also, the adopted representation of context was also different from the real-world settings: the context factors were demonstrated on a screen and operators need to comprehend them, rather than feel the vibration of the equipment or see “white smoke” over the recently paved asphalt layer. This limitation is in line with other research in the VE domain, when although virtual reality can supports multisensory interaction channels, visual representations predominate [38]. These elements might be addressed if one intends to advance the developed VE toward a comprehensive virtual reality system.

The developed VE can also benefit from adopting advanced models of equipment movements and interactions between equipment and the surrounding elements. This can be done, for instance, with help of game engines. As Jhin Ren [30] points out, game engine based simulations for the construction domain have several advantages compared to traditional programming methods. Within the developed environment, a game engine can, among other tasks, model acceleration, deceleration, turning radius of equipment, and advanced physics, such as collisions.

Noteworthy, PaVE currently utilizes a simplified version of calculating machine–soil interaction. The compaction level is computed as the amount of roller passes with no account for temperature of the area under compaction. In short, the trajectories are converted into roller passes by finding which nodes of the pavement mesh are covered by rollers. Afterwards, PaVE represents the amount of roller passes to its users as a context parameter. This computation approach is relatively fast, easy to program, and widely adopted in off-the-shelf solutions industrial solutions to track the asphalt compaction process, including those described in Trimble [53]. At the same time, we acknowledge that interactions between the user-input trajectories and induced impacts can be computed more realistically. Clearly, future developments of PaVE and other similar VEs can benefit from accounting for advanced machine–soil interaction models. Additional realism in computing the compaction effort can be introduced by applying specialized asphalt compaction models (for instance, from Huerne [28]), which are informed by analysis of data from the tracked compaction process.

Additionally, the environment can benefit from advances in research on discrete event simulators (DES). Recent advances both in the construction [3,1] and the intelligent manufacturing [64] domains suggest that utilizing DES to model equipment trajectories can bridge real-world processes and the simulation models. Some already available examples of how DES can be used at the core of interactive visualization (e.g. as described in Rekapalli and Martinez [44]), could be used as a starting point to further enhance the method described in this paper. Future work could elaborate the provided trajectories-context duality in terms of simulation formalisms. This duality can be described using Discrete Event Specification (DEVS) and related to the hierarchy of multimodal data sources. The overview of these topics, which can foster this task, within the AEC/FM domain was recently provided in Behzadan et al. [8].

One of the questions to be further developed concerns data pre-processing. Currently, the utilization of this method is possible only if data acquisition was conducted in a way adequate for future data processing. This assumption is reasonable. For instance, it was proposed how to align documenting trajectories of construction equipment with respect to future utilization of the acquired data [63]. Also, information fusion filter outliers in the equipment trajectories [60]. However, because data acquisition is critical for future data processing, additional research in this direction is desired.

Future research can also explore the applicability and suitability of quantifying equipment trajectories, for instance by using statistical-based graphs utilized in this research. During test sessions this topic received significant attention from construction professionals. The test participants confirmed that such graphs could indeed provide brief and insightful overviews of conducted trajectories. Specifically, the practitioners suggested that this approach can help to “digitalize” equipment trajectories and thus make them possible for future analysis and comparisons. As an example, such indicators could assist in tracking the progress of equipment operators who start their careers.

Additional research could investigate how to expand the method toward creating multi-user environments. Such direction is of particular interest, because typically multiple equipment shares the same goal. As a result, equipment operators might need to adjust their actions to maintain or improve the performance of the team as a whole. A possible step in the direction of developing such VEs is to implement multiple client-oriented visualizations that communicate with a server that runs the overall simulation [61].

Future research could investigate to what extent the VEs organized according to this method support human-centered construction process simulations. This research would be in line with the transition from the existing practice of visualizing construction sequences to simulating construction processes. Due to its significance, this transition is one of the relevant R&D initiatives for the next decades [42]. In this regard, the suggested method can assist in improving understanding of how to organize human-centered simulations of construction processes.

Finally, the question how the proposed method can be applied for other construction processes (in addition to compaction projects) can be studied. Such generalization potential was intentionally designed into the method. We envision that the framework can provide a means to concentrate on construction equipment trajectories in context in general by facilitating disentangling complex intertwined relations between trajectories, actions, context, and impact. Possibly, because cranes or excavators often operate on specific locations without changing their position, these concepts might need to be refined or redefined. For instance, a bucket or another equipment component can be followed instead of the equipment itself. Also, the relationships within the proposed framework “context-action-trajectory-impact” can be different (and even more complex) for the case of simulating excavating activities. For example, to adjust the framework presented here to excavating activities, future research needs to build on the body of knowledge of excavating activities. The way of calculating Dynamic Equipment Workspaces for excavators, described in Vahdatikhaki and Hammad [56,57] could be a point of departure. All in all, we consider that the interested researcher equipped with the developed method and an understanding of the nature of other construction processes can effectively apply the suggested method to structure interrelations between trajectories of different construction equipment and their context. Practitioners, in turn, could benefit from VEs with the outlined functionality (that account for specific construction equipment) by preparing themselves to employ advanced working methods in future projects. Knowledge management principles [20,50] can be of help for this task.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

The success of compaction projects, similar to construction projects in general, increasingly depends on effective utilization of construction equipment on-site. Pervasive networks and new and less expensive sensors make construction sites more data rich. These data can be used to study and search for ways to advance the utilization of construction equipment via interactive visualization environments. This paper proposes a novel approach to build specific interactive visualization environments that can represent documented equipment trajectories, as well as to enable experimenting with alternative trajectories in context. The proposed method is formed by two elements: (1) the “context-actions-trajectory-impact” framework to assist in disentangling continuous interrelations between compaction equipment trajectories and their context; and (2) an organizational scheme outlining how to organize interactive simulation and representation environments.

This paper illustrates the applicability of the proposed method by operationalizing it for the case of asphalt compaction – a construction process that heavily depends on roller trajectories in context, like other compaction processes. Based on known specifics of the process and by concentrating on specific aspects of it, four context factors were chosen to be represented within the environment. The corresponding VE was developed according to the operationalized method. Later, the VE was tested with the involvement of professional roller operators. During the tests the VE provided its users with the opportunity to both (1) review the actual equipment trajectories in context, as documented during real-world projects and to (2) develop and demonstrate (or try out) alternative roller trajectories for the same context factor. The comparison of the actual and alternative trajectories was found to be valid and create meaningful insight for equipment deployment strategies.

Because of the reduced demand for modeling actual projects, visualization environments developed according to the method can easily be integrated into diverse education sessions, including feedback sessions conducted shortly after the completion of a construction project or classes at specialized education facilities. Using sensors’ acquired data of the actual construction projects in the visualization environment reduces the modeling effort significantly. This creates a flexible solution for analysis, learning, and training. It can be expected that such utilization will result in enhancing the operators’ professional knowledge and lead to improvements of construction processes on-site.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This work was supported by the Pioneering Foundation and would not have been possible without cooperation of asphalt paving professionals from the Dutch ASPARi (Asphalt Paving Research and Innovation) network. The authors would like to thank Frank Bijleveld, Marco Oosterveld, and Ad Klompenmaker for fruitful discussions.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

