@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#MATEPRED-A-SVM-Based Prediction Method for Multidrug And Toxin Extrusion (MATE) Proteins

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           The prediction of MATE proteins is made using SVM based method.


                        
                        
                           
                           The model was derived using PSSM classifier and achieved an overall accuracy of 92.06%.


                        
                        
                           
                           MATEPred efficiently distinguishes MATE proteins from non-MATE proteins.


                        
                        
                           
                           This tool is helpful to general users and also for the researchers working in this field.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Antibiotics

Drug resistance

MATE

PSSM

SVM

Diarrheal pathogens

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The growth and spread of drug resistance in bacteria have been well established in both mankind and beasts and thus is a serious public health concern. Due to the increasing problem of drug resistance, control of infectious diseases like diarrhea, pneumonia etc. is becoming more difficult. Hence, it is crucial to understand the underlying mechanism of drug resistance mechanism and devising novel solution to address this problem. Multidrug And Toxin Extrusion (MATE) proteins, first characterized as bacterial drug transporters, are present in almost all species. It plays a very important function in the secretion of cationic drugs across the cell membrane. In this work, we propose SVM based method for prediction of MATE proteins. The data set employed for training consists of 189 non-redundant protein sequences, that are further classified as positive (63 sequences) set comprising of sequences from MATE family, and negative (126 sequences) set having protein sequences from other transporters families proteins and random protein sequences taken from NCBI while in the test set, there are 120 protein sequences in all (8 in positive and 112 in negative set). The model was derived using Position Specific Scoring Matrix (PSSM) composition and achieved an overall accuracy 92.06%. The five-fold cross validation was used to optimize SVM parameter and select the best model. The prediction algorithm presented here is implemented as a freely available web server MATEPred, which will assist in rapid identification of MATE proteins.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The discovery of the antibiotics has been the most important step towards the control of infectious disease. However, with the emergence of drug resistant pathogens, currently available drugs are becoming ineffective (Putman et al., 2000). Multidrug efflux is an important mechanism of biocide and antimicrobial agent resistance in bacteria. They have been divided into various groups, which include the Major Facilitator Super (MFS) family, the Small Multidrug Resistance (SMR) family, the Resistance Nodulation and Cell Division (RND) family, the ATP binding cassette (ABC) family, and the Multidrug And Toxin Extrusion (MATE) family (Otsuka et al., 2005). Multidrug and Toxin Extrusion (MATE) proteins form a class of proteins that function as drug and proton antiporters. Initially, due to the presence of 12 transmembrane helices, they were designated as the member of MFS family. Shortly afterwards, it was reported that they showed no sequence identity to other known multidrug transporters, therefore, categorized as a new family of multidrug transporters, and are widely propagated in all realms of living beings (Omote et al., 2006). MATE proteins have been characterized as important transporters that mediate the final excretion of cationic drugs into bile and urine (Nies et al., 2012). In plants, transporter proteins from the MATE family are essential in metabolite transport, which directly changes crop yields. In bacteria and mammals, these MATE transporters facilitate multiple-drug resistance (MDR), thus regulating the efficacy of many pharmaceutical drugs used in curing a variety of diseases (He et al., 2010). MATE family transporters are conserved in the three pinion domains of life (Archaea, Bacteria and Eukarya), and export xenobiotics using an electrochemical exchange of H+ or Na+ across the tissue layer. MATE transporters confer resistance to bacterial pathogens and cancer cells, thus causing critical reductions in the curative efficacies of antibiotics and anti-cancer drugs, respectively (Tanaka et al., 2013). An example of one such protein is NorM, of Vibrio parahaemolyticus which is a multidrug Na+-antiporter, and was found to confer resistance to dyes, fluoroquinolones and aminoglycosides (Mohanty et al., 2012; Li and Nikaido, 2004).

As reported, MATE family efflux pumps depend upon Na+/H+ gradient for transport and have three major branches: the NorM branch, a branch containing several eukaryotic proteins and a branch containing E. coli DinF (Mohanty et al., 2012). MATE protein length varies from 400 to 700 residues comprising of 12 transmembrane helices. In MATE proteins, there is no conserved consensus sequence; however, they share ∼40% sequence similarity (Omote et al., 2006). Granting to the studies, it has been reported that sequence information for very few MATE proteins is available till date. Also, due to its primary structure heterogeneity, it is hard to recognize these proteins based on sequence. The alignment based tools like Pfam and BLAST are not sufficient to identify all the MATE proteins (as described in Section 3.1).

To combat the problem of drug resistance, it is all important to extensively understand and identify multidrug resistance proteins at a faster pace. Owing to the time limit and cost of experiments, there is a demand to have computational methods to rapidly examine and interpret relevant data (Ramana and Gupta, 2010a). In this study, we attempted to develop a prediction tool for identification of MATE proteins on the basis of Position Specific Scoring Matrix (PSSM) using Support Vector Machine (SVM). First, we used different features for generating SVMs (i) Amino Acid composition (ii) Dipeptide composition (iii) Hydrophobicity (iv) Charge composition (v) Mutliplets composition (vi) PSSM composition. However, it was observed that the performance of these SVMs was poor when compared to PSSM based SVM.

@&#METHODOLOGY@&#

MATE proteins (assigned as positive set) and all other types of proteins (assigned as negative set) were collected through a broad and critical study of research articles from PubMed. Using CD-Hit (http://weizhong-lab.ucsd.edu/cd-hit/) (Li and Godzik, 2006) program the redundancy in both the sets was scaled down to 40%. So we had two datasets positive and negative, each comprising of 63 and 126 sequences, respectively.

For checking the efficiency of the SVM model generated, its performance was tested on independent datasets consisting of 8 positive sequences and 112 negative sequences, obtained after scaling down its redundancy to 40% against NR database.

Support Vector Machine (SVM) is a supervised machine learning method first introduced by Vapnik in 1995 (Vapnik, 1998). SVM in combination with kernel functions is used to map input data to some vector space. In order to avoid over fitting, SVM then finds a hyperplane separating the positive data from the negative ones in high dimensional space (Ben-Hur et al., 2008).

SVM in this approach was implemented using LibSVM package (http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/∼cjlin/libsvm/) (Chang and Lin, 2001) which allows us to optimize a number of parameters (Ramana and Gupta, 2009) and to use kernels (e.g., linear, polynomial, radial basis function, sigmoid) for obtaining the best hyperplane (Ramana and Gupta, 2010a). In this study Radial Basis Function (RBF) kernel was used.

For evaluating the performance of modules generated in this study, we used five-fold cross validation in which the data is first partitioned into 5 equal sized datasets. Later, five iterations of training and validation are done such that within each iteration, a different fold of the data is held-out for validation while the remaining four-folds are used for learning (Refaeilzadeh et al., 2009). Several performance measures were then applied to evaluate the best parameters (γ and C) and then averaged to bring forth an overall assessment of the model (Ramana and Gupta, 2010b).

Applying the following equations accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, Matthew correlation coefficient (MCC) and F-score were calculated for evaluating the accuracy of SVM classifiers:

1) Sensitivity: It is determined as the percentage of MATE that is correctly predicted as MATE.

Sensitivity=TP/TP+FN×100

2) Specificity: It is the percentage of non-MATE that is correctly predicted as non-MATE.

Specificity=TN/TN+FP×100

3) Accuracy: It is the percentage of correct predictions out of the total number of predictions.

Accuracy=TP+TN/TP+FP+TN+FN×100

4) Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC): It is a measure of both sensitivity and specificity. MCC=0 is the indication of completely random prediction, while MCC=1 indicates perfect prediction.

MCC=(TP×TN)−(FN×FP)/(sqrt (TP+FN)×(TN+FP)×(TP+FP)×(TN+FN)

5) F-score: It is the harmonic mean of precision and recall. The best value for F-score is 1 and worst score is 0.


                        F-score=2×Precision×Recall/(Precision+Recall)

a) Amino acid composition (AAC): It is the fraction of each of the 20 amino acids present in a protein sequence and generates an input vector of 20 dimensions.

b) Dipeptide composition (DPC): It is the fraction of a dipeptide divided by the total number of possible dipeptides and gives information in the form of 400 dimensions (20×20).

c) Charge composition (CC): It is the fraction of charged amino acids divided by the total length of the protein. The fractions of positively and negatively charged amino acids yields a fixed length input vector of 20 dimensions.

d) Hydrophobicity composition (HC): Based on their hydrophobicity properties, the amino acids may be classified into five groups (Brendel et al., 1992). Moments of the positions of the five groups were calculated using the formula as below with r varying from 2 to 5. This yields a fixed length input vector of 25 dimensions.
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       M
                                       r
                                       =
                                       ∑
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   (
                                                   X
                                                   i
                                                   −
                                                   X
                                                   m
                                                   )
                                                
                                                r
                                             
                                          
                                          N
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           where Xm=mean of all positions of hydrophobic amino acids, 
                              
                                 X
                                 m
                                 =
                                 
                                    
                                       ∑
                                    
                                    
                                       i
                                       =
                                       1
                                    
                                    
                                       N
                                    
                                 
                                 X
                                 i
                                 /
                                 N
                              
                           ; Xi=position of ith hydrophobic amino acid and N
                           =total number of hydrophobic amino acids in the sequence (Ramana and Gupta, 2010a).

e) Multiplet composition (MPC): Multiplets are homopolymers (Y) n and yield an input vector of 20-dimensions.where Y is any amino acid repeated n times with n
                           ≥2.

f) Position Specific Scoring Matrix (PSSM) profile
                        

A Position Specific Scoring Matrix (PSSM) is a table that contains probability information of amino acids or nucleotides at each spot of an ungapped multiple sequence alignment. In such a table, the rows represent residue positions of a particular multiple alignment and the columns represent the names of residues or vice versa. The values in the table represent log odds scores of the residues calculated from the multiple alignments. PSSM consists of a set of 20 substitution scores at each position along the motif—one for each of the amino acids, thus generating an input vector of 400 dimensions. Sigmoid function (f(x)=1/1+
                           e
                           −x
                           ) was used to normalize each element of the PSSM matrix whereby each element f(x) was scaled to a range of 0-1 and the steps followed to generate PSSM matrix with 400 dimensions as described in Garg and Gupta (2008). Position-Specific Iterated BLAST (PSI-BLAST) provides an automated facility for constructing, refining, and searching PSSMs.

LibSVM package was used to obtain the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) plot for the SVM classifier developed in the study.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

In total 100 MATE sequences were collected through extensive survey of research articles from PubMed. Pfam and BLAST analysis were then performed on these protein sequences. The Pfam database contains one Pfam domain having Pfam ID PF01554.13 and it was found that only 27 proteins out of the 100 MATE protein sequences showed presence of this Pfam domain. PSI-BLAST was also performed on a positive dataset comprising of 63 MATE protein sequence in a Leave-One-Out-Cross Validation (LOO CV) manner where once each sequence was used as the query sequence while the rest were used as the reference database at a threshold of 0.001. This process was repeated over each sequence present in a positive dataset. It was found that 21 sequences did not find any significant hit. As none of these similarity based search methods were efficient to depict MATE proteins, therefore we explored SVM approach on various protein features for identification of MATE proteins.

Five-fold cross validation of Amino Acid Composition (AAC), Dipeptide Composition (DPC), Charge Composition (CC), Hydrophobicity Composition (HC), Multiplet Composition (MPC) and Position-Specific Scoring Matrix (PSSM) was performed and all were trained using the radial basis function (RBF) kernel. The kernel function was then optimized to obtain the best C and γ corresponding to maximum accuracy, at which values of sensitivity and specificity is higher for a given feature.

It was found that the Charge Composition (CC) model has an accuracy of 78.84%, 85.71% with Dipeptide Composition (DPC) and 65.08% with Multiplet Composition (MPC) based model. The Amino Acid Composition (AAC) model was found to exhibit over-fitting as it performed remarkably well (accuracy=90.47%) in cross validation, but failed to perform well in testing set (accuracy=50%). This suggests that amino acid used as an independent property is not enough to discriminate between MATE and non-MATE proteins.

To enhance the prediction accuracy, we further developed several hybrid models with the combination of features. We obtained an accuracy of 72.75% with CH (hybrid of Charge and Hydrophobicity) based, 82.53% with DCP (hybrid of Dipeptide, Charge and PSSM) based and 74.60% with ACP (hybrid of Amino acid, Charge and PSSM) based model. But all of these hybrid models failed to perform well on independent test sets.

PSSM profiles generated using PSI-BLAST provides valuable information about conserved residues present within the protein sequence. PSSM profiles for the training set sequences were generated by performing the PSI-BLAST search against NR database. We employed PSSM profiles as a feature for training SVM. It was scaled between 0 and 1 and normalized using logistic function. This model was best among all the models and yielded an accuracy of 92.06%, with the sensitivity and specificity of 100% and 89.42% respectively along with an MCC of 0.82 and F-score of 0.83632 (Table 1
                        ) in five-fold cross validation.


                        Table 2
                         represents prediction results of the SVM model on a benchmark dataset yielding an overall accuracy of 92.5%.

To evaluate the performance of the best model the ROC curve was used which shows the trade-off between true positive rate (sensitivity) and false positive rate (specificity) over their entire range of possible values. The PSSM classifier had Area Under Curve (AUC) of 0.960 (Fig. 1
                        ). This analysis confirmed the efficacy of the model.

The SVM classifier presented in this study is implemented as a freely available web tool ‘MATEpred’ to predict MATE proteins. The tool is openly accessible at http://www.bioinformatics.org/matepred_hos (Fig. 2
                     ) and connected to the HTML front-end through PHP using the Apache web server. The prediction is made using PSSM classifier. The server accepts protein sequence in FASTA format as an input. The output displays sequence no, score and decision of the model.


                     Vibrio parahaemolyticus and Shigella boydii are two of major contributors in the epidemiology of diarrhea. We used the PSSM model to scan the proteomes of these organisms for the presence of MATE proteins. Initially, the model reported eight and sixteen positives for each of these species, respectively. Out of these predicted MATEs, seven proteins from Vibrio parahaemolyticus (Accession no. O82855, Q87FN2, Q87IY5, Q87HE9, Q87MO9, Q87FV4, and Q87QD3) (Table 3
                     ) and one protein from Shigella boydii (Accession no Q323U7) (Table 4
                     ) are having 12 transmembrane helices predicted using HMMTOP (Tusnády and Simon, 2001) server. These were assigned as ‘MATE-like’ proteins that could be investigated for their role in drug resistance (Ramana and Gupta, 2010a). We also analyzed for the presence of Pfam and PROSITE which suggested that out of seven proteins, four proteins from Vibrio (Q87FN2, Q87HE9, Q87FV4, and Q87QD3) (Tables 5 and 7
                     ) and one from Shigella boydii (Q323U7) (Tables 6 and 8
                     
                      
                     ) are the members of MFS family, and two more proteins from Vibrio (O82855 and Q87MO9) (Table 5) belongs to matE family, hence these represent potential MATE proteins. Out of the total predicted positives, there were some false positives also. We also performed BLAST (Altschul et al., 1990) analysis for the predicted proteins against positive dataset employed for training and it was found that five proteins from Vibrio (O82855, Q87IY5, Q87HE9, Q87MO9 and Q87FV4) and one from Shigella (Q323U7) showed significant sequence similarity with the known MATE proteins. From all these analysis, it was observed that out of the total predicted proteins, two proteins from Vibrio with Accession number (O82855, Q87MO9) are MATE family proteins while two others with Accession numbers (Q87HE9 and Q87FV4) from Vibrio and one from Shigella (Q323U7) are the potential MATE candidates that can further be taken for experimental verification to study their role in drug resistance.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

MATEpred efficiently distinguishes MATE sequences from non-MATE sequences on the basis of PSSM profile. In future, MATEpred will continue to be updated with the inclusion of additional MATE sequences, which will further enhance the efficiency of MATEpred. This will make it more worthwhile for the general users and also for the researchers working in this field.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENT@&#

This work was funded by FAST TRACK Young Scientist Fellowship awarded to Jayashree Ramana by Department of Science and Technology (DST), New Delhi, India.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

