@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Cation−π interactions in high resolution protein−RNA complex crystal structures

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We have analyzed the cation–π interactions of protein–RNA complexes.


                        
                        
                           
                           We employed conservation pattern, structural motif, and binding energy calculation.


                        
                        
                           
                           The distribution of interacting residues and geometry of interactions are also be elucidated.


                        
                        
                           
                           Results from this study will provide valuable insight into rational drug design.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Cation–π interactions

Proteins

RNA

Interfaces

Stabilization centers

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  In this work, we have analyzed the influence of cation–π interactions to the stability of 59 high resolution protein–RNA complex crystal structures. The total number of Lys and Arg are similar in the dataset as well as the number of their interactions. On the other hand, the aromatic chains of purines are exhibiting more cation–π interactions than pyrimidines. 35% of the total interactions in the dataset are involved in the formation of multiple cation–π interactions. The multiple cation–π interactions have been conserved more than the single interactions. The analysis of the geometry of the cation–π interactions has revealed that the average distance (d) value falls into distinct ranges corresponding to the multiple (4.28Å) and single (5.50Å) cation–π interactions. The G–Arg pair has the strongest interaction energy of −3.68kcalmol−1 among all the possible pairs of amino acids and bases. Further, we found that the cation–π interactions due to five-membered rings of A and G are stronger than that with the atoms in six-membered rings. 8.7% stabilizing residues are involved in building cation–π interactions with the nucleic bases. There are three types of structural motifs significantly over-represented in protein–RNA interfaces: beta-turn-ir, niche-4r and st-staple. Tetraloops and kink-turns are the most abundant RNA motifs in protein–RNA interfaces. Amino acids deployed in the protein–RNA interfaces are deposited in helices, sheets and coils. Arg and Lys, involved in cation–π interactions, prefer to be in the solvent exposed surface. The results from this study might be used for structure–based prediction and as scaffolds for future protein–RNA complex design.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Protein–RNA interactions have diverse functions within the living cells and form the basis for several regulatory mechanisms including RNA splicing, transport, replication, translation, posttranscriptional control (Glisovic et al., 2008) and association (Zhou et al., 2009). Understanding these complexes is a pivotal goal in structural biology, because it underpins many fundamental areas of molecular biology from viral replication to cell differentiation. Defects in protein–RNA interactions have been described for a number of diseases, ranging from neurological disorders to cancer (Cooper et al., 2009; Lukong et al., 2008). Protein–RNA interactions are ranked high on the list of unsolved problems and the precise mechanisms of interactions are not fully understood (Ellis et al., 2007; Tjong and Zhou, 2007). For this reason, there have been many intense interests in experimental and statistical analyses of atomic contacts at protein–RNA interfaces, and a large portion of these studies has focused on biological, chemical and physical aspects of these interactions (Lewis et al., 2011; Morozova et al., 2006; Reddy et al., 2008; Treger and Westhof, 2001). The published works on structural analyses of protein–RNA complexes mainly concentrated on identification and calculation of various nonbonding interactions across the protein–RNA binding interfaces, such as H-bonding, electrostatic interaction, and van der Waals contact (Ahmad and Sarai, 2011; Ellis et al., 2007; Kim et al., 2003; Morozova et al., 2006). These interactions rely on proteins and target RNA molecules. Thus, identifying protein–RNA interactions and key residues in proteins are crucial for illustrating the function of proteins and understanding the mechanism of various biological processes, such as posttranscriptional control, protein synthesis and viruses infection (Glisovic et al., 2008; Hall, 2002; Tuschl, 2003).

Cation–π interactions are unique biomolecular binding forces that occur between electron-rich aromatic rings and organic or inorganic (metallic) cations. This type of noncovalent interaction can be very strong, as has been confirmed by solid-state studies of small-molecule crystal structures (Kumpf and Dougherty, 1993; Zhu et al., 2004) and by theoretical and experimental analyses in the gas phase and in aqueous media (Salonen et al., 2011; Zhu et al., 2004). The strength of cation–π interactions ranges between 10 and 150kcalmol−1 (Priyakumar et al., 2004), which is comparable to the three other major types of molecular interactions: hydrogen bonds, van der Waals interactions, and electrostatic interactions. Cation–π interactions are therefore considered to be an essential force in generating tertiary and quaternary protein structures induced by oligomerization and protein folding (Brocchieri and Karlin, 1994). While cation–π interaction is arguably the strongest of the nonbonded interactions, its strength critically depends on the nature of aromatic system and charge of cation (Ma et al., 1997). Ever since the study of cation–π interaction has gained prominence, the interplay of theory and experiments to see the manifestation of this reasonably strong interaction in chemistry and biology has become inevitable. In a series of pioneering papers Dougherty and co-workers have explored the role, relevance and range of the cation–π interaction between aromatic amino acids and side chains of arginine and lysine (Gallivan and Dougherty, 1999). Parallel to this, a series of experimental studies carried out by Rodgers and co-workers to explore the cation–π interaction involving alkali and alkaline metal ions reveal their quantitative strengths (Amunugama and Rodgers, 2003; Huang and Rodgers, 2002). Computations have played an important role in studying the cation–π interaction in aromatic, heteroaromatic, polycyclic aromatic compounds and biomacromolecules (Anbarasu et al., 2009; Lavanya et al., 2013; Li et al., 2009; Singh et al., 2009; Vijay and Sastry, 2008). While complexes with a dication have a strength comparable to covalent bonds, monocationic complexes have much smaller binding energies. A strong cooperativity between cation–π, π–π and hydrogen bonding interactions has also been observed (Reddy et al., 2006; Vijay et al., 2008).

Though there are several reports, on the intra-protein interactions in protein–RNA complexes (Anbarasu and Sethumadhavan, 2007; Anbarasu et al., 2007a,b, 2008) there are not many studies which explores the cation–π interactions between amino acid residues (Lys, Arg) in the protein and the π-ring in nucleotide bases of RNA. Hence, we attempted this research. We have focused our study at the protein–RNA interface and hence the cation–π interactions within a protein or RNA are not considered. Results from this study might be used for structure–based prediction and as scaffolds for future protein–RNA complex design and engineering.

@&#METHODOLOGY@&#

For this study we used the Protein–RNA Interface Database (PRIDB) (Lewis et al., 2011). We used the following procedure to select the desired complex structures for further analysis: (1) no theoretical model structures and no NMR structures were accepted; these structures were not included since it was difficult to define the accuracy of the ensemble of structures in terms of displacement that was directly comparable to the X-ray diffraction studies; (2) only crystal structures with the resolution of 2.0Å or better and a crystallographic R-factor of 25.0% or lower were accepted, and (3) polypeptides and polyribonucleotides longer than 20 amino acids and 5 nucleotides, respectively. As done by Allers and Shamoo (2001), in cases when the PDB file contained multiple copies of the complex in the asymmetric unit, only one copy of the structure was used. The exclusion of these copies reduces the likelihood of inferring interaction patterns from a biased dataset. To avoid redundancy in our data set, a standalone PISCES package was used to select a single structure with the best resolution in cases where proteins in different complexes had >30% sequence identity (with all other options set to their default) (Wang and Dunbrack, 2005). Using these criteria, we created a dataset of 59 protein–RNA complexes. The PDB IDs are as follows: 1a34, 1c9s, 1dfu, 1di2, 1dul, 1fxl, 1gtf, 1h2c, 1hq1, 1j1u, 1jbs, 1jid, 1k8w, 1r9f, 1sds, 1urn, 1utf, 1utv, 1uvj, 1wpu, 1zbi, 1zh5, 2anr, 2asb, 2g8f, 2jlv, 2nug, 2po1, 2q66, 2r7y, 2r8s, 2voo, 2x1f, 2xlk, 2xnr, 2xs5, 2y8w, 2zko, 3bou, 3boy, 3bso, 3d2s, 3dd2, 3g9y, 3h5x, 3i5x, 3iev, 3k62, 3lqx, 3nmr, 3ova, 3oin, 3pew, 3pf4, 3qgc, 3r2c, 3rer, 3sqw, and 3t5n.

Macromolecular crystal structures rarely contain H-atom positional data with the precision required to properly evaluate hydrogen bond geometry. Therefore H-atoms were added to the protein using the program Discovery Studio Visualizer 3.5 (Accelrys Software Inc., 2012). The H-atom positions were then refined, keeping the position of the non-H atoms fixed, using the MMFF94 force field (Halgren, 1996). When multiple alternative conformations of certain residues were present, as indicated by the altLoc field in the PDB file, only the first conformation was considered.

A computer program Discovery Studio Visualizer 3.5 (Accelrys Software Inc., 2012) was used for the calculation of various types of cation–π interactions and their geometrical features with default settings (Fig. 1
                        ). The following tests are performed to find cation–π interactions: cations are found; these are considered to be atoms with a formal charge of >0.5 to allow inclusion of delocalized cationic species such as lysine and arginine side chains. The distance (R) between each cation and the centroid of each π ring is tested to find those within 1Å more than the Distance Cutoff (i.e., 7Å by default). In such cases, the distance between the cation and the mean plane of the ring is determined to find those within the Distance Cutoff (default 6Å). The angle (θ) between the cation-centroid vector and the ring plane should be more than the Minimum Angle (default 45°). The angle α is the dihedral angle between the two extended planes. The positive charge centers of Arg (CD, NE, CZ, NH1, NH2) and Lys (CE, NZ) are considered to be cations in the present study.

We have computed the energetic contribution of all cation–π interactions for each protein–RNA complex in the dataset. The total interaction energy (E
                        total) has been divided into electrostatic (E
                        es) and van der Waals energy (E
                        vdw) and were computed using the program NAMD 2.8 (Phillips et al., 2005), which has implemented a subset of AMBER99 force field to calculate the energies (Gromiha et al., 2004).

We computed the conservation of amino acid residues in each protein using the ConSurf server (DeLano, 2002). This server computes the conservation based on the comparison of the sequence of a PDB chain with the proteins deposited in Swiss-Prot (Boeckmann et al., 2003) and finds the ones that are homologous to the PDB sequence. The number of PSI-BLAST iterations and the E-value cutoff used in all similarity searches were 1 and 0.001, respectively. All the sequences that were evolutionary related to each one of the proteins in the dataset were used in the subsequent multiple alignments. Based on these protein sequence alignments the residues are classified into nine categories from highly variable to highly conserved. Residues with a score of 1 are considered to be highly variable and residues with a score of 9 are considered to be highly conserved.

Stabilization centers are the clusters of residues that make cooperative, non-covalent and long-range interactions (Dosztanyi et al., 1997). Thus, they are likely to play an important role in maintaining the stability of protein structures. Residues can be considered as parts of stabilization centers if they are involved in medium or long-range interactions and if two supporting residues can be selected from their C and N terminal flanking tetrapeptides, which together with the central residues form at least seven out of the nine possible contacts. We used an online server, available at http://www.enzim.hu/scide (Dosztanyi et al., 2003), to analyze the stabilization centers of interaction-forming residues. This server defines the stabilization center based on the following criteria: (1) Two residues are in contact if there is at least one heavy atom–atom distance smaller than the sum of their van der Waals radii plus 1Å. (2) A contact is recognized as “long-range” interaction if the interacting residues are at least ten amino acids apart. (3) Two residues form a stabilization center if they are in long-range interaction, and if it is possible to select one–one residues from both flanking tetrapeptides of these two residues that make at least seven contacts between these two triplets (Dosztanyi et al., 2003).

The secondary structure and solvent accessibility of the amino acid residues were among the key factors that were essential for understanding the environmental and structure–function relationship of proteins. Hence, a systematic analysis of each interaction forming a residue was performed based on its location in different secondary structures of protein–RNA complexes and their solvent accessibility. We used the program DSSP (Kabsch and Sander, 1983) to obtain information about secondary structures and solvent accessibility. The secondary structures have been classified into alpha helix, beta turn, beta strand and coil, as suggested by the DSSP output. Solvent accessibility is the ratio between the solvent accessible surface area of a residue in a 3D structure and in an extended tripeptide conformation. Solvent accessibility was divided into three classes: buried, partially buried, and exposed, indicating respectively; the least, moderate and high accessibility of the amino acid residues to the solvent.


                        Figs. 2 and 3
                        
                         were prepared using the program Discovery Studio Visualizer 3.5 (Accelrys Software Inc., 2012).

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

Using the geometrical criteria described in Section 2, in the Protein–RNA interface database (PRIDB), we found 59 protein–RNA complex crystal structures. We have noticed that most of the complexes are involved in cation–π interactions. The quantification of such interactions is of great importance for a rational approach to biological systems including protein structure and function RNA binding as well as for understanding the stability and mechanism of protein–RNA recognition (Iwakiri et al., 2012).

The presence of cation–π interactions in key positions in the active site of proteins, provides scope to control the processes, which they regulate and helps in modification or design of new ligand molecules (Mahadevi and Sastry, 2013). Quantitative understanding of drug receptor interaction with biological receptors is of prime importance in pharmacy. Therefore, the presence of cation–π interactions could be used as a means of discriminating chemically relevant docking results from false positives. This scrutiny will assist structural biologist and medicinal chemist to design better and safer drugs. Although there are now several examples of studies for design of new compounds against specific drug targets the improvement of different scoring functions to give a correct representation of cation–π interactions still remains a challenging task (Mahadevi and Sastry, 2013).

The distribution of cation–π interactions, is shown in Table 1
                        , based on data in protein–RNA complex interfaces in our dataset. There were a total of 168 interactions. Thus, on average, every RNA forms 2.85 interactions with the protein part. Some of the complexes have no interactions, while most of them have several interactions. Some of the complexes have up to 20 interactions (the structures with PBD ID codes 1c9s, 1gtf and 3d2s).

The number and composition of each amino acid/base is presented in Table 1. There is no significant prevalence of a residues Lys and Arg in the dataset. The numbers of contacts between nucleotide components and amino acids Lys and Arg do not differ significantly. On the other hand, the bases U, G and A have higher occurrence than C. Further, A–Lys, G–Arg and G–Lys are the most frequent pairs involved in cation–π interactions. The contribution from pyrimidines–amino acids is minimal, less than 6% of each pair. This tendency cannot be explained by higher frequencies of particular amino acid residues and RNA bases (Table 1). Steric exclusion is a powerful means of base discrimination that is often overlooked in the analysis of protein–RNA interactions. Close contacts to the purine five-membered ring might be expected to exclude pyrimidines from a purine binding pocket since the glycosidic bond connecting the base to sugar constrains the base and would place the larger six-membered ring of the pyrimidine in a position that would result in many possible steric clashes (Morozova et al., 2006).

This observation is specific to protein–RNA complexes whereas in protein–DNA complexes, the contribution of Arg is twice to that of Lys and the cation–π interactions are dominated by G–Arg pair and their contribution is twice that of A–Arg (Gromiha et al., 2004). Hence, we suggest that the contacts of A–Lys, G–Arg and G–Lys pairs through cation–π interactions are important for the stability of protein–RNA complexes.

In our analysis, we have investigated multiple cation–π interactions, an illustrative example is shown in Fig. 2. A cation group from Arg and Lys can interact with to five-and six-membered rings of purines simultaneously. This type of interaction is marked as furcation. The analysis shows that about 35% of the total interactions in the dataset are involved in the formation of multiple cation–π interactions. This conveys that furcation is an inherent characteristic of macromolecular crystal structures (Stojanović et al., 2012). The furcation level of multiple cation–π interactions is much higher than that of single cation–π interactions in protein–RNA complexes. The majority of furcated interactions exhibit longer distances than the simple non-furcated interactions as expected (Dimitrijević et al., 2012).

The analysis of the geometry of the cation–π interactions has revealed that the average distance (d) value falls into distinct ranges corresponding to the multiple (4.28Å) and single (5.50Å) cation–π interactions. There is a significant statistical difference in the distribution of d between the multiple and the single cation–π interactions. For Arg the positive charge can be defined to be in a plane, more precisely in the plane formed by the atoms (NZ1, NZ2, CZ). We thus examine the interplanar angle (α) this plane forms with the plane of the cycle of the RNA base. We find that this angle is, on average, equal to 22°. These planes are thus usually parallel; rather than perpendicular. There is no significant statistical difference in the α angle distribution between the multiple and the single cation–π interactions. In general, the separation distance between the cation group and the aromatic ring decreases as the interplanar angle decreases. This can be expected since coplanar stacking leads to maximal (shortest distance) contact between the interacting groups. The geometries that are observed in abundance are not necessarily the ones that have the highest interaction energy between the two moieties in a pair, but the ones that can provide the maximum overall stability to the protein structure by the optimum use of all cation–π interactions.

We used the ConSurf server to compute the conservation score of residues involved in cation–π interactions in protein–RNA interfaces. Among the cationic residues 52.6% of them had a conservation score of ≥6, the cutoff value used to identify the stabilizing residues. None of the residues had the highest score of 9. Additionally, most of the additional residues comprising the interfaces also show a great degree of conservation. Analysis of the conservation patterns of cation–π interactions have shown that the multiple interactions (68.5%) have been conserved more than the single interactions (41.8%), and it is considered that structurally conserved residues are important in protein stability and folding (DeLano, 2002).

To estimate the stabilization energy of the different cation–π pairs identified in X-ray protein–RNA complexes, energy calculations were carried out. In our database it was found that cation–π interactions showed an energy less than −5kcalmol−1, and most of them have energy in the range −2 to −4kcalmol−1. These results are consistent with a previous study of protein–DNA complexes (Gromiha et al., 2004). It has been reported that in globular proteins, roughly one quarter and in membrane proteins 65% of the cation–π interactions have an energy less than −4kcalmol−1 (Gallivan and Dougherty, 1999; Gromiha, 2003; Ramanathan et al., 2011).

We have calculated the average interaction energy for all possible pairs of nucleic bases and amino acid residues and the results are presented in Table 2
                        .

It is noteworthy that the interaction energy is mainly due to the electrostatic term (E
                        es) and the contribution from van der Waals energy term (E
                        vdw) is very minimal. Electrostatic attraction between the π system and the cation has been established as the main contributing force to the interaction (Ma et al., 1997; Salonen et al., 2011). These results were consistent with the results observed with protein–porphyrin complexes (Dimitrijević et al., 2012), protein–DNA complexes (Gromiha et al., 2004), prokaryotic and eukaryotic translation elongation factors (Anbarasu et al., 2009), β-lactamase (Lavanya et al., 2013). We found that the purines (A and G) have the strongest cation–π interaction energy with both Lys and Arg. The bases A and G have favorable interactions with Lys/Arg while the energy is always positive for the combinations C–Arg, C–Lys and U–Lys. On an average, G–Arg has the strongest cation–π interaction energy of −3.68kcalmol−1. Indeed, the binding energies of C–Arg/Lys pairs are an average value close to zero. These results clearly indicate that cation–π interactions involving purine bases provide stabilizing contributions to the protein–RNA association. There is no correlation between the number of amino acids/bases and number of cation–π interactions/cation–π interaction energy. However, we noticed a good correlation between the number of cation–π interactions and cation–π interaction energy (r
                        =0.88).

The contribution of cation–π interaction energy due to five- and six-membered rings of A and G has been computed and the results are presented in Table 3
                        . We found that there is no favorable cation–π interactions between the six-membered ring of G and Lys. On the other hand, we observed very strong cation–π interaction energy with five-membered ring of G. Considering A, there is no significant difference between the interaction energy with five- and six-membered rings. However, the five-membered rings have stronger cation–π interaction energy than six-membered rings. These results show the vital role played by five-membered rings in purines for the contribution to cation–π interactions.

Stabilization centers are composed of certain clusters of residues, involved in the cooperative long range interaction of proteins that regulate flexibility, rigidity and stability of protein structures. Stabilization centers are important in regulating the turnover of certain proteins by preventing their decay with cooperative long range interactions. The most frequent stabilization center residues are usually found at buried positions and have a hydrophobic or aromatic side-chain, but some polar or charged residues also play an important role in stabilization. The stabilization centers show a significant difference in the composition and in the type of linked secondary structural elements, when compared with the rest of the residues. The performed structural and sequential conservation analysis showed a higher conservation of stabilization centers over protein families (Dosztanyi et al., 1997; Magyar et al., 2005). In addition, sequence and structure motifs have an application in drug design (Craik et al., 2001) when motifs map to active-sites and ligand binding sites.

We have computed the stabilization centers for all cation–π interaction forming residues in protein–RNA complexes. Table 4
                         shows the percentage contribution of the individual amino acid residue which is part of the stabilizing center involved in cation–π interactions with nucleic bases.

Considering the whole data set of 653 stabilizing residues were found to have one or more stabilization centers, 57 (8.7%) are involved in building cation–π interactions with the nucleic bases. These data suggest that the amino acids that are part of stabilization centers are not involved in the building of interactions with the nucleic bases, but they are involved in the stabilization of the surrounding structure and overall structure of the protein. Lys were found to have somewhat more stabilization centers than Arg residues in protein–RNA interfaces. This could be explained by the fact that Arg residues are involved in various strong and weak hydrogen bonds with nucleic bases and is located in the environment (Treger and Westhof, 2001). From this we infer that these residues might contribute additional stability to the protein–RNA complexes in addition to their participation in cation–π interactions.

We have elucidated the structural motifs of residues responsible for the cation–π interactions using the PDBeMotif web interface (Golovin and Henrick, 2008). We discovered three types of structural motifs significantly over–represented in protein–RNA interfaces: beta-turn-ir, niche-4r and st-staple. It has been shown that these small structural motifs could be involved in protein functions such as determining the conformation of enzyme active sites or binding sites (Golovin and Henrick, 2008; Watson and Milner-White, 2002). Our underlying hypothesis was that cation–π interaction forming residues are probably linked to structural implications.

RNA motifs are directed and ordered stacked arrays of non-Watson–Crick base pairs forming distinctive foldings of the phosphodiester backbones of the interacting RNA strands. They correspond to the “loops”—hairpin, internal and junction—that intersperse the Watson–Crick two-dimensional helices as seen in two-dimensional representations of RNA structure. RNA motifs mediate the specific interactions that induce the compact folding of complex RNAs. RNA motifs also constitute specific protein or ligand binding sites (Vanegas et al., 2012). We have elucidated the structural motifs of RNA responsible for the cation–π interactions using the RNA CoSSMos web interface (Vanegas et al., 2012). The RNA CoSSMos database focuses on the 3D characteristics of secondary structure motifs in RNA; these include symmetric and asymmetric internal loops, bulge loops and hairpin loops.

We observed that the RNA molecule interacted with the protein at a loop region that contained unpaired nucleotides (loop nucleotides) in 35 complexes. On the other hand, the RNA molecule interacted with the protein at regions that were outside of the loop and contained unpaired nucleotides (non-loop nucleotides) in 24 complexes. The high presence of RNA motifs in protein–RNA interfaces is given by tetraloops and kink-turns: tetraloops are 4 residues long hairpin loops characterized by well conserved structure and consensus sequence patterns given by GNRA, UNCG, and CUUG, where N can be any nucleotide and R can be either G or A; on the other hand kink-turns consist of approximately 15 nucleotides from two distinct segments which base pair to form two helices and an internal loop. Tetraloops are involved in the folding of RNA molecules and in stabilizing helical stems. Kink-turns are usually involved in tertiary interaction with proteins, thus they may help in interaction site recognition (Apostolico et al., 2009).

An illustrative example of a tetraloop RNA motif involving cation–π interactions is shown in Fig. 3. A cation group from Arg14 and Arg101can interact with to five- and six-membered rings of a tetraloop purines.

These loops, including internal, bulge and hairpin loops, contribute to the functionality as well as the overall tertiary folding of the nucleic acid. Knowledge of these specific structural motifs can aid in the design of therapeutics (Lee et al., 2009), the understanding of RNA–protein interactions (Gupta and Gribskov, 2011) and the prediction of tertiary structure folding of RNA (Reiter et al., 2011).

The propensity of the amino acid residues to favor a particular conformation is well described. Such a conformational preference is not only dependent on the amino acid alone, but also on the local amino acid sequence (Chakkaravarthi et al., 2006). In order to obtain the preference and pattern of each cation–π interaction-forming residue in protein–RNA interfaces, we conducted a systematic analysis based on their location in different secondary structures and their solvent accessibility.

Thus, we have analyzed amino acid secondary structure preferences for the whole data set of 59 proteins. Among all interface amino acids, 47% belong to a secondary structure: 27% to helices, 15% to sheets, and 5% to turns/coils. We have observed a significant number of cation–π interactions between the residues in α-helical segments, which is consistent with previous report that the residues in α-helices have the tendency to form cation–π interactions (Gallivan and Dougherty, 1999; Gromiha et al., 2002). The protein main chain atoms are less often implicated in contacts when they belong to β-sheets than when they form an α-helix. Amino acids belonging to helices and in contact with RNA through their side chain prefer contacts with phosphate over bases; for amino acids in contact through their main chain, the preferences are in the reverse order. Amino acids belonging to sheets and in contact through their side chain prefer the uracil over the guanine bases. It was found that, among the cationic residues Lys preferred to be in sheet and Arg favored coil and helix conformation. This might be due to the formation of cation–π interactions between the residues in adjacent/distant strands. The secondary structure preferences for the cation–π interacting residues were not consistent with the information available in literature, Lys was classified as very frequent in helical regions (Malkov et al., 2008). From this observation, we infer that Arg residue might stabilize coils and helices by bonding in protein–RNA interfaces. This analysis indicates that the cation–π interactions do not occur at random but have a residue-specific preference for a particular secondary structure.

An interesting question concerns the location of cation–π interactions within protein structures. Cationic residues generally prefer to be on the surface of proteins whereas aromatic amino acids prefer to remain in the hydrophobic core. Because a cation–π interaction contains both a cation and an aromatic, it is not clear whether the interacting pairs should prefer to be located on the surfaces of proteins or in the cores. Traditional methods for determining residue surface accessibility rely on calculating the water-exposed surface area for a given amino acid. Because cation–π partners are necessarily in contact with one another, their water-accessible surface is diminished, even though the interacting pair as a unit may be well solvated. We observed that Arg and Lys preferred to be in an exposed region. This observation is quite reasonable in the sense that the aromatic residues are in principle, non-polar residues, and tend to be buried. Since Arg and Lys are polar in nature they tend be exposed to the solvent surface. The polar residues might contribute significantly to the stability of the protein–RNA complexes as the contribution of the global energy is much greater in solvation.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

We have systematically analyzed the influence of cation–π interactions to the stability of protein–DNA complexes. Further, the characteristic features of residues involved in cation–π interactions have been evaluated in terms of the distribution of cation–π interactions, interaction geometry, conservation score, energetic contribution, stabilizing centers, structural motifs, secondary structure, and solvent accessibility.

We conclude that the total number of Lys and Arg are similar in the dataset as well as the number of their interactions. On the other hand, purines play a dominant role in establishing cation–π interactions. Further, A–Lys, G–Arg and G–Lys are the most frequent pairs involved in cation–π interactions. The analysis shows that about 35% of the total interactions in the dataset are involved in the formation of multiple cation–π interactions. The furcation level of multiple cation–π interactions is much higher than that of single cation–π interactions in protein–RNA complexes. Analysis of conservation patterns of cation–π interactions have shown that the multiple interactions have been conserved more than the single interactions. The comparison of cation–π interaction energy due to five- and six-membered rings of purines shows that the five-membered rings are forming stronger cation–π interactions than six-membered rings. Considering the whole data set of 653 stabilizing residues were found to have one or more stabilization centers, 57 (8.7%) are involved in building cation–π interactions with the nucleic bases. We discovered three types of structural motifs significantly over-represented in protein–RNA interfaces: beta-turn-ir, niche-4r and st-staple. It has been shown that these small structural motifs could be involved in protein functions such as determining the conformation of enzyme active sites or binding sites. The high presence of RNA motifs in protein–RNA interfaces is given by tetraloops and kink-turns. These loops contribute to the functionality as well as the overall tertiary folding of the nucleic acid. The secondary structure and solvent accessibility of residues in protein–RNA complexes reveal that Lys preferred to be in sheet and Arg favored coil and helix conformation. It is found that in the protein–RNA complexes, the positively charged amino acids, Arg and Lys, involved in cation–π interactions, prefer to be in the solvent exposed surface.

In conclusion, observations obtained in this study identify cation–π interactions and structural motifs that contribute to the stabilization of the protein–RNA complexes, relevant to the understanding of structure–function relationships, and useful to the efforts made to design and engineering protein–RNA complexes.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This work was supported by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technological Development of the Republic of Serbia (Grants Nos. 31085, 172001, 173034).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

