@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Molecular dynamics simulations of lectin domain of FimH and immunoinformatics for the design of potential vaccine candidates

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           MD simulations were carried out for the FimH lectin domain from UPEC J96.


                        
                        
                           
                           The high affinity state lectin domain was found to be largely rigid and stable.


                        
                        
                           
                           Two sequence motifs were designed around a functionally important region.


                        
                        
                           
                           Immunoinformatics was used to predict epitopes for the FimH lectin domain of UPEC J96.


                        
                        
                           
                           MD simulation data was used to assess the accessibility of the epitopes.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

FimH adhesin

Molecular dynamics simulation

Rigidity

Motif

Immunoinformatics

Vaccine

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Adhesion of uropathogenic E. coli (UPEC) to uroepithelial cell receptors is facilitated through the lectin domain of FimH adhesin. In the current study, Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations were performed for the lectin domain of FimH from UPEC J96. The high affinity state lectin domain was found to be stable and rigid during the simulations. Further, based on conserved subsequences around one of the disulfide forming cysteines, two sequence motifs were designed. An immunoinformatics approach was utilized to identify linear and discontinuous epitopes for the lectin domain of FimH. We propose that the accessibility of predicted epitopes should also be assessed in a dynamic aqueous environment to evaluate the potential of vaccine candidates. Since MD simulation data enables assessing the accessibility in a dynamic environment, we evaluated the accessibility of the top ranked discontinuous and linear epitopes using structures obtained at every nanosecond (ns) in the 1–20ns MD simulation timeframe. Knowledge gained in this study has a potential utility in the design of vaccine candidates for Urinary Tract Infection (UTI).
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Bacterial adhesins are virulence factors important for pathogenesis. Urinary Tract Infection (UTI) is a disease more commonly seen in women. They have a 50% chance of an infection during their lifetime (Bouckaert et al., 2006). Uropathogenic Escherichia coli (UPEC) are implicated in 90% of UTI. 95% of UTI causing E. coli possess type1 fimbriae (Tchesnokova et al., 2011).

Adhesion of UPEC to the high mannose glycoprotein uroplakin Ia receptor in the bladder epithelium is mediated by FimH of the filamentous type I pilus system (Zhou et al., 2001). The type I pilus of UPEC has four structural subunits FimA, FimF, FimG and FimH. Each structural subunit of the pilus has a single pilin domain while FimH has an additional lectin domain through which it attaches to the mannose based receptors of the host. The pilus rod is able to stretch and unwind under mechanical stress without dissociating from the host cell receptors (Puorger et al., 2011). UPEC has to withstand the shear stress while establishing an infection.

Although UTI can be treated with antibiotics, recurrence is a major problem. This is compounded with the emergence of multidrug resistant UTI causing strains. Invasion of bladder epithelial cells by E. coli is also mediated by FimH (Martinez et al., 2000). When UPEC gets into the host cytosol, it can grow and form intracellular bacterial communities (IBC) (Anderson et al., 2003).

The FimH lectin domain is an elongated 11 stranded beta barrel with an immunoglobulin fold (Bouckaert et al., 2005). FimH forms mechanical force enhanced catch bonds due to an interdomain allosteric regulation wherein it switches over to a high affinity state which shows stronger binding to mannose (Yakovenko et al., 2008). Experimental and Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulation studies have addressed FimH adhesin (Thomas et al., 2002; Nilsson et al., 2007; Aprikian et al., 2011). Steered Molecular Dynamics (SMD) simulation of the lectin domain of FimH was performed wherein shear induced force was simulated (Thomas et al., 2002). The importance of cysteine bond of FimH in the adaptation to bind surfaces under increased shear stress was also evaluated through experiments and MD simulations (Nilsson et al., 2007). Single molecule force spectroscopy experiments show that the fimbrial tip mediates shear dependent adhesion of bacteria to uroepithelial cells and the force enhances interaction with mannose (Aprikian et al., 2011). Further, MD simulations of the quaternary structure of the fimbrial tip was used to evaluate inter domain flexibility in the presence and absence of force and a hook chain model was proposed for the fimbrial tip complex (Aprikian et al., 2011). Crystal structures of FimH show an allosteric conformational change, but in order to assess if all the other observed structural differences (beta bulge, alpha switch and pocket zipper) between the two states are also part of the allosteric mechanism, Rodriguez et al. used experimental and computational strategies. Using crystal structures of low and high affinity states of FimH, they predicted 10 point mutations in four regions that could stabilize one of the two states: high or low affinity states. Further, using experimental techniques, they validated that these regions have a role in the allosteric pathway. They also identified low affinity state FimH variants (Rodriguez et al., 2013).

In the current study, an extended conformation of FimH lectin domain from a pathogenic strain UPEC J96 has been used for MD simulations with the objective of finding the stability and flexibility of the high affinity elongated conformation of the lectin domain and for design of potential vaccine candidates. The availability of immune related experimental data and development of bioinformatics tools and techniques have made an impact on immunology research (Brusic and Petrovsky, 2005). Immunoinformatics deals with in silico analysis and modeling of immunological data (Patronov and Doytchinova, 2013). It offers several tools for computational identification of epitopes. It more specifically deals with algorithms for mapping B and T cell epitopes which aids in vaccine research. MD simulations have been used in the past to study MHC protein – peptide complexes, for testing immunogenicity of peptide vaccine candidates amongst others (Rognan et al., 1994; Oomen et al., 2003; Flower et al., 2010). Most epitope prediction strategies are data driven. MD simulations have an advantage in the context of epitope prediction as they are not data driven and they can also account for explicit solvation and intrinsic flexibility of the receptor and ligand (Flower et al., 2010). In the current study, we have used an immunoinformatics technique for identifying epitopes and further assessed their accessibility using MD simulations. It is essential to know if the epitopes predicted through the crystal structures are still accessible in a dynamic system. Our approach of following the accessibility of the epitopes from structures obtained at different timeframes of the simulation in an aqueous environment facilitates this.

The crystal structure (PDB ID: 1UWF) of the lectin domain of FimH adhesin from UPEC J96 was obtained from Protein Data Bank (PDB) (Berman et al., 2000). We chose this crystal structure since it is a good resolution (1.7Å) PDB structure from a pathogenic strain UPEC J96, a causative organism for UTI. GROMACS software (Berendsen et al., 1995; Lindahl et al., 2001) was used for MD simulations. The ligand in the crystal structure was removed before performing the simulation. The protein was solvated with an explicit solvent: SPC water, in a cubic box which left 2.5nm space around the solute. Total number of water molecules was 45,868. One Na+ counter ion was added for neutralizing the charge. Steepest descents method was used for energy minimization. The system was weakly coupled to an external bath using Berendsen’s method. The reference temperature was fixed at 300K. All bonds were constrained with LINCS (Miyamoto and Kollman, 1992; Hess et al., 1997). G43a1 force field in GROMACS was used for energy calculations. Periodic boundary conditions were imposed. During the simulation, grid type neighbor searching was done and long range electrostatics was handled using PME (Essmann et al., 1995). The energy minimized structure was subjected to position restrained MD simulation for 50ps. This was followed by full all atom MD simulation for 20ns. A time step of 2fs was used. Coordinates were written every 0.5ps to the trajectory. GROMACS built in tools were used to compute Root Mean Square Deviation (RMSD), residue wise fluctuations: Root Mean Square Fluctuations (RMSF) and distances between residues. Xmgrace (http://www.plasma-gate.weizmann.ac.il/Grace/) was used to visualize all the graphs. Residues with RMSF of 0.2nm and above were considered to be mobile. 3D structural alignment was performed using PDBeFold (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/msd-srv/ssm/cgi-bin/ssmserver) (Krissinel and Henrick, 2005). Interatomic distances from PDB structures obtained at every ns interval were calculated using UCSF Chimera (Pettersen et al., 2004).

For the sequence analysis and motif generation, we have included representative sequences of FimH from various E. coli strains, E. coli K12, enteroaggregative E. coli (EAEC), enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC), enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC), Diarrheal E. coli (DEC), a multidrug resistant environmental isolate SMS 3–5 SECEC, Avian Pathogenic E. coli (APEC) and shiga toxin producing E. coli (STEC). Representative sequences of FimH from different E. coli strains bearing UniProt IDs P08191 (E. coli K12), E7H828 (EPECa14), B1LDQ6 (SMS 3–5 SECEC), H4VQ48 (DEC6C), A1AJI7 (APEC), D3GSD8 (EAEC), D5D2M2 (ExPEC), B5Z3Q8 (EHEC) and G1ZYI1 (STEC_94C) were obtained from UniprotKB (release 2014_01) (The UniProt Consortium, 2014). Sequence motifs were generated around Cys44 by performing multiple sequence alignment using ClustalX software (Thompson et al., 2002). The motifs were validated using ScanProsite tool (De Castro et al., 2006) by scanning against UniProtKB/TrEMBL databases (release 2014_01) (Boeckmann et al., 2003). From the ScanProsite results, corresponding UniProt protein entries matching the motif were retrieved and their Pfam (Punta et al., 2012) domain and InterPro (Hunter et al., 2012) domain annotation noted. Linear and discontinuous epitopes were predicted using ElliPro server (Ponomarenko et al., 2008).

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

A 20ns MD simulation was performed for the high affinity state lectin domain of FimH. The protein stabilized around 2ns and remained stable till 20ns. The RMSD and RMSF graphs are presented in Fig. 1
                        a and b, respectively. From the RMSF data, residues with fluctuations of 0.2nm and above were considered mobile. Only 18 out of the 158 residues were mobile. These include Asn7, Gly8, Thr9, Pro49, Glu50, Thr51, Gly79, Thr87, Ser97, Ser114, Ala115, Gly116, Gly117, Tyr137, Asn138, Ser139, Asp140 and Thr158. Four out of these 18 residues are glycines. The rest of the protein was very rigid with fluctuations below 0.2nm with about 48 residues showing very low fluctuations below 0.1nm indicating that these residues are extremely rigid. Amongst these extremely rigid regions are beta strand 7 (residues 70–76 barring residue 75), part of beta strand 11 (108–111), beta strand 13 (125–134) and beta strand 14 (142–150). The structure obtained at the end of 20ns was superimposed with the initial structure and is presented as Fig. 1c. When FimH is not bound to the mannose receptor, the lectin domain is in a compressed and a twisted conformation because of the pilin domain which exerts an allosteric auto inhibition. Upon activation, it shifts from this low affinity state to an elongated high affinity state which can possibly remain as such without re-docking of the pilin domain on application of force to the elongated conformation (Le Trong et al., 2010).

The FimH PDB structure, 1UWF used in the current study is that of a purified lectin domain bound to a carbohydrate. It is in an elongated conformation and is considered as a high affinity state. Analyses of the structure obtained at the end of the simulation shows that the high affinity state is extremely stable and rigid with about 90% of the protein showing very low flexibility. Few regions which showed mobility were analyzed in the light of their functional and structural importance.

The crystal structure of FimC–FimH chaperone–adhesin complex bound to α-D-mannopyranoside shows FimH lectin domain interacting with mannose through hydrogen bonds and hydrophobic interactions via residues Phe1, Asn46, Asp47, Asp54, Gln133, Asn135, Asp140 and Phe142. All these residues except Gln133 are either part of loops or at the end of beta strands. Further, a hydrophobic ridge formed by residues Ile13, Tyr48, Ile52 and Phe142 surrounds the mannose binding pocket. This ridge may facilitate entry of mannose into the pocket such that polar interactions can take place (Hung et al., 2002). Similarly in 1UWF, the mannose ring makes direct contacts with residues Phe1, Asp47, Asp54, Gln133, Asn135, Asp140 and water mediated contacts with residues Asn138 and Asp140 (Bouckaert et al., 2005).

Regions of mobility were correlated with the mannose binding pocket and the hydrophobic ridge. All the secondary structure elements discussed herein are in accordance with DSSP assignment in PDB. Region 49–51, which showed mobility, is part of a turn between beta strand 5 and 6 and is close to the mannose binding pocket. Residues 137–140 are part of a loop connecting beta strands 13 and 14 where residue 140 is mannose binding. Residue 51 is close to the hydrophobic ridge.

We hypothesize that while most of the protein remains rigid and helps in keeping the elongated conformation of the protein intact, movement of loops close to the hydrophobic ridge and the mannose binding pocket helps in positioning of the carbohydrate into the mannose binding pocket and facilitates adhesion.

In the crystal structure, the ligand makes contacts with the two tyrosine residues Tyr48 and Tyr137 which form the rear end of a hydrophobic collar. In the lectin domain of FimH J96, the two tyrosines are in the same orientation as in the FimH: FimC structure (Hung et al., 2002) forming a gate like structure behind the binding site. Over the course of the simulation at every 1ns interval, tyrosine gate fluctuations were assessed by computing the Cα–Cα and Cβ–Cβ distances between Tyr48 and Tyr137. Details are tabulated in Supplementary Data File 2 (Table S1). As expected compared to the starting structure there was an overall increase in distance between the two tyrosines since the simulation did not have the ligand in it. Interestingly, the distances alternated between an increase and decrease. These fluctuations may provide an opportunity for the ligand to enter or exit the mannose binding pocket. The 3D-structural alignment of the initial structure and the structures obtained at every 1ns interval in the simulation is presented in Fig. 1d.

Supplementary material related to this article found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2014.08.002.


                        
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     

The distances between residues Ile13, Asp140 and Tyr48 which define the mouth of the lectin domain were computed for the crystal structure and for structures obtained at every 1ns interval. Details are presented in Supplementary Data File 2 (Table S1). The interatomic distances between the pairs Ile13 and Tyr48 and Tyr48 and Asp140 had a pattern of increase and decrease as seen for the tyrosine gate whereas the distance between Asp140 and Ile13 showed relatively less variation. This perhaps helps to keep the mannose binding pocket stable in an extended conformation. This stability may have also been due to the disulfide bridge under the ligand binding site in this structure. Fig. 1e shows the mobile regions, lectin mouth and the tyrosine gate for the structure obtained at the end of the simulation. The distances between the tyrosine gate residues, lectin mouth residues were also computed over the entire simulation timeframe of 20ns and shown in Fig. 2
                        a and b, respectively.

Residues 114–117 which form a part of the loop that connects with the inter domain linker region is mobile in the simulation as is residue 158 which is part of the linker domain region. This shows that in an elongated state this region is flexible.

Catch bonds are ligand receptor interactions which are enhanced by an increase in force as opposed to slip bonds which break or detach under force (Barsegov and Thirumalai, 2005). Catch bond type of interactions are said to mediate mannose specific adhesion of FimH (Yakovenko et al., 2008). From our simulations, it is observed that the carbohydrate bound conformation of FimH is an extremely rigid conformation. Most part of the protein is very rigid with very low RMSF. Since the structure used in the simulation is in an elongated conformation conducive for the formation of catch bond type of interaction with the receptor, the protein was extremely rigid even during the simulation.

Studies on wild type and mutant FimH lectin domains have shown that the disulfide bond is critical for adhesion under flow conditions (Nilsson et al., 2007). In the current study, the disulfide bond between Cys3 and Cys44 was stable throughout the course of the simulation. The interatomic distances between the two cysteine residues computed at every ns interval are tabulated in Supplementary Data File 2 (Table S1) and the distances over the entire simulation timeframe is shown in Fig 2c. The region 49–51 had a low mobility probably due to the presence of a disulfide bond forming Cys44 in the vicinity. The stable disulfide bond may have a role in maintaining the overall stability and rigidity of the protein.

Further, the sequence environment around Cys44 in different E. coli FimH lectin domain sequences was analyzed since Cys44 is in close proximity to the tyrosine gate residue Tyr48. Two sequence motifs “FCHNDYP” and “SCWNDYGG” were designed based on multiple sequence alignment of representative FimH sequences (Supplementary figure). On scanning for these motifs in UniprotKB/TrEMBL it was found that the motifs are specific to FimH lectin domain sequences. While 1692 sequences match the first motif, 1357 sequences matched the second motif. 1493 sequences containing the first motif were from E. coli, 36 from Shigella, 160 from Klebsiella, one each from Raoultella ornithinolytica B6, Enterococcus gallinarum and Citrobacter rodentium. Of the 1357 sequences matching the second motif, 1338 were from E. coli and 19 from Shigella. Since many of the entries were from TrEMBL, the annotation of some of the proteins as FimH was not complete. However, they had FimH_mannose binding domain annotation from PFam (PF09160) and InterPro (IPR015243) thus, confirming that they are FimH related sequences. Details are presented in Supplementary File 1. Crystal structures of FimH lectin domain from PDB show that the cysteine in the first motif “FCHNDYP” is engaged in a disulfide bond except in the lectin domain of FimH K-12 (1TR7). There are no representative crystal structures for sequences bearing the second motif. With the currently available information, it is proposed that the first motif region may provide a favorable environment for the formation of disulfide bond near the ligand binding site and contribute to the stability of the adhesin.

Supplementary material related to this article found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2014.08.002.


                        
                           
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              
                           
                        
                     

B-cell epitope predictions were obtained from Ellipro server. Eight linear epitopes and four discontinuous epitopes (DE) were predicted. Some of the DEs encompassed linear epitopes. For example, DE1 overlaps with linear epitopes 1, 3 and 8. Since DEs provide information from a structural perspective, structures available through the simulation were utilized to find accessibility of these epitopes in a dynamic environment. With the structure obtained at 20ns, eight linear epitopes and three DEs were predicted. Details of the epitopes obtained with the crystal structure and the 20ns simulation structure are provided in Table 1
                        , while epitopes for the other structures (1–19ns) are provided in Supplementary Data File 2 (Table S2).

DE1 obtained from crystal structure 1UWF had 22 residues which include four of the mannose binding pocket residues Asn46, Asp47, Asn135 and Asp140 and two tyrosine gate residues Tyr48 and Tyr137. This is significant since blocking of the mannose binding site will abolish adhesion. Since the crystal structure is a static structure, we propose that accessibility of epitopes in a dynamic environment as is encountered in a physiological state should be assessed. The epitopes predicted from the structures obtained through MD simulations can be used to assess the accessibility. Additionally, any new epitopic regions which become accessible in a dynamic state can be predicted from the MD simulation structures. It was found that DE1 of crystal structure remains accessible throughout as part of atleast one of the top two DEs predicted with the MD simulation data. The epitopes predicted at the end of the simulation timeframe 20ns is discussed. Analysis shows that DE1 predicted from the 20ns simulation includes residues 4–17, 39–41, 45–53, 55, 90–94, 96–101, and 134–142. In addition to all the residues of DE1 of crystal structure, it includes an additional mannose binding residue Phe142 along withjavascript:void(0) other residues. Thus, DE1 of the crystal structure remains accessible even in a dynamic environment. The top scoring linear epitope of 1UWF is also a part of DE1 of crystal structure and remains accessible. The epitope DE1 obtained from the crystal structure and its overlap with epitopes obtained from structures at every ns of the simulation is shown in Fig. 3
                        a and b, respectively.

Previous studies have addressed the potential of FimH and FimCH as a vaccine candidate (Tchesnokova et al., 2011; Langermann et al., 1997, 2000; Thankavel et al., 1997). In one of the studies, antibodies raised against the lectin domain of FimH increased adhesion of FimH to uroepithelial cells instead of inhibiting it. The conformational epitopes identified in their study did not include the mannose binding site (Tchesnokova et al., 2011; Kisiela et al., 2013). Kisiela et al. in a recent study proposed that in the functionally active conformation of FimH lectin domain, the binding pocket epitopes are shielded by ligand masking. They also developed an interesting strategy wherein they made a functionally defective FimH lectin domain which was locked in a low-binding conformation and they further showed that the antibodies that were induced by this mutant lectin domain were able to block the adhesion (Kisiela et al., 2013). Other experimental studies have also shown the potential of anti FimH antibodies inhibiting adhesion (Langermann et al., 1997, 2000; Thankavel et al., 1997).

The epitopes identified in the current study have a potential in the design of vaccine candidates against UTI, since they were generated from the 3D structure of the high affinity state FimH lectin domain, and they also include some of the mannose binding residues and remain accessible even in a dynamic aqueous environment. We therefore propose that these epitopes have a potential to be immunogenic.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

MD simulation of the high affinity conformation of FimH shows that the entire lectin domain is largely rigid with very few regions showing mobility. The rigidity of the protein with selective movement of regions in the vicinity of the mannose binding pocket and the hydrophobic ridge perhaps helps the protein in attaching to the mannose based receptors while staying stable under shear stress. Linear and DEs were predicted for the lectin domain of FimH of UPEC J96 and their accessibility was assessed with structures obtained from the MD simulation studies.

Muthukumar Singaravelu and Anitha Selvan contributed equally to the work and may be considered as joint first authors.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The authors thank BTIS, Department of Biotechnology for computational facilities. Muthukumar Singaravelu thanks MBT NIOT for support. Anitha Selvan thanks CSIR for Senior Research Fellowship.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

