@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Transcriptome-wide identification of Rauvolfia serpentina microRNAs and prediction of their potential targets

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Fifteen conserved microRNAs were identified from Rauvolfia serpentina.


                        
                        
                           
                           Uracil was preferred initial base (86.67%) of identified mature miRNA sequences.


                        
                        
                           
                           Phylogenetic analysis revealed pre-miRNAs evolutionary relationship across species.


                        
                        
                           
                           Thirty six potential targets of identified miRNAs were predicted in R. serpentina.


                        
                        
                           
                           Predicted targets were associated with regulation of diverse biological processes.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#




                     Rauvolfia serpentina




                  

MicroRNA

Gene expression regulation

Secondary metabolism

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs of ∼19–24 nucleotides (nt) in length and considered as potent regulators of gene expression at transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels. Here we report the identification and characterization of 15 conserved miRNAs belonging to 13 families from Rauvolfia serpentina through in silico analysis of available nucleotide dataset. The identified mature R. serpentina miRNAs (rse-miRNAs) ranged between 20 and 22nt in length, and the average minimal folding free energy index (MFEI) value of rse-miRNA precursor sequences was found to be –0.815kcal/mol. Using the identified rse-miRNAs as query, their potential targets were predicted in R. serpentina and other plant species. Gene Ontology (GO) annotation showed that predicted targets of rse-miRNAs include transcription factors as well as genes involved in diverse biological processes such as primary and secondary metabolism, stress response, disease resistance, growth, and development. Few rse-miRNAs were predicted to target genes of pharmaceutically important secondary metabolic pathways such as alkaloids and anthocyanin biosynthesis. Phylogenetic analysis showed the evolutionary relationship of rse-miRNAs and their precursor sequences to homologous pre-miRNA sequences from other plant species. The findings under present study besides giving first hand information about R. serpentina miRNAs and their targets, also contributes towards the better understanding of miRNA-mediated gene regulatory processes in plants.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are tiny regulatory nucleic acid molecules belonging to the small RNA world. These endogenous, non-coding RNA (ncRNA) molecules are ∼19–24 nucleotides (nt) in length and are potent regulators of gene expression in animals, fungi, nematodes, plants and viruses. In plants, miRNAs originate from long self complementary secondary structure containing transcripts that are transcribed into long primary miRNAs (pri-miRNAs) by RNA polymerase II from intergenic or coding regions (Lee et al., 2004). DICER-LIKE 1 (DCL1), an RNase III enzyme, process these pri-miRNAs into shorter stem-loop hairpin containing sequences called precursor miRNAs (pre-miRNAs). The pre-miRNAs are further subjected to cleavage by DCL1 to generate a double-stranded structure known as miRNA/miRNA* duplex containing mature miRNA and its opposite sequence (Kurihara and Watanabe, 2004). In plants, these duplexes are characterized by ∼2nt overhangs at their 3′ ends (Bartel, 2004), and 2′-O-methylation by Hua-Enhancer1 (HEN1), a nuclear RNA methyl transferase (Yu et al., 2005). The export of miRNA/miRNA* duplexes from nucleus to cytoplasm is facilitated by an exportin 5 homolog, HASTY. The mature miRNA molecule from duplex gets incorporated into an RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC) while the miRNA star (miRNA*) sequence usually gets degraded, but recently biological roles of miRNA* sequences have also been reported (Guo and Lu, 2010; Hsieh et al., 2009). The RISC contains argonaute family proteins which facilitate the interaction of mature miRNA with its target mRNAs (Baumberger and Baulcombe, 2005). The negative regulation of target gene expression by either transcript cleavage or translational inhibition within RISC depends upon the level of complementarity between mature miRNA and its target transcript (Kidner and Martienssen, 2005). Near perfect or perfect complementarity between miRNA and its target mRNA leads to suppressed gene expression either by translational inhibition or target mRNA degradation (Zhang et al., 2006a). Plant miRNAs exhibit near perfectly to complete complementarity to target mRNA transcript(s), thus, regulate the concerned gene through either translational repression or degradation (Aukerman and Sakai, 2003; Schwab et al., 2005). The precise slicing of target mRNA molecules between 10th and 11th bases from the 5′ end of majority of plant miRNAs leads to the degradation of their targets. Majority of the predicted targets that are regulated by plant miRNAs are transcription factors as they usually exhibit perfect or near perfect complementarity for duplex formation with mature plant miRNA sequences (Bartel, 2004). In plants, miRNAs play pivotal role(s) in the regulation of growth and developmental activities (Aukerman and Sakai, 2003; Kim et al., 2005; Palatnik et al., 2003; Wang et al., 2005). Moreover, the regulatory roles of miRNAs in responses to abiotic as well as biotic stresses (Khraiwesh et al., 2012; Ruiz-Ferrer and Voinnet, 2009; Sunkar et al., 2012), secondary metabolism (Lu et al., 2013) and as potential graft-transmissible signal (Bhogale et al., 2014) has also been emerged recently.

Identification of miRNAs relies either on small RNA sequencing and subsequent bioinformatics analysis or solely on the bioinformatics approaches provided that the sequence resources are available in databases. Besides high-throughput sequencing, the available sequence databases provide a useful resource to mine the conserved miRNAs in different plant species. The in silico identification of miRNAs in publically available databases is cost effective, fast and reliable due to the specialized algorithms such as BLASTN for homology-based searches, and MFold (Zuker, 2003) or UNAFold (Markham and Zuker, 2008) for prediction of stem-loop hairpin structures. Simultaneously, the targets of miRNAs could be predicted by using web-based tools such as psRNATarget (Dai and Zhao, 2011). Computational analysis of expressed sequence tags (ESTs) and/or genomic sequence resources has been a successful approach towards the identification of miRNAs and prediction of their targets in several plants including Arabidopsis thaliana (Wang et al., 2004), banana (Chai et al., 2015), barley (Colaiacovo et al., 2010), Brassica napus (Xie et al., 2007), cabbage (Wang et al., 2011), cotton (Zhang et al., 2007), sorghum (Katiyar et al., 2012), soybean (Zhang et al., 2008), tobacco (Frazier et al., 2010), tomato (Yin et al., 2008), and wheat (Han et al., 2013), etc. Besides EST and genomic sequence resources, bioinformatics analysis of deep sequencing-generated small RNA reads by aligning them to the whole genome or transcriptome sequence resources has also been a successful approach for the identification of miRNAs and prediction of their stem-loop hairpin structures (Jain et al., 2014; Wan et al., 2012). In the past recent years, microRNAs and their targets have also been reported in few medicinal plants like Artemisia annua (Pérez-Quintero et al., 2012), Catharanthus roseus (Prakash et al., 2015), Papaver somniferum (Unver et al., 2010), Panax ginseng (Li et al., 2013), and Taxus chinensis (Qiu et al., 2009), etc. The miRNAs and their targets identified computationally from these plants would throw some light on the possibilities of miRNA-mediated regulation of important pathway genes and transcription factors involved in secondary metabolism.


                     Rauvolfia serpentina (family: Apocynaceae) is well known for the biosynthesis of terpenoid indole alkaloids. The important alkaloids of R. serpentina include ajmalicine, ajmaline, deserpidine, rescinnamine, reserpine, serpentine and yohimbine; all of which have pharmaceutical importance. Approximately 85–90% of alkaloids are present in the bark of root and exhibit important biological activities (Itoh et al., 2005). R. serpentina alkaloids have been reported to be effective against breast cancer, cardiovascular diseases, hypertension, and snake bite. Reserpine, a major alkaloid, is commonly known for its antihypertensive and antipsychotic activities. Other alkaloid such as ajmaline is used as an antiarrhythmic agent whereas ajmalicine, deserpidine and rescinnamine are antihypertensive drugs effective against high blood pressure (Vakil, 1955). Its root extract is effective in treatment of disorders which are generally associated with central nervous system such as epilepsy, insanity, insomnia, psychosis and schizophrenia (Dey and De, 2011). Considering the pharmaceutical and economic importance of secondary metabolites of R. serpentina, its transcriptomic resources were generated and reported in National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) by Góngora-Castillo et al. (2012). So far no information regarding miRNAs is available from R. serpentina which produces several secondary metabolites having commercial and pharmaceutical importance.

In the present study, we in silico analyzed the nucleotide sequences of R. serpentina available in NCBI database including transcriptome shotgun assembly (TSA) entries for the identification of potential miRNAs and their targets. We report 15 rse-miRNAs in the dataset, and a few of them are predicted to target secondary metabolism-related genes. The presence of rse-miRNAs and their targets in the transcriptomic sequences indicates miRNA-mediated control of certain regulatory genes and metabolic pathways which could be further used as a tool for manipulating secondary metabolism in R. serpentina for enhanced production of commercially important alkaloids.

A total of 7201 mature miRNA sequences from 53 plant species were downloaded from miRNA sequence database (miRBase release 21) available at http://www.mirbase.org These mature miRNA sequences were used as reference sequence for performing BLASTN search against all 99,763 nucleotides entries including TSA dataset (contigs) of R. serpentina available at NCBI (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov).

For the identification of miRNAs, two parameters were considered: (a) sequence conservation among mature miRNA sequences i.e. homologs in R. serpentina nucleotide dataset having no more than 2nt mismatch to the mature miRNAs available in miRBase, and (b) formation of stem-loop hairpin structures with minimal folding free energy index (MFEI) value <–0.66kcal/mol. A BLASTN search was carried out using the mature miRNA sequences of miRBase as query against R. serpentina nucleotide dataset using default parameters for short input sequences and a cut-off e-value of 10. The sequences with only 0–2nt mismatches to the queried miRNAs were manually selected. These filtered sequences were subjected to the miRNA identification pipeline of C-mii tool (Numnark et al., 2012). The parameters and other criteria used for identification of R. serpentina primary and precursor miRNA sequences by using C-mii tool were the same as described previously by Prakash et al. (2015).

Targets of the identified rse-miRNAs were predicted in R. serpentina nucleotide dataset by using the user-submitted small RNAs/user-submitted transcript option as well as in other plant species by using the user-submitted small RNAs/preloaded transcript option of web-based plant small RNA target analysis tool psRNATarget (http://plantgrn.noble.org/psRNATarget). The parameters considered for target prediction include (i) 0–2nt mismatches between mature rse-miRNA and its complementary sequence for target prediction in other plant species, while 0–3nt mismatch for target prediction in R. serpentina, (ii) complementarity scoring length (hspsize): 20, (iii) maximum allowed unpaired energy (UPE): 25, (iv) Flanking length of 17bp upstream and 13bp downstream around the target site for analysis of target accessibility, and (v) central mismatch range leading to translation inhibition: 9–11nt. The predicted rse-miRNA targets were subjected to Gene Ontology (GO) annotation by using Blast2GO suite.

Nucleotide composition and their dominance at particular positions in mature rse-miRNAs were analyzed by using BioEdit tool (Hall, 1999). Positional frequency summary analysis of mature rse-miRNA sequences was performed and the average percentage of A, C, G and U bases was calculated. BioEdit and WebLogo 3 (Crooks et al., 2004) were used to represent the overall position-specific base analysis in graphical form.

The precursor sequences of identified rse-miRNAs were used for a BLASTN-assisted homolog search (e-value cutoff: 10) against all the miRNA stem-loop sequences in miRBase. Three best hits for each rse-miRNA precursor were retrieved and aligned along with the identified precursors of rse-miRNAs by using CLUSTALX2. A phylogenetic tree of aligned sequences was constructed by maximum likelihood method using MEGA version 5.2 (Tamura et al., 2011) to analyze the evolutionary relationship among the rse-miRNA precursors and their homologous stem-loop sequences present in other plants.

@&#RESULTS@&#

BLASTN analysis of 7201 mature miRNA sequences from 53 plant species available in miRBase (release 21) against R. serpentina 99,763 nucleotide sequences, stem-loop hairpin structure prediction, and MFEI value analysis by using the C-mii tool led to the identification of 15 potential rse-miRNAs belonging to 13 families (Table 1
                        ). We could not find any miRNA in R. serpentina nucleotide sequence repository other than TSA dataset. The numbers of mature miRNAs from each plant species used in BLASTN analysis are given in Supplementary Table S1. The workflow used for the identification of rse-miRNAs is shown in Fig. 1
                        . The identified potential miRNAs varied from 20 to 22 nucleotides in length. Uracil was found to be the initial base towards the 5′ end in 13 mature rse-miRNAs. Among the 15 identified rse-miRNAs, 07 rse-miRNAs (168, 169b, 169h, 394b, 396b, 477b and 828a) were located on the 5′ arm while 08 rse-miRNAs (159c, 166c, 319a, 319b, 398a, 399h, 408 and 482) were located on the 3′ arm of pre-miRNA (Fig. 2
                        ). Among the 13 miRNA families, 11 (miR159, miR166, miR168, miR394, miR396, miR398, miR399, miR408, miR477, miR482 and miR828) were represented by single member whereas the remaining two families (miR169 and miR319) were represented by two members each (Table 1). The sizes of potential pre-miRNA sequences ranged from 69 to 207nt with an average of 123.33. The average minimal folding free energy (MFE) value of pre-miRNAs was found to be –45.02kcal/mol. The MFEI values of their stem-loop sequences ranged between 0.676–0.965 with an average of –0.815kcal/mol. All the four bases (A, U, G and C) were analyzed in terms of their percentage in the identified pre-miRNAs. The average G+C content of the 15 rse-miRNA precursors was found to be 45.44% (Table 2
                        ).

For all the identified 15 mature rse-miRNAs, position-specific base analysis was performed. Uracil was found to be the preferred initial base (86.67%) towards the 5′ end of mature rse-miRNA sequences. Cytosine was found to be a dominating base at position 19 (80%). Adenine (60%) was abundant at 10th nt position while guanine (53.33%) was found to dominate 3rd and 8th base positions of mature rse-miRNAs. The overall percentage of each base was also calculated in mature rse-miRNAs which was found to be 29.98% for uracil, 28.40% for cytosine, 22.45% for guanine and 19.16% for adenine (Fig. 3
                        ).

MicroRNAs exhibit sequence complementarity with their target mRNAs, therefore, it is possible to screen the miRNA targets by performing BLASTN searches using mature miRNAs as query against mRNA sequence databases. Computational prediction of the target genes of potential rse-miRNAs was carried out in R. serpentina (Table 3
                        ) and other plant species (Supplementary Table S2) by using psRNATarget. The strategy used for the prediction of rse-miRNA targets is shown in Fig. 1. A total of 36 targets were predicted for 10 rse-miRNAs (rse-miR159c, rse-miR166c, rse-miR169b, rse-miR169h, rse-miR319a, rse-miR319b, rse-miR394b, rse-miR396b, rse-miR477b, and rse-miR828a) in R. serpentina TSA sequences. A different numbers of targets were predicted for miRNAs, e.g. rse-miR396b was found to target 09 genes whereas single genes were predicted as targets of rse-miR169h, rse-miR477b and rse-miR828a (Table 3). In other plant species, 11 rse-miRNAs (rse-miR159c, rse-miR166c, rse-miR169b, rse-miR169h, rse-miR394b, rse-miR396b, rse-miR398a, rse-miR399h, rse-miR408, rse-miR482, and rse-miR828a) were predicted to target a total of 32 genes (Supplementary Table S2). The predicted targets of rse-miRNAs belonged to several gene families with diverse biological functions. Transcription factors were found to be one of the major targets of rse-miRNAs while other proteins were related to growth and developmental processes, primary and secondary metabolism, disease resistance, and stress responses (Table 3 and Supplementary Table S2). The GO analysis of all the predicted 36 target genes in R. serpentina also indicated their involvement in diverse biological processes (Supplementary Table S3). The base pair alignment between the rse-miRNAs and their predicted target mRNAs in R. serpentina is shown in Table 4
                        .

To understand the relationship in terms of evolutionary closeness or divergence between rse-miRNA precursors (rse-MIRs) and stem-loop sequences present in other plant species, phylogenetic analysis was carried out. Three best hits for each rse-miRNA were aligned and a phylogenetic tree was constructed to determine the evolutionary relationship among them. Except rse-MIR169h, rse-MIR477b and rse-MIR482, all other rse-miRNA precursors showed conservation in their stem and mature miRNA regions and thus exhibited phylogenetic closeness to precursor miRNAs reported in other plants (Fig. 4
                        ). Stem-loop sequences of miR169 and miR477 families (rse-MIR169h and rse-MIR477b) showed closeness to each other, while on the other hand, the members of same two families present in other plant species (gma-MIR169v, stu-MIR477a, mes-MIR477d, and nta-MIR477b) clustered together in a distant clade. In our analysis, rse-MIR482 did not show any phylogenetic closeness to its homologous precursors although stem-loop sequences of miR482 family (sly-MIR482a, stu-MIR482a and nta-MIR482c) present in other plant species grouped together (Fig. 4).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Small non-coding RNAs which include miRNAs have recently emerged as key players in regulating gene expression. The miRNA molecules have been shown to play crucial roles in controlling various aspects of plant development and physiology (Bartel, 2004; Meng et al., 2011). The establishment of detailed information regarding comprehensive miRNAs expression from any organism will be instrumental for understanding the gene regulation. The abundance in the knowledge and roles of miRNAs started increasing with the successful cloning and sequencing of miRNAs in animal and plant systems (Lee and Ambros, 2001; Sunkar and Zhu, 2004). At the same time, the bulk increase in the DNA sequences in various databases and development of small RNA prediction tools has led to easily discover miRNA-like sequences and predict its stem-loop secondary structures. The development and recent advancements in bioinformatics-based miRNA prediction tools have facilitated the fast and reliable identification of miRNAs in several organisms including plants having complex and large genomes. Since plants have a complex genetic network for its development, identification of entire set of small RNAs is of fundamental importance. This would also lay the foundation to understand regulation of gene expression during primary and secondary metabolism in plants. A number of plant miRNAs have been identified via cloning and sequencing as well as computationally analyzing the bulk sequence data including genomic DNA and ESTs.

In the present study, an attempt was made to identify the miRNA-like sequences in R. serpentina TSA sequences available at GenBank (NCBI). Out of 99,763 R. serpentina nucleotide entries in GenBank, 15 (0.015%) TSA sequences (contigs) were identified to be potential rse-miRNAs that belonged to 13 different miRNA families. Uracil and cytosine were found to be the dominant bases at the 1st and 19th nucleotide positions, respectively, from the 5′ terminus of mature rse-miRNAs. Similar observations were reported in soybean mature miRNAs by Zhang et al. (2008). Argonaute1 (AGO1) proteins prefer to recruit miRNA molecules beginning with uridine for their incorporation into the RISC (Mi et al., 2008), whereas, the abundance of cytosine at 19th base position might be related with RISC targeting or DICER-mediated cleavage facilitating miRNA processing steps in the cytoplasm (Zhang et al., 2008). In plants, real precursors of miRNA sequences range between ∼60–220nt in length (Xuan et al., 2011). Similarity in the range of length for the identified rse-miRNA stem-loop sequences (69–207nt) was observed which agreed with the earlier reports. According to Zhang et al., (2006b), miRNA precursors show a higher MFEI value than tRNAs (0.64), rRNAs (0.59) and mRNAs (0.66). Thus, MFEI value of a given miRNA molecule distinguish it from other types of protein coding or non-coding RNAs. R. serpentina miRNAs identified in our study showed higher MFEI values (ranging between –0.67 and –0.96kcal/mol) and can be considered as authentic candidates.

It has been reported previously that plant mature miRNAs are conserved among closely as well as distantly related species whereas their complete precursors do not exhibit sequence conservation (Zhang et al., 2006a). But recently, it has been observed that stem regions of plant miRNA precursors are usually stable and conserved in nature while the loop regions of miRNA precursors exhibit great variation and are not conserved (Xuan et al., 2011). To investigate the sequence similarity and evolutionary relationship between rse-miRNA precursors and their homologous miRNA stem-loop sequences present in various other plant species, phylogenetic analysis was done. Except three (rse-MIR169h, rse-MIR477b, and rse-MIR482), the precursor sequences of all other rse-miRNAs showed high sequence conservation in mature miRNA region. A moderate to less conservation in their stem regions was observed when compared to precursor sequences of their respective miRNA family members present in other plant species. The precursor sequence of rse-miR482 (rse-MIR482) clustered distantly which indicates a possible evolutionary divergence from its homologous stem-loop sequences (sly-MIR482a, stu-MIR482a and nta-MIR482c) from other plant species. The rse-miR482 could be a different member within miR482 family. The precursors of rse-miR169h and rse-miR477b were found to be close to each other in the phylogenetic analysis. Similarly, the precursor sequences of other plant species belonging to miR169 family (gma-MIR169v) and miR477 family (stu-MIR477a, mes-MIR477d and nta-MIR477b) grouped together and thus showed phylogenetic closeness to each other. The similarity and phylogenetic closeness among precursors of different plant miRNA families might be attributed to their divergence from a common evolutionary lineage for performing specialized biological function(s).

Plant miRNAs are conserved in nature and thus they exhibit the tendency of targeting genes across diverse plant species. The conserved rse-miRNAs picked several targets including transcription factors and genes related to metabolism, ubiquitination, and disease resistance in different plant species. Besides other plants, 36 target genes for rse-miRNAs in the R. serpentina TSA dataset could also be successfully identified. The predicted rse-miRNA targets were found to be involved in diverse biological activities such as transcriptional regulation, growth, development, ubiquitination, DNA methylation, and primary as well as secondary metabolism. Among the targets predicted for rse-miR159c include an adenylate kinase isoenzyme 6 homolog which is a nucleoside monophosphate kinase involved in catalytic processes leading to reversible transfer of the terminal phosphate group between nucleoside monotriphosphates and triphosphates. In Arabidopsis, adenylate kinase 6 (AAK6) has been suggested an important growth regulating factor (Feng et al., 2012). Rse-miR159c also targets beta-xylosidase alpha-l-arabinofuranosidase 2 reported to be implicated in release of arabinose and xylose from cell walls in actively growing root tips (Xiong et al., 2007), and ubiquinone (coenzyme Q) biosynthesis protein that acts as an electron transporter and facilitates aerobic cellular respiration. The predicted targets of rse-miR166a were haloacid dehalogenase-like hydrolase domain-containing protein mediating cellular metabolic processes, homeobox-leucine zipper protein REVOLUTA involved in regulation of apical and lateral meristem growth (Talbert et al., 1995; Otsuga et al., 2001), probable transcriptional regulator SEUSS-LIKE2 (SLK2) that regulates organ development from meristematic regions (Bao et al., 2010), and ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal hydrolase 6 involved in processing of poly-ubiquitin precursors and ubiquitinated proteins. The genes targeted by rse-miR169b were Casparian strip membrane protein 2 which facilitates the formation of Casparian strips in endodermis (Roppolo et al., 2014), nuclear transcription factor Y subunit A-1/A-3 known to mediate activation of various genes through interaction with CCAAT motif present in promoters (Gusmaroli et al., 2002), protein transport sec1a which regulates vesicle trafficking during cytokinesis (Assaad et al., 2001), and photosynthetic NDH subunit of lumenal location 2 (a chloroplastic gene essential for the activity of chloroplast NAD(P)H dehydrogenase (NDH) complex) (Ifuku et al., 2011). Target genes of rse-miR319a were actin-related protein 2/3 complex that regulate actin polymerization, and control cell morphogenesis (Saedler et al., 2004) and trehalose-phosphate synthase regulating carbohydrate utilization and growth (Schluepmann et al., 2003). On the other hand, another miR319 family member, rse-miR319b, was found to target TCP transcription factors which control the morphogenesis of shoot lateral organs by repressing the expression of CUP-SHAPED COTYLEDON (CUC) genes (Koyama et al., 2007). The rse-miR394b was predicted to regulate chitobiosyldiphosphodolichol beta-mannosyltransferase involved in the formation of lipid-linked precursor oligosaccharide for N-glycosylation, DNA (cytosine-5)-methyltransferase 2 which is implicated in CpG methylation of plant DNA (Genger et al., 1999), and F-box proteins known for protein degradation through ubiquitin/26S proteasome proteolytic pathway (Xiao and Jang, 2000). Several genes including putative calcium-transporting ATPase 13, plasma membrane-type, conserved oligomeric Golgi complex subunit 2, kaempferol 3-O-beta-D-galactosyltransferase (F3GalTase) whose activity is essential for formation of flavonol glycosides required for pollen germination (Miller et al., 1999), phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (an enzyme involved in carbohydrate biosynthesis and gluconeogenesis), probable E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase HERC1 implicated in membrane trafficking, regulator of nonsense transcripts UPF2 which control nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) pathway (Shi et al., 2012), secologanin synthase (CYP72A1) which converts loganin into secologanin (Irmler et al., 2000), and triacylglycerol (TAG) lipase responsible for TAG breakdown during seed germination were predicted to be targeted by rse-miR396b. A UDP-glycosyltransferase 74E1 was predicted to be targeted by rse-miR477b in our study. The anthocyanin regulatory C1 protein which regulates the expression of anthocyanin biosynthesis-related genes (Paz-Ares et al., 1990) was predicted as a target of rse-miR828a. Besides many potential targets involved in important plant-specific processes, the prediction of secondary metabolism-related genes secologanin synthase (CYP72A1) and anthocyanin regulatory C1 protein as targets of rse-miRNAs (rse-miR396b and rse-miR828a) indicates towards the possibilities of miRNA-mediated regulation of secondary metabolic pathways in this commercially important medicinal plant.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

In summary, we identified for the first time miRNAs from R. serpentina, an important medicinal plant, by using computational approaches. Fifteen conserved potential miRNAs were successfully identified in 99,763 R. serpentina nucleotide/TSA entries. Targets were also predicted for rse-miRNAs which were found to be related to plant growth and development, transcriptional regulation, ubiquitination, DNA methylation, disease resistance, stress response and metabolic processes. MicroRNAs targeting secondary metabolic pathway genes could also be identified hinting towards their role(s) in the regulation of secondary metabolism. As our understanding on the roles of miRNAs deepens, there is a fair possibility of using miRNAs as a metabolic engineering tool for manipulating secondary metabolites biosynthesis in medicinal plants.

The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This research work was supported by BSC0203 project of Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), Govt. of India. PP acknowledges Department of Biotechnology, Govt. of India for junior and senior research fellowships. The authors are grateful to the Director, CSIR-CIMAP, for providing necessary facilities.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2015.12.002.

The following are Supplementary data to this article:
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

