@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Mapping the intramolecular signal propagation pathways in protein using Bayesian change point analysis of atomic motions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Bayesian change points for detection of the intramolecular signals are proposed.


                        
                        
                           
                           The algorithm for mapping the signal propagation pathways is developed.


                        
                        
                           
                           The origin of signals is explained based on the stochastic resonance.


                        
                        
                           
                           The presence of signaling in protein in its native state is demonstrated.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Bayesian change point analysis

Protein

Molecular dynamics

Intramolecular signal propagation

Wavelet coherence

Stochastic resonance

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  We propose to use change points of atomic positions in the molecular dynamics trajectory as indicators of the propagating signals in protein. We designate these changes as signals because they can propagate within the molecule in the form of “perturbation wave”, transmit energy or information between different parts of protein, and serve as allosteric signals. We found that change points can distinguish between thermal fluctuations of atoms (noise) and signals in a protein despite the differences in the motility of amino acid residues. Clustering of the spatially close residues that were experiencing change points close in time, allowed us to map pathways of signal propagation in a protein at the atomic level of resolution. We propose a potential mechanism for the origin of the signal and its propagation that relies on the autonomic coherence resonance in atomic fluctuations. According to this mechanism, random synchronization of fluctuations of neighboring atoms results in a resonance, which increases amplitude of vibration of these atoms. This increase can be transmitted to the atoms colliding with the resonant atoms, leading to the propagating signal. The wavelet-based coherence analysis of the inter-atomic distances between carbon-alpha atoms and surrounding atoms for the residue pairs that belong to the same communication pathway allowed us to find time periods with temporarily locked phases, confirming the occurrence of conditions for resonance. Analysis of the mapped pathways demonstrated that they form a network that connects different regions of the protein.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Protein dynamics is essential for its functional activity and includes several types of motions: atomic vibrations, residue motions (including bond stretching and bond angle bending), motions of secondary structure elements, and correlated motions of multiple residues, including motions of large domains (Yonetani and Laberge, 2008; Teilum et al., 2009). These motions carry the signals related to the intramolecular communication, example of which is allosteric regulation of protein function. In allosteric mechanism, ligand binding at an allosteric site is coupled to a structural and/or dynamic change at a distant regulated site of the protein. This implies that there exist links between distant regions of protein which can be defined in terms of long-range intramolecular communication. Historically, two basic models for understanding long-range intra-protein communication where successfully used to explain cooperative nature of the changes in hemoglobin tetramer upon oxygen binding. (a) The sequential or Koshland-Némethy-Filmer (KNF) model (Koshland et al., 1966) and (b) the concerted model or Monod–Wyman–Changeux (MWC) model (Changeux, 2012). Modern versions of theory explaining allosteric mechanisms include several common principles: a protein conformation is not static; rather, it constantly populates a range of distinct conformations according to the Boltzmann distribution, ligands bind to a small subset of the conformations present in the ensemble, stabilizing them, and as a result, the entire ensemble eventually becomes enriched in the ligand-bound, stabilized conformations. All globular proteins could be allosteric and could contain multiple preexisting pathways for long-range intramolecular communication (Tsai et al., 2009). Although allosteric mechanisms are investigated in great detail, mechanistic understanding of the long-range intramolecular communication is still incomplete. Some of the remaining problems include: mapping the communication pathways (identifying atomic chains that transmit the signal), and how propagating signal is sustained and can reach distant sites.

There are several examples of successful mapping of the allosteric pathways in proteins based on their structure, evolutionary conservation, modeling the protein as a network and considering the residue connectivity, and inter-atom force distribution analysis (Chen et al., 2007; Chennubhotla et al., 2008; Stacklies et al., 2009; Lu et al., 2010; Selvaratnam et al., 2011; Weinkam et al., 2012; Suel et al., 2003). Although insightful, the above mentioned approaches can reveal only a small fraction of existing pathways. For example, the evolutionary approach is based on the analysis of many proteins of the same family and can reveal conserved pathways common for the whole family of proteins, but not unique pathways specific to individual proteins. The approaches that infer links from correlated motions do not even try to map communication pathways: they only take for granted the link between two distant residues, if these residues are involved in coordinated motion. Despite the extensive structural insight, X-ray crystallography provides snapshots of different states of the protein reaction cycle, but not of the transitions between them. There is no established method for mapping the signal transition paths, and also there is no accurate terminology to describe intramolecular communication in proteins. For example, definition of conformation as a specific “three-dimensional arrangement of its constituent atoms” (Price, 2000) can lead to confusion, when applied to protein dynamics, because it allows different interpretation of what to consider a conformation. The object of our study – Activated Protein C (APC) is a serine protease involved in the coagulation (blood clotting) cascade formed by multiple macromolecules. Binding of APC to its receptor or other macromolecules results in dramatic changes in its substrate specificity and its functional activity. Although some of these changes can be attributed to the steric hindrances created by the macromolecules bound to the APC, other changes are clearly allosteric (Yang et al., 2007; Rezaie, 2003). For example, the activity of APC is regulated by the binding of Ca2+ and Na+ to the sites distant from the active site regions without inducing structural changes detectable by the X-ray crystallography. In this context, computational approaches have the potential to complement the experimental techniques and provide the information that cannot be obtained experimentally. Therefore, in this study we used molecular dynamics (MD) simulations and looked for methods which would allow us to find indicators of the intramolecular communication in the MD trajectory. Because we are dealing with hardly detectable structural changes, protein dynamics, and intramolecular communication which may include energy transmission, here we define our use of terminology, in order to prevent possible confusion. We use a definition of protein conformation that is based on energetic, rather than geometric, considerations. The distinct ensemble of accessible conformational states of proteins corresponds to local minima on the energy surface (with the native conformation corresponding to the global minimum). The native conformation (i.e., protein states corresponding to the global minimum on the energy surface) exhibits a certain degree of heterogeneity, because structural dynamics is an essential feature of any protein system. These energy sublevels are referred in literature as conformations, and sometimes as conformers (Molina et al., 2008). The conformations we are referring to in this study correspond to these energy sublevels and the APC is not expected to undergo strong structural (conformational) changes during our experiments. Other terms that require clarification are collective (or correlated) motions of the protein residues, normal modes, and stochastic resonance as they relate to the change points. The collective motions in the protein are described by its normal modes (NM), which are derived from the elastic network model of the protein and assume the resonance conditions. Protein residues that belong to the same NM move in coordinated fashion, for example, cross the equilibrium position simultaneously (Chennubhotla et al., 2008). These are global motions, as opposed to the local changes in protein dynamics determined with the changepoint analysis. Thus, change points reflect local changes and can be thought of as random (stochastic) phenomena in contrast to collective motions, which reflect the behavior of the whole system. It should be noted that normal modes and related standing waves do not transport energy, although there is a possibility of energy transmission between different modes in certain conditions. Also, low frequency NM correlate with thermal fluctuations, B-factor (residue motility), and direction of the conformational change of the protein. Intramolecular energy transport in proteins is an important phenomenon and there were many studies devoted to modeling of this process. One mechanism that attracted much attention was exciton-soliton mechanism of transmission of the energy released by ATP hydrolysis (Davydov, 1977). This theory explains long-distance energy propagation by formation of solitons characterized by slow dissipation of energy enabling its transmission for long distances. According to the theory of “discrete breathers”, energy in a protein can jump from site to site with high yields, covering in many instances remarkably large distances. Such energy transfers mark the spontaneous formation of a localized mode of nonlinear origin at the destination site, which acts as an efficient energy-accumulating center (Piazza and Sanejouand, 2009). The energy accumulation capability of some residues carries some similarity to the properties of the residues undergoing change point in our description of perturbation transmission in proteins.

The first objective of this study is to investigate whether the Bayesian change point analysis of atomic displacements can be used to discriminate between thermal fluctuations and conformational changes (hardly detectable structural changes involved in intramolecular communication). The second objective is to test whether detected change points can allow mapping the signal (perturbation) propagation pathways. Additional goal is to propose a possible explanation of the origin and the mechanism of propagation of these signals.

The three-dimensional structure of the Activated Protein C (APC) was downloaded from Protein Data Bank (PDB ID: 1AUT.pdb). The APC consist of protease domain (heavy chain) and a light chain made of two epidermal growth factor like domains (EGF1 and EGF2) and Gla-domain. In this study, we used the APC fragment containing 293 amino acid residues designated as APCw. The APCw consists of protease and EGF2 domains covalently linked by the disulfide bond. Native APC protease domain contains Na+ and Ca2+ cations (Rezaie, 2010; Yang et al., 2004) not resolved in the 1AUT.pdb structure. These cations were added to the structure of APCw by homology modeling using as templates the trypsin and factor Xa structures with PDB IDs 1A31.pdb and 2BOK.pdb, respectively.

MD simulations of APCw were carried out with periodic boundary conditions and full PME electrostatics using NAMD2 (Phillips et al., 2005) with the all-atom CHARMM27 force field (Foloppe and MacKerell, 2000). The SHAKE algorithm was used to constrain the bonds containing hydrogen atoms to their equilibrium length (Andersen, 1983). The structure was solvated in the TIP3P model water (Mahoney and Jorgensen, 2000) to produce 10Å thick water shell around the protein. To maintain electrical neutrality sodium ions were added to the system. The Langevin dynamics was utilized to keep a constant temperature of 300K and the Langevin piston method was used to keep the pressure at 1atm. in all simulations. The solvated starting structure was minimized using conjugate gradient minimization to an energy gradient tolerance of 0.05. The minimized structure was then heated from 0K to 300K in steps of 10K using velocity reassignment during a 15ps molecular dynamics run. The equilibrated system was then used for the production runs. The results were saved with frequency 1000, resulting in 2000 frames of the trajectory per 4ns. MD simulations were conducted on the Lonestar cluster at the Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC) at The University of Texas at Austin.

Six parameters that characterize the Cα atomic motions: displacement; displacement–velocity; RMSD; RMSF; change of backbone phi angle; and change of psi angle for each Carbon-alpha (Cα) atoms of APCw for each time frame in the MD trajectory, were derived using analytical possibilities of VMD (Humphrey et al., 1996) and NAMD2. Displacement and RMSD were obtained by comparing the atomic coordinates to the initial position. Alignment of frames was used to exclude contribution of the whole molecule translational and rotational motions into determined parameters. Changes of the phi and psi angles, and also displacement–velocity values were determined by comparing two sequential time frames. To determine RMSF, five consecutive time frames were considered during calculations. Stochastic coherence of atomic fluctuations was determined from time dependent changes of the distance between Cα atom of each residue and geometric center of atoms within 5Å radius from that atom. By analogy with mechanical (sound) wave propagation in the air, this parameter may inform about signal propagation in the protein molecule: time points with shorter distance may correspond to the crest of the wave (high pressure region in sound wave).

Bayesian change point analysis (Erdman and Emerson, 2007) of the time series data detects the change points (a moment when significant change of average occurred) and reports the posterior probabilities of changes for each time point. Mapping the communication pathways with change points include clustering of atoms by closeness in space (within a contact distance between residues in three-dimensional structure of protein) and by closeness in time of the occurrence of change point. Mechanical signals propagate in the protein molecules with the speed comparable to the speed of sound in liquids, giving us the upper limit for propagation of the conformational changes in proteins by means of atomic collisions. Thus, the signal can travel across the protein molecule of 100Å in diameter in about 10ps, which corresponds to 5 time frames in our MD trajectory. Therefore, the communication paths included residues that experienced change points within 3 consecutive time frames. The cluster of residues close in space and undergone changes within 3 time points (6ps), is denoted as a communication pathway in our study.

We defined the ICNs as chains of interacting atoms that mediate long-range links via physical interactions. The ICNs were inferred using the python script that implemented the following algorithm.

Input data:
                           
                              1.
                              A file containing time series data. For example, displacement values for each 293Cα atoms at each 2000 time points in form of matrix containing 293 rows and 2000 columns.

A file containing coordinates of all atoms in the three-dimensional structure of APCw.

Change points clustering:
                           
                              3.
                              Calculate posterior probabilities of change point occurrences for each residue at each time point and convert data into binary format: 0, 1, where 0 means no change point and 1 corresponds to occurrence of change point using posterior probability more than 90% as a threshold.

Calculate pair-wise distances between all Cα atoms of APC and create a contact map in the binary form: 0, 1; 0 means no contact (distance more than 10Å); 1 means that the pair of atoms are in contact.

Create draft paths by clustering together all the residues that experience change points within three time frames. Do not include residues into paths otherwise. Filter resulting clusters to discard the ones which contain less than 4 residues.

Create final paths by retaining the draft paths residues that contact with at least one of the residues in the path. Filter resulting paths to discard the ones which contain less than 4 residues.

Analyze the paths based on their amino acid composition, length, and the protein regions they connect. Combine the paths that share one or more residues into communication networks, thereby creating the ICNs.

Frequency and time resolved synchronization in the distance fluctuations derived from MD trajectory (Section 2.3) was detected with wavelet based analysis using “biwavelet” package from R statistical package (Team, 2008). The analysis includes continuous wavelet transform with complex Morlet wavelet, which provides time resolved information about magnitude and phase angle of atomic vibrations. Based on this data the “biwavelet” package calculates pair-wise cross-correlation and coherence between atoms and also allows creating presentations of the generated data.

The algorithm was implemented and calculations were done using Enthought Python Distribution (EPD 2.7.3) which includes about hundred libraries for scientific computing in addition to standard python libraries. Figures were generated with the plotting library matplotlib (Hunter, 2007), computations were done with scientific computing libraries numpy and scipy (Jones et al., 2001). Biopython library (Chapman and Chang, 2000) was used for protein analysis, along with other libraries, as indicated in the text and the figure legends.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

Change point analysis is a method designed for detection of changes in noisy time series data including MD trajectory (Ensign and Pande, 2009). We propose to use change point analysis for detection of the disturbance in the protein molecule and map pathways of this disturbance propagation by tracing the disturbance in time and space. MD is a well-established method with a long history of proven predictive power and generation of the results which are in agreement with experimental observations. Relatively short MD simulations (4ns runs used in our study) are expected to contain mostly data on thermal fluctuations of the atoms around equilibrium positions and also conformational transitions that are characteristic for native structure and dynamics of the protein. Therefore, atomic mobility measured from MD (displacement, RMSD, RMSF) in these circumstances should be in agreement with experimental B-factors (or temperature factors). Indeed, molecular profiles constructed by calculating the average displacement, RMSD, RMSF for each Cα atom over trajectory were similar to the profile created from B-factors of the same Cα atoms taken from the structure file (Fig. 1A and B). To make sure that change point analysis can discriminate between thermal fluctuations and conformational changes and also to take into account different mobility of residues, we computed normalized number of change points per residue, and compared that number (Fig. 1C) to the normalized mobility of residues (Fig. 1B), and to the B-factors. The B-factor correlated with the RMSF, but not with change point profile (the Pearson coefficients of correlation 0.5 and 0.1, respectively), suggesting that change points are independent of residue motilities. These properties of change points suggest that they are suitable for discriminating between thermal fluctuations and conformational transitions. In this study we assume that propagation of the mechanical disturbance with posterior probabilities of the change points more than 90% can be considered as propagation of conformational transitions (or in other words, can be considered as hardly detectable structural changes related to allosteric signaling).

We determined pathways using all six parameters derived from MD trajectory (see Section 2.2) and also explored several combinations of contact distances and threshold values of posterior probabilities. We found that pathways inferred from Cα displacements or RMSD were more abundant, as compared to the pathways derived from other parameters, suggesting that analysis of these two parameters will provide more sensitive method for mapping of the communication pathways. Therefore, in this study we mostly describe pathways derived from displacements of Cα atoms of the APCw. We used 10Å distance between Cα as a contact distance, included change points with more than 90% posterior probability, and considered change points within three time frames as belonging to the same pathway. To test whether our algorithm works as expected, we visualized change points and locations of residues for an example pathway made of six residues. Data presented in Fig. 2
                         show that all six residues have matching change points at time point 1829 of MD trajectory (Fig. 2A) and the residues were neighbors in the three-dimensional structure of APCw (Fig. 2B). As it is seen from Fig. 2A, residues that form long pathway at one time point, can form shorter pathways at other time points (matching change points for 2–3 residues). This suggests that change points, and consequently, propagating signals appear in MD trajectory randomly, and that MD run time (4ns) was sufficient for detection of at least most active signal transmitting (disturbance propagation) pathways. Once we confirmed that algorithm works correctly, we detected all the pathways made of four or more amino acid residues. We discarded shorter pathways assuming that they have smaller chance of being functionally important. In addition to mapping specific pathways, we calculated frequencies for different residues to be included in communication pathway and found that some amino acids are more active in communication. Fig. 3A shows location of twenty amino acids most frequently detected in signaling pathways: Leu16, Ile17, Leu34, Val45, Ile47, Ala56, Asp60, Leu64, Asp100, Asn101, Thr117, Ile121, Arg128, His144, Ile160, Asn166, Glu167, Asp189, Ala190, Cys220 (numbering as in the file 1Aut.pdb). Some of these residues are located in known allosteric sites, others can participate in regulation of the active site of APC. Summary of the pathways is presented in Fig. 3B, which displays all detected pathways longer than 4 amino acid residues in different transparent colors. It is evident that the communication network is formed by the overlapping and intersecting pathways.

In order to explain the origin of the propagating signal and how the signal is sustained, we propose a hypothesis that considers the propagating signal as a consequence of the autonomous coherence resonance in a protein molecule. According to this hypothesis, the coherence resonance enhances the thermal fluctuations turning some of them into propagating signal. This hypothesis assumes that conditions for the resonance evolve randomly as a result of temporal coherence of thermal fluctuations. The atomic collisions play a role of periodic force that creates resonance. Data generated during MD simulations allow testing this hypothesis, because coordinates of all atoms at each time point are saved in the MD trajectory. We measured the distance between Cα atoms of all residues and center of the mass of atoms located within 5Å distance from Cα atom. The time-dependent change of this distance can be used as a measure of collisions, or changing strain (force) which can generate resonance conditions. Based on these ideas we reasoned that even transient synchronization of thermal fluctuations at certain frequencies will create conditions for the resonance. To detect such synchronization, we used wavelet based technique capable of detecting coherence in a time-resolved manner. The temporary synchronization at different frequencies (periods) was easily detected in cross-wavelet coherence analysis, which employs complex Morlet wavelet to reveal time dependent changes in phases of the signals for the pairs of residues (Fig. 4
                        ). Detection of stochastic coherence in the MD trajectory confirms the presence of conditions favoring resonant increase of oscillation amplitudes and therefore appearance of the signal detectable in a form of change point. Having time-resolved measure of signal (change point) and atomic level time resolved data for protein dynamics, allowed us to approach the question about mechanistic (physics-based) explanation of allosteric signaling (or signal propagation) in protein molecule. To this end, we put forward a hypothesis that explains the origin of the propagating signal in the protein molecule as a result of stochastic resonance (SR). We hypothesize that intramolecular communication (including allosteric signaling) in proteins can be explained using a phenomenon of coherence resonance of atomic fluctuations, which is one of the forms of the stochastic resonance (Wellens et al., 2003). The SR is defined as a cooperative effect between a weak signal and noise in a nonlinear system, leading to an enhanced response to a periodic force (Wellens et al., 2003). Noise in protein system represents thermal fluctuations of atoms. The hypothesis states that thermal fluctuations of atoms results in random kicks that help some atoms hop over the potential barrier—undergo a noise-assisted transition detected as a change point in the molecular dynamics trajectory. This can be described in terms of coherence resonance and/or autonomous stochastic resonance which are close SR relatives that describe situations in which coherent motion in noisy systems emerges even in the absence of a periodic input signal. We hypothesize that coherence resonance contributes to appearance of the propagating signal and also supports the signal propagation by serving as a signal amplifier, making it possible for the signal to reach distant regions in the protein.

Calculations of displacement, RMSD and other parameters were carried out with widely tested VMD software and the resulting values can be considered reliable. Noise in form of thermal fluctuations of the atoms and different mobility of amino acid residues, makes it difficult to identify signals related to conformational changes in the MD trajectory. The clustering algorithm detected multiple pathways (more than 20) with varying lengths ranging from 4 residues per path up to 6 residues. Although the method also detected multiple short pathways with less than 4 residues, these pathways were discarded since they are less likely to have functional importance. To test whether the pathways longer than three amino acid residues can be detected by chance, we randomized change point locations in time by shuffling the detected change points. Applying the same clustering algorithm to randomized change points did not detect any pathways longer than three amino acid residues. These tests suggest that revealed pathways are characteristic for the architecture of the analyzed protein, not just a random combination of the residues experiencing the change points.

Comparing pathways to each other revealed that some pathways had unique residues, while others shared from one to several residues and were partially overlapping. This suggests that residues may participate in several pathways. The occurrence of common elements suggests that the signaling pathways in protein form a network of intersecting pathways – communication network.

To test possible functional importance of these pathways, we investigated whether the pathways are involved in connecting the known allosteric sites of APC. The examples of the known allosteric regions of APCw are: basic residues that form anion binding exosite 1 (factor V binding residues), Ca2+-binding loop (70–80 loop), and Na+-binding region. We found that among residues included in the communication pathways most frequently (Fig. 3), there are residues that belong to the substrate binding specificity pocket residues of the active site (target for allosteric regulation), and Na+ binding region.

For further validation of our method, we mapped pathways using five other parameters (Section 2.3) in addition to the atomic displacements. We found that fewer pathways can be revealed with these parameters. The reason for reduced sensitivity could be the way how these parameters were calculated. While the RMSD and the displacement were calculated using the initial three-dimensional structure of the APCw as the reference point, RMSF was calculated from five consecutive time points, which resulted in smoothing of the data. Calculation of delta phi, delta psi and displacement–velocity was based on comparison of two consecutive time frames, which results in smoothing of the data even more. Some change points were lost as a result of the smoothing, resulting in less sensitive mapping of the pathways.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

Statistically robust measure–average displacement change point is proposed as an indicator of the presence of intramolecular signals (propagating disturbances) in the protein. This approach allows to detect a signal in the presence of thermal fluctuations (noise) and also takes into account different mobility of amino acid residues. The molecular dynamics data allow to detect this signal at atomic resolution and also to trace the location of the signal in space and time. This gives an opportunity for mapping the signal propagation pathways and propose detailed hypothesis to explain the origin of the signal. We found that MD data of the protein in its native state contains propagating signals that link known allosteric regions of APC to the active site. In order to explain the origin of these signals we propose a hypothesis that relies on the stochastic resonance in atomic vibrations. Wavelet coherence analysis of atomic motions demonstrated that conditions for stochastic resonance can be easily detected from the molecular dynamics data.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

We acknowledge Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC) at The UT Austin for providing an access to the Lonestar cluster, which allowed us to complete molecular dynamics simulation studies.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

