@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Identifying microRNAs involved in cancer pathway using support vector machines

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Construction of a two-step SVM classifier for identifying miRNA associated with cancer.


                        
                        
                           
                           Features are extracted from sequence, thermodynamics and miRNA–mRNA hybridization interactions based on experimentally data.


                        
                        
                           
                           For miRSEQ – Positions 1, 6, 10, 19, GG and CC repeat in the miRNA sequence form the optimal feature subset.


                        
                        
                           
                           Optimal features vary significantly based on the number of seed formed by hybrid for miRINT.


                        
                        
                           
                           Final classifier obtained a good performance with cv-rate ranging from 92 to 87.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Signatures

miRNA:mRNA interaction

Machine based learning

Feature selection

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Since Ambros’ discovery of small non-protein coding RNAs in the early 1990s, the past two decades have seen an upsurge in the number of reports of predicted microRNAs (miR), which have been implicated in various functions. The correlation of miRs with cancer has spurred the usage of this class of non-coding RNAs in various cancer therapies, although most of them are at trial stages. However, the experimental identification of a miR to be associated with cancer is still an elaborate, time-consuming process. To aid this process of miR association, we undertook an in-silico study involving the identification of global signatures in experimentally validated microRNAs associated with cancer. Subsequently, a support vector machine based two-step binary classifier system has been trained and modeled from the features extracted from the above study. A total of 60 distinguishing features were selected and ranked to form the feature set for classification – 26 of these extracted from the miR sequence itself, and the remainder from the thermodynamics of folding and the hybridized miRNA–mRNA structure. The two step classifier model – miRSEQ and miRINT had reasonably good performance measures with fairly high values of Matthew’s correlation coefficient (MCC) values ranging from 0.72 to 0.82 (availability: https://sites.google.com/site/sumitslab/tools).
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

miRNA (miR) are small non-coding, single stranded RNAs (about 22 nucleotides in length) involved in several regulatory pathways in the cell cycle. They bind to the untranslated regions (UTRs) of mRNA, (particularly the 3'UTR) and play an important role in the post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression (Bartel, 2004; Filipowicz et al., 2008). Recent studies suggest that these noncoding RNAs can bind to 5'UTRs (Ragan et al., 2009) and coding regions (Hausser et al., 2013) of mRNA as well, but little is known about the mechanism of binding and their regulation. Binding of a miR to a specific target in an UTR with complete complementarity either leads to degradation of the mRNA itself or induce translational repression (Esquela-Kerscher and Slack, 2006). In tissues associated with various tumors, it has been observed that the expression pattern of miRs is altered considerably (Cummins et al., 2006; Zhang et al., 2006). Additionally, gene mapping reveals that most of the human miRs are located in chromosomal positions which are susceptible to rearrangements (Calin and Croce, 2007). Hence, it can be asserted that miRs in humans play a major role in the cancer pathway.

Previous studies by several authors have investigated the involvement of different types of base pairing in miR–mRNA interactions and target prediction algorithms have been formulated based on these precincts. These algorithms predominantly considered Watson Crick base pairing between the miR and its respective mRNA – especially with the 2nd to the 8th nucleotide positions of miR – as the potential target sites. However, in later studies, it was found that animal miRs do not bind to mRNA with perfect complementarity (unlike in plants); rather their binding leaves several imperfections like loops, mismatches or bulges and often involves GU(non-Watson Crick) base pairing as well (Axtell et al., 2011; Didiano and Hobert, 2008). Other than these determinants, AU richness around the seed regions and folding of mRNA play a vital role in target binding (Grimson et al., 2007; Robins et al., 2005). All these factors need to be considered, not in isolation but together to hypothesize miR:mRNA interactions.

Some of the computational methods used in the functional annotation of miRs involved in cancer mainly rely on the expression profile of various cancer cell types and statistical analysis for further classification (Jayaswal et al., 2011). These methods utilize the expression profile but they fail to consider the fact that a single miR can bind to several mRNA target sites and regulate the cell differently. Our aim at feature selection was, therefore, to embrace all these redundancy checks. Other attempts to classify miRs into oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) were based on functional and evolutionary features (Wang et al., 2010) like conservation, expression levels, chromosome distribution, etc.

The present study involved a search and analysis of features involved in the interaction of a miR:mRNA associated with cancer. These features encompassed sequential, hybridization and thermodynamics of validated miR:mRNA interactions only. Based on the curated and prioritized features, we developed a two-step machine based classifier model – miRSEQ and miRINT, which will identify a miR to be associated with cancer and also classify the type of its association, i.e., either with an oncogene or a tumor suppressor. Prioritization of the features and a diversification of the models according to the number of seed regions drastically improved the performance of the classifier, as compared to generalized features and holistic hybridization. The incorporation of seed based classification in the determination of features is a novel approach in our algorithm. The final classifier thus developed had good performance with experimentally validated datasets giving good prediction accuracy (cross validation (cv-rate) ranging from 92% to 87%).

@&#METHODS@&#

For the purpose of generating a classifier, the first step needed to be undertaken is the construction of a microRNA dataset which has been experimentally validated to be associated with cancer. To begin with, a list of genes involved in cancer was downloaded from the catalog of somatic mutations (COSMIC) (Higgins et al., 2007). A total of 488 genes were thus listed, which could be further segregated into oncogenes and tumor suppressors by cross-referring with the tumor associated gene database (TAG) (Chen et al., 2013). Experimentally validated miRNA interactions with target mRNA can be obtained from miRECORDS (Xiao et al., 2009) and miRTARBASE (Hsu et al., 2011). Therefore, the list of genes obtained from COSMIC was curated with miRECORDS and miRTARBASE to obtain a list of experimentally validated targets. This process finally yielded a set of targets for miRNA which have been experimentally validated to be associated with cancer. A total of 2578 miRNAs were extracted from miRBASE 20.0 (May 2013, (Griffiths-jones et al., 2006)), and these were compared with the experimentally validated miR–mRNA interactions obtained as above, yielding a final set of 239 microRNAs which have been conclusively implicated in the cancer pathway (Supplementary data S1). These 239 miRNAs were manually checked with their available literature and revalidated. 3′UTR mRNA sequences involved in the interaction of these 239 miRNAs with their targets were obtained from BIOMART – Ensemble (Kinsella et al., 2011) (Fig. 1
                        ).

Positive and negative datasets for training and testing the classifier were built separately for miRSEQ and miRINT. For miRSEQ, experimentally validated mature miR sequences (the same 239 obtained as above) would serve as the positive dataset. The negative dataset was built in accordance with the method employed in (Bandyopadhyay and Mitra, 2009) (Supplementary data S3). The negative dataset was constructed on the basis of specific experimental evidence presented in literature for miRNAs whose binding to a target mRNA does not involve gene regulation (Hebert et al., 2007; Kiriakidou et al., 2004; Lewis et al., 2003; Musiyenko et al., 2008; Robins et al., 2005; Schultz et al., 2008; Sethupathy et al., 2007; Skalsky et al., 2007; Visvanathan et al., 2007; Zhao et al., 2005). Selection of random samples for negative dataset was strictly avoided since they may increase the false positives thereby decreasing the performance of the classifier. For miRINT, experimentally validated miRNA:mRNA interactions, further segregated as oncogene interactions (129 instances) and tumor suppressor interactions (110 instances) were considered as the positive and negative datasets, respectively (Supplementary data S7). Class imbalance in the datasets was overcome by applying the synthetic minority over sampling technique (SMOTE) (Chawla et al., 2002).

Construction of an efficient classifier depends on meticulous feature extraction, since the quality of the feature reflects upon the effective performance of the classifier. For our classifier, features were identified and extracted based on a survey of previous studies and our own indigenous parameters (Batuwita and Palade, 2009; Kothandan and Biswas, 2013; Mendoza et al., 2013; Sharma and Biswas, 2011). For miRSEQ, 26 features were considered, which included nucleotide positions and repeat information. The maximum length of the miR used in the training was restricted to 22 nucleotides (Supplementary data S4 and S5).

For miRINT, a total of 34 features based on the hybridization profile (miR:mRNA interactions) were utilized. miR:mRNA hybrids having the best fit in terms of free energy, were obtained using RNAHybrid – ViennaRNA package (Krüger and Rehmsmeier, 2006). A total of 2926 hybrid structures were generated and considered for feature extraction. miR:mRNA hybridization using RNAHybrid may contain false target site predictions. Hence, a post-processing filter was applied to miR–mRNA interactions in order to remove the false predictions. An indigenous Perl script, “PairFinder” (https://sites.google.com/site/sumitslab/tools) was used to parse and analyze the hybrids for seeds, regions outside seeds, mismatches and bulges (Kothandan and Biswas, 2013). Seed regions have been defined according to the convention followed in (Lekprasert et al., 2011) and our previous work (Kothandan and Biswas, 2013). A detailed list of all the 60 features has been summarized in the supplementary files (Supplementary data S5 and S6).

For the construction of test datasets, a non-validated miR is allowed to hybridize in RNAHybrid with the list of genes obtained from COSMIC and the most energetically favored structure was considered. False interactions were removed using the same post processing filter and then let into the classification process.

In this study, we used LibSVM package for constructing classifier models (Chang and Lin, 2011). Radial basis function (RBF) was chosen as the kernel for the classification process. Parameters for RBF (cost and gamma) were found using a grid search, which involved the construction of a mesh grid allowing a search for best cost (c) and gamma (g
                        =1/number of features). The main disadvantage of training a disease related dataset is the inadequate number of training instances that are experimentally validated and it is important that the same training set should never be used as a test set in any of the experiment because they may lead to over fitting in the model generated. So in order to overcome these hassles we used 10-fold cross-validation step (by default) to evaluate the performance of the classification.

Features extracted were ranked based on F-score (Supplementary Tables T1 and T2) and eventually prioritized. The F-score method has been described in detail in Supplementary section S9. Two sets of features – for miRSEQ and miRINT – were finalized as has been described before. Additionally, for miRINT, models were built based on the number of seeds they form in the hybrid (Seed 1, Seed 2 and Seed 3 model). This is because the parameters which play crucial roles for miRNA binding to mRNA differ when the interaction involves the formation of a single seed compared to the interaction where more than one seeds are formed. We considered a maximum of three-seed hybrid for the training. Feature ranking was done individually for each of the models and individually trained. This was done to prevent the dilution or extrapolation of some features when all the differently-seeded hybrids were taken together. To find the optimum subset for the classifier, we followed recursive feature elimination (RFE) for both miRSEQ and miRINT during the training process. Low ranking features were removed one by one iteratively and the performance of the classifier measured until saturation. Removing all the low ranking features at a glance may degrade the performance of the classifier completely; hence the process of optimum feature subset selection was carried out iteratively (Zeng et al., 2009). As a result of the difference in binding parameters, the features that dominate in the optimal feature set for each seed model differ as well (Supplementary Table 2).

Due to the difference in numbers between the positive and the negative sets, class imbalance existed in the dataset; so, accuracy could not be chosen as a direct measure of performance (Batuwita and Palade, 2010) for such sets. Hence, performance measures were chosen in compliance with the cross-validation rate (cv-rate) and Matthew’s correlation coefficient (MCC). MCC ranges from −1 to 1; a MCC value of 1 indicates the best prediction and a negative value indicates imperfect classification.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Dataset preparation was carried out individually for the classifiers miRSEQ and miRINT (Fig. 1). Consequently, a total of 263 miRs were used in the miRSEQ training. Class imbalance problem in the dataset was overcome by the SMOTE (k-nearest algorithm with no replacement) method which generated sufficient number of negative instances for the training set. Like most SVM classification problems related to miRNAs, our dataset was also not linearly separable as it was too complex in nature. RBF was applied to convert all non-linear data from lower dimensional space to linearly separable higher dimensional space.

For miRSEQ, nucleotide position conservation was used initially as the main feature set. However, poor performance of the classifier (cv-rate of 45%) prompted us to use nucleotide repeat information with appropriate window size to boost the performance. Selection of appropriate window size (W) for nucleotide repeat information was done by measuring the performance of the classifier keeping a sliding window size ranging from 2 to 5. Performance was measured from the plot between cv-rate and window size, depicting a clear drop in cv-rate when the window size exceeded 2 (Fig. 2
                     ). Hence, a 2-window sized repeat was considered for training miRSEQ.

The 26 features chosen were ranked by F-score method and recursive feature elimination was performed to find the best subset of features for the dataset as well as retain all the features with very low classification error, respectively. Optimum subset of features which were finally selected has been depicted in Fig. 3
                     . Judging by the thickness of the bands in the Circos diagram, the following features yielded the best subset for the classification – Position 1, GG repeat, CC repeat, Position 6, Position 19 and Position 10, in sequence of their relative importance. These features were prioritized to construct the optimal feature subset for miRSEQ and performance measures were carried out which yielded a cv-rate of 91.15% and MCC of 0.803. Model generation and performance estimation were carried out with the training set (only validated miR sequences) with a 10-fold cross validation method (Table 1
                     
                     ). The model generated was used on an unseen test set for a primary prediction of the association of those miRs with cancer.

For the second classifier miRINT, the choice of features were initially centered around the results of the hybridization – number of unpaired bases, Watson–Crick and non-Watson–Crick base pairing in and around the seed region, to name a few. The generated model had a very poor performance with low cv-rate (<40%). Addition of normalized base pairing and normalized free energy features raised the total number of features to 34 for miRINT and showed a marked improvement in the performance of the classifier, but not to expected levels.

It was therefore, decided to have different models for hybridization structures with different numbers of seed formation. For each of the different classes, the method of ranking by F-score and prioritization (as with miRSEQ) was carried out to achieve three different optimal feature subsets. As with miRSEQ, the highest ranked feature was not exclusive, but considered in conjunction with other features as well during the construction of the optimal feature set. Precaution was taken to utilize only the non-redundant informative features for model construction. This improved the performance of all the three models of the classifier with good cv-rate of 92.19% for single seed (MCC 0.821), 89.54% for two seed (MCC 0.765) and 87.61% for three seed (MCC 0.722) hybrids. The effect of number of features versus the accuracy measurement is given in the graph for all three models (Fig. 4
                     ). Feature selection not only improved the classification but also optimized the total time taken for training the model. The resulting classifier model not only predicts the association of a miRNA with cancer, but also gives an output about that association with either a tumor suppressor gene or an oncogene. Performance measurement carried out on the independent test dataset for miRINT is shown in Table 2
                     .

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Identifying miR involvement in cancer is a major obstacle for researchers striving to understand the basis of the disease and to generate new therapies against particular cancer types. miRNAs regulate the molecular pathways in cancer by either upregulating or downregulating various oncogenes and tumor suppressors, and sometimes acting as oncogenes themselves. The functional annotation of miRNAs in cancer is still a painstaking process, though cancer therapies using miRNA has been picking up lately. So, in an attempt to aid the cancer biologist, we employed a support vector machine based binary classifier system to predict a miR associated with cancer.

The tool described in this study is based on the experimentally annotated interactions of a miRNA when bound to a particular mRNA only. Since either the oncogene or TSG may switch invariantly between each other depending on the cell stimuli, the tool considers a training set with experimentally validated data only. Cross verification performed on test datasets with our classification model proved to be consistent with experimentally validated data.

During the initial training process, although a number of features have been extracted and used, performance improved only after systematic ranking and prioritization were introduced. Of these features, some again could be used to discriminate binding against oncogenes and TSG while the rest, in combination with the above features boosted the discrimination. Initial classification process was quite complex mainly due to the unique behavior of miR:mRNA interactions. So in order to suppress the complexity, we considered features both from within and outside the seed regions. Features extracted outside the seed region along with several site specific features provided quite a good classification performance. With the available training datasets, the tool performed satisfactorily and prediction performance should improve as the number of experimentally validated data increases. Further work involving a multiple algorithm based model (apart from SVM), in order to utilize all the informative features extracted from the validated dataset is being undertaken to check for better performance efficiency.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The authors wish to thank Dr. Ranjit Prasad Bahadur, Indian Institute of Technology – Kharagpur, India for his initial assistance in machine learning approaches. Ram K. was supported by a scholarship from Council of Scientific Research and Industrial Research, Govt. of India.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2015.01.007.

The following are Supplementary data to this article:
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

