@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Predicting functional regulatory SNPs in the human antimicrobial peptide genes DEFB1 and CAMP in tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           10 SNPs in DEFB1 and CAMP modify the TFBS for 24 TFs related to HIV/AIDS and TB.


                        
                        
                           
                           We introduce the homotypic redundancy weight factor (HWF) to assess rSNP impacts.


                        
                        
                           
                           Our algorithm has 53% sensitivity and 84.6% specificity to detect functional rSNPs.


                        
                        
                           
                           Future ENCODE and 1000 genomes project releases will improve the proposed algorithm.


                        
                        
                           
                           This algorithm could be useful to probe design and personalized medicine.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Regulatory single nucleotide polymorphisms (rSNP)

Tuberculosis

HIV/AIDS

Antimicrobial peptide

Defensins

Cathelicidin LL-37

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs) within gene promoter region or enhancers can modify the transcription rate of genes related to complex diseases. These SNPs can be called regulatory SNPs (rSNPs). Data compiled from recent projects, such as the 1000 Genomes Project and ENCODE, has revealed essential information used to perform in silico prediction of the molecular and biological repercussions of SNPs within TFBS. However, most of these studies are very limited, as they only analyze SNPs in coding regions or when applied to promoters, and do not integrate essential biological data like TFBSs, expression profiles, pathway analysis, homotypic redundancy (number of TFBSs for the same TF in a region), chromatin accessibility and others, which could lead to a more accurate prediction. Our aim was to integrate different data in a biologically coherent method to analyze the proximal promoter regions of two antimicrobial peptide genes, DEFB1 and CAMP, that are associated with tuberculosis (TB) and HIV/AIDS. We predicted SNPs within the promoter regions that are more likely to interact with transcription factors (TFs). We also assessed the impact of homotypic redundancy using a novel approach called the homotypic redundancy weight factor (HWF). Our results identified 10 SNPs, which putatively modify the binding affinity of 24 TFs previously identified as related to TB and HIV/AIDS expression profiles (e.g. KLF5, CEBPA and NFKB1 for TB; FOXP2, BRCA1, CEBPB, CREB1, EBF1 and ZNF354C for HIV/AIDS; and RUNX2, HIF1A, JUN/AP-1, NR4A2, EGR1 for both diseases). Validating with the OregAnno database and cell-specific functional/non functional SNPs from additional 13 genes, our algorithm performed 53% sensitivity and 84.6% specificity to detect functional rSNPs using the DNAseI-HUP database. We are proposing our algorithm as a novel in silico method to detect true functional rSNPs in antimicrobial peptide genes. With further improvement, this novel method could be applied to other promoters in order to design probes and to discover new drug targets for complex diseases.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Tuberculosis (TB) is mainly a pulmonary infection caused by the Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex (MTC) and around one third of the global population carry the bacilli in a latent state. In 2012, 8.6 million people developed the disease and 1.3 million died from TB (including 320,000 deaths with HIV co-infection) (World Health Organization, 2013). The TB activation route is not yet well understood (O’Garra, 2013) because there are several factors that could alter a person’s susceptibility to MTC infection. These factors could be genetic, or the host could have a co-infection of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) on its progressed stage, the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). The HIV infects CD4+cells like T cells and macrophages diminishing or nullifying the host’s immune activity. Genetic susceptibility to a disease can be originated by variations (e.g. Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms, SNPs) that alter normal gene expression involved in the pathogenesis of the disease or the host’s defense (e.g. host’s immune response genes).

Human β-defensin 1 (hBD-1) and cathelicidin LL-37 (peptidic products of DEFB1 and CAMP genes respectively) are antimicrobial peptides (APs), which are essential components of the innate immune response. The induction of LL-37 has been reported as a response to the defense against MTC (Li et al., 2012; Liu et al., 2006, 2007; Méndez-Samperio et al., 2008) by enhancing the autophagy (Yuk et al., 2009, Campbell et al., 2012) and the phagolysosome maturation (Fabri et al., 2011; Hmama et al., 2004; Realegeno and Modlin 2011; Sonawane et al., 2011) in monocytes/macrophages. LL-37 also takes on role in the defense against HIV by the induction of autophagy (Campbell et al., 2012) and inhibits HIV reverse transcriptase (Wong et al., 2011). Despite the discovery of several regulators of the CAMP gene (Gombart et al., 2005; Kida et al., 2006; Termén et al., 2008), none of them have been directly found disrupted by a SNP in its binding site or associated to a disease progression. The hBD-1 shows in vitro activity against TB (Fattorini et al., 2004), induction in M. bovis infection (Zhu et al., 2003) and suppressive activity against HIV and increases RANTES chemokine release (Sun et al., 2005), and yet it is still not clear which TFs activate the gene. SNPs in the DEFB1 promoter region have been shown to be associated to several diseases (Prado Montes de Oca et al., 2010), including TB (López Campos et al., 2014) and HIV (Estrada Aguirre et al., 2014; Freguja et al., 2012). It has been hypothesized that elicitors of this gene could potentially be used in preventing HIV/AIDS and TB, among other diseases (Prado Montes de Oca, 2013).

Many efforts have been made, usually in the context of genetic association studies, to associate SNPs to TB (López Campos et al., 2014; Png et al., 2012; Thye et al., 2010, 2012 
                     Png et al., 2012; Thye et al., 2010, 2012) and HIV infection or AIDS (Fellay et al., 2009; Le Clerc et al., 2009; Parkes et al., 2013; Santa Marta et al., 2013). However, few of these studies propose a biological mechanism involved in the susceptibility because many of them are limited to performing GWAS, which are based, depending on the platform, on tag SNPs from the HapMap or on an average base pair distance from SNP to SNP to “cover” the genome. The candidate gene approach starts from a plausible biological/molecular assumption, which is the approach taken in this paper.

Most SNPs in the human genome are located in non-transcribed regions, and some of these are within regulatory elements, either promoters or enhancers, affecting the binding ability of transcription factors (TFs) to DNA. These polymorphisms in regulatory elements (also called rSNPs), through a change in the gene expression level, could cause phenotype alterations and diseases or susceptibility to diseases such as hemophilia and familiar hypercholesterolemia among many others (Bryzgalov et al., 2013; Haraksingh and Snyder 2013; Kasowski et al., 2010). For this reason, the genetic factors involved in complex diseases have recently pointed in the direction of rSNPs analysis, besides those involved in changing the amino acids in the gene product. Recent projects such as the 1000 Genomes Project (1kGP) (Abecasis et al., 2012) attempt to systematically map genome-wide variants, while the ENCODE Project database’s (Bernstein et al., 2012) main aim is to find DNA functional elements in the human genome. These have spurred a scientific trend for creating algorithms that select rSNPs and quantify their functional impact (Lower et al., 2013; Chen et al., 2014; Bryzgalov et al., 2013; Li et al., 2013; Macintyre et al., 2010; Manke et al., 2010; Schaub et al., 2012, Teng et al., 2012; Ward and Kellis 2012; Holm et al., 2010). There are several rSNP databases (Guo et al., 2014; Ning et al., 2014; Boyle et al., 2012) which could have an application in diagnostics and personalized medicine. Nevertheless, it is still very challenging to predict phenotype from in silico analysis due to the high number of genetic and environmental factors involved in a disease (Cline and Karchin 2011; Fernald et al., 2011). More recent reviews on rSNPs can be found in (Li et al., 2015; Mathelier et al., 2015).

There are many pitfalls and limitations from the existing algorithms and databases for achieving an accurate prediction of the transcription regulation: (1) the disease-associated SNPs in GWAS datasets (Bryzgalov et al., 2013; Li et al., 2013; Schaub et al., 2012; Teng et al., 2012; Ward and Kellis 2012) may not be in fact causal, since its selection is due to the linkage to other causal SNPs (Levo and Segal, 2014); (2) chromatin accessibility datasets lack many specific cell lines (Bryzgalov et al., 2013; Macintyre et al., 2010; Manke et al., 2010; Teng et al., 2012) or are limited in their use (Boyle et al., 2012; Li et al., 2013; Schaub et al., 2012; Ward and Kellis, 2012); (3) there are few resources integrating genetic variant databases and expression profile information (Yang et al., 2010; Holm et al., 2010), though there is a recent effort in providing tissue-specific gene expression and genotype information (GTEx Consortium, 2015); and (4) the absence of the quantification of the impact of multiple TFBSs of the same TF in the regulatory region (also called homotypic redundancy) (Boyle et al., 2012; Bryzgalov et al., 2013; Macintyre et al., 2010; Schaub et al., 2012; Teng et al., 2012; Ward and Kellis, 2012), which is an important feature in the regulation of gene expression (Gotea et al., 2010; Spivakov et al., 2012). This is because it has been suggested that the more TFBSs for a single TF in the same region, the less impact a single TFBS perturbation will have (Sharon et al., 2012; Smith et al., 2013). This is based on recent work that describes a close relationship between the quantity of homotypic TFBSs and gene expression (Sharon et al., 2012; Smith et al., 2013).

In the present work we introduce an in silico method to assess the impact of SNPs in promoter TFBSs in DEFB1 and CAMP, two genes that are relevant to TB and HIV/AIDS. To select SNPs whose variants may affect TFs binding, we coherently integrated information from the UCSC Genome Browser (Meyer et al., 2013), ENSEMBL (Flicek et al., 2013), 1kGP database (Abecasis et al., 2012), chromatin accessibility (cell line-specific) databases from the ENCODE (Bernstein et al., 2012), Position Frequency Matrices (PFMs) from JASPAR CORE database (JCD) (Mathelier et al., 2014), and expression data from the Gene Expression Atlas (GXA) (Kapushesky et al., 2012), using a 6-step filtering method. The resultant TF-SNP interactions were prioritized using the homotypic redundancy weight factor (HWF), a term coined by our group that involves the quantification of homotypic redundancy factor (more detail in the methods section). The TB and HIV/AIDS infection pathways were obtained from the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) (Kanehisa et al., 2012) and the REACTOME project (Vastrik et al., 2007). The filtering process was partially implemented in MATLAB® (R2010b).

The novelty of our method involves performing a hypothesis-generating analysis of the impact and mechanism of a rSNP in promoters in a specific disease using relevant tissue/cell line accessibility database (ENCODE) (nucleosome-depleted regions and DNase accessible regions) and the resultant TFs-rSNP interactions are ranked by the value of HWF.

@&#METHODS@&#

Our goal was to apply our method to predict the impact on TB and HIV/AIDS infection and progression pathways regarding the presence of rSNPs in the promoter of the human AP genes DEFB1 and CAMP. We processed in silico biological information such as positions and allelic frequencies of SNPs, chromatin accessibility, PFMs, homotypic redundancy values, gene expression profiles and interaction pathways. To integrate this information, we designed a filtering method to select putatively functional and accessible SNPs that diminish TF-binding and thus affecting the phenotype in the selected genes (See Fig. 1
                     ).

We selected annotated SNPs (dbSNP build 138) (Sherry et al., 2001) in the 1000 Genomes Project (1kGP)(Abecasis et al., 2012) that are present in the proximal promoter (−2Kb to the transcription start site, GRCh37/hg19 assembly) of the DEFB1 and CAMP genes and with at least 1% in the minor allele frequency (common SNPs) in the averaged “all populations” (Fig. 1, step 1). From the latter SNP list, we selected those within an open chromatin region using two different chromatin accessibility ENCODE datasets: (a) the narrow peaks or hotspots of databases that uses DNaseI (hypersensitive sites, digital genomic footprinting and hypersensitivity by digital DNaseI) and FAIRE (formaldehyde-assisted isolation of regulatory elements) and (b) the DNaseI Hypersensitivity Uniform Peaks (DNaseI HUP) from the ENCODE Analysis Working Group (AWG) methods (See Supplementary information) (Fig. 1, step 2). The latter set is considered to be more restrictive than the first, because it integrates the DNaseI Hypersensitive sites (DH) data from Duke University (DU) and the University of Washington (UW) using the “narrow Peaks” (False Discovery Rate 1% peaks) algorithm. Thus we considered DNaseI HUP more reliable than the DNaseI and FAIRE datasets. For the latter filtering analysis, we included only the cell lines relevant to TB and HIV/AIDS in the ENCODE data: HL60 (neutrophils), CD14+ (macrophages), TH1 (lymphocytes), and A549 (transformed lung epithelial cells) for TB; and the same minus A549 for HIV/AIDS. If a SNP was in an open region for at least one of these sets of experiments and in at least one of the cell lines previously described, it is selected for further analysis, otherwise it was discarded. The resulting SNPs (3 and 9 SNPs in CAMP and DEFB1 promoters respectively) were considered as common and open (Fig. 1, step 2).

The JCD has 126 TF PFMs from H. sapiens obtained from either SELEX experiments or experimentally determined TFBSs of regulatory elements and high throughput techniques. Using this database, we used the algorithm presented in Wasserman and Sandelin (2004) (See Supplementary information) and looked for putative TFBSs in the SNP regions previously selected and obtained a relative binding score (RBS) for each putative TFBS using a uniform background and pseudocount value of 1 according to Nishida et al. (2009) performance test. Only putative TFBSs that had RBS≥0.8 in the major allele (RBS
                           M
                        ) were selected as binding TFs and with a p-value ≤0.05 (Student’s t-test on the null hypothesis of the list of RBSs above the threshold is equal that those who did not) (Fig. 1, step 3 and table S1 from Supplementary information).

We assessed the impact of the minor allele by obtaining the RBS using the minor allele (RBS
                           m
                        ) and obtained its difference from the RBS
                           M
                        . We selected those whose RBS differences were significant considering that the difference between the RBSs (major and minor allele) is equal to or higher than 10% of the RBS
                           M
                         (Fig. 1, step 4) in the following equation inspired by Bryzgalov et al. (2013): ΔRBS=RBS
                           M
                           −
                        RBS
                           m
                           ≥
                        0.1 (RBS
                           M
                        ) (p-value ≤0.05, student’s t-test on the null hypothesis of the list of ΔRBS above the threshold is equal that those who did not). Note that RBS
                           M
                        
                        >RBS
                           m
                        , since we were looking for a SNP that reduce the binding strength, not the opposite. This filter results in a TF-rSNP interactions list.

The relative gene expression of TFs genes (mRNA levels compared with control conditions) whose TFBS were negatively impacted with SNPs were analyzed in the GXA database (Kapushesky et al., 2012) in order to decrease the false positive rate and to find associations to TB and HIV/AIDS. Those TFs-rSNP interactions without significant differences in the TF expression were discarded (Fig. 1, step 5) (see the discussion section for a deeper explanation of this step). This step resulted in 3 and 7 SNPs for CAMP and DEFB1 promoters respectively.

We obtained the homotypic redundancy value for each selected TF by finding all putative TFBS (RBS≥0.8) within the open promoter regions for the genes. We did not solely use this to filter SNPs and prioritize the TF-SNPs interactions (Fig. 1, step 6); we also defined homotypic redundancy weight factor (HWF) by HWF=1/HR, where HR is simply the number of TFBS for a given TF, inspired by Gotea et al. (2010) and Spivakov et al. (2012). We assume that the more TFBS for a TF, the less impact of the SNP within one TFBS, according to the work of Sharon et al. (2012) and Smith et al. (2013). Similarly, the fewer number of TFBS for a given TF, the more important the SNPs within one TFBS. Some genes have clusters of TFBSs in its promoters as a mechanism for noise control and robustness of the regulatory network. We analyzed the relevance of the TFs obtained in pathway databases such as the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) (Kanehisa and Goto, 2000), REACTOME (Croft et al., 2014), as well as in the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim/) catalog.

To assess the performance of our algorithm we used ORegAnno (Griffith et al., 2008), a database with 141 true positives rSNPs and 1 rSNP from literature (Gazzoli and Kolodner, 2003) including all the available ENCODE cell lines for the analysis. We selected only those rSNPs within the proximal promoter of a gene. For negative controls we analyzed 13 true negative rSNPs from literature (Fairfax et al., 2012, 2014; Raj et al., 2014; Ye et al., 2014) (see Tables S2 and S3 from supplementary information). Due to lack of availability, these rSNPs were not located in proximal promoters. Furthermore, these rSNPs were tested in the cell line where literature proved true negativity. This validation was performed using the same thresholds as in the DEFB1 and CAMP analysis.

@&#RESULTS@&#

To predict the putative impact of SNPs in the promoters of DEFB1 and CAMP on TB and HIV/AIDS, it is necessary to integrate multiple biological information in a coherent method such as in the one previously described. The common (judged by allele frequency) and open (judged by chromatin accessibility) SNP selection was done from the UCSC Genome Browser web access. The PFMs of JCD were imported in MATLAB® along with the SNP selection and its flanking sequences using the method previously described. The TF differential expression was assessed using the GXA web access. The homotypic redundancy was obtained by using a JASPAR sequence analysis web tool, which finds putative TFBSs in a sequence input query (www.jaspar.binf.ku.dk). We used only the open promoter sequence (all databases previously mentioned) and the HWF obtained using the equation explained in the Section 2. For the TF interpretation, mechanism hypothesis and discussion we used a pathway interaction analysis executed manually at KEGG and REACTOME web platforms and in the OMIM catalog.

In Table 1
                      we present the results for the promoter analysis of DEFB1 and CAMP. We present the TFs and SNPs associated to a TFBS, the cell lines in which the SNP is accessible, the RBS
                        M
                      and ΔRBS.

In Fig. 2
                      we present the TFs that are associated with TB and/or HIV/AIDS. Note that ZNF354C, EGR1 and NFKB1 are present in both of the promoters. Only relevant TF results are extended in the following paragraph.

We performed a search for the HWF within the open chromatin promoter region for the four cell lines previously specified in the DNaseI and FAIRE methods (less restrictive). We obtained HWF to rank the putative impact of a SNP in one of the TFBSs of a TF (Table 2
                     ).

CREB1 has a putative TFBS with RBS
                        M
                     
                     =0.86 in DEFB1 open promoter (high confidence) and has a SNP within the TFBS that significantly affects the interaction with a ΔRBS=0.13. It has the highest HWF (0.5), which increases the importance of the SNP. It is down-regulated in AIDS infected T cells (Li et al., 2009) and has a role in the inhibition of antigen presentation during TB infection. In addition, it has a role in the mitogen activated protein kinases (MAPK) and in the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) signaling pathways. It has been identified as an inductor of the JUN gene and thus, the cell cycle progression (Barton et al., 1996).

JUN (or AP-1) has a TFBS in DEFB1 open promoter (high confidence) significantly affected by a SNPs (ΔRBS=0.1) with a HWF=0.25, which is relatively high. It is involved directly in the HIV infection pathway and in the TNF, MAPK, toll-like receptors (TLRs), T cell and B cell signaling pathways. It is also down-regulated in lymphatic tissue from HIV infected patients (Li et al., 2009).

Nuclear factor (NF)-κB showed five TFBSs within the DEFB1 open promoter (HWF=0.2). One of them is significantly affected by a SNP (ΔRBS=0.12). It also showed a TFBS in the promoter of CAMP significantly affected by a SNP (ΔRBS=0.125) with a low HWF (0.05). It showed up-regulation during MTB infection in macrophages and dendritic cells (Tailleux et al., 2008). It has a role in the TLR, MAPK, TNF, T cell, B cell and chemokine signaling pathways as well as in the TB infection pathway.

BRCA1 showed 17 TFBSs in the DEFB1 open promoter (HWF=0.059). One of them is significantly affected by a SNP (ΔRBS=0.156) in a high confidence open region. BRCA1 showed up-regulation in T cells during acute and early HIV infection (Hyrcza et al., 2007; Li et al., 2009). It was not detected in a pathway related to TB.

HIF1A::ARNT heterodimer showed 10 TFBS in CAMP open promoter (HWF=0.1), two of which showed a SNP within that significantly affects the binding affinity (ΔRBS=0.16 in both cases) in a high confidence open region. HIF1A was down-regulated in mononuclear cells infected with HIV (Ockenhouse et al., 2005) and the component gene of HIF1A, ARNT showed down-regulation in asymptomatic HIV infection in T cells (Li et al., 2009) and up-regulation in dendritic cells and macrophages stimulated with MTB (Tailleux et al., 2008).

The CEBPB TF has a TFBS within the DEFB1 open promoter region that is significantly affected by a SNP (ΔRBS=0.11) with a low HWF (0.11). It shows down-regulation in HIV seropositive mononuclear cells (Ockenhouse et al., 2005) and it has a role in the TNF signaling pathway and in TB infection pathways.

To assess the performance of our algorithm we used 15 true positive rSNPs (14 annotated in ORegAnno and one from literature) and 13 true negative rSNPs from literature. We found 8 true positives using the DNaseI-HUP database (sensitivity=53.3%; specificity=84.6%) and 9 true positives using the DNaseI and FAIRE datasets (sensitivity=60%; specificity=61.5%) in all cell lines.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The rapid progress in biotechnology and the need for a better understanding of complex diseases towards personalized medicine has encouraged global projects to obtain large amounts of genomic data (several petabytes), such as ENCODE, 1kGP, and data repositories freely available such as ENSEMBL, JCD, GXA, REACTOME, UCSC GB, KEGG, NCBI, among many others.

In this work, we propose an in silico method to assess the putative impact of rSNPs within TFBSs in the proximal promoters of DEFB1 and CAMP that yield a molecular susceptibility to TB and/or HIV/AIDS. To achieve our goal, we integrated several databases in a coherent manner. Additionally, our pipeline could be applied to other genes and diseases. Currently we are verifying our results with rSNPs databases/literature and with in vitro validation.

This prediction method has advantages compared to others due to several reasons. First, the Position Frequency Matrices used for TFBS prediction (Stormo, 2000, 2013) are obtained mainly by in vivo methodologies (Mathelier et al., 2014), instead of using Protein Binding Microarrays (PBMs) (Roider et al., 2007), which are considered controversial because they lack the cell environment factors (Levo and Segal, 2014). In our method, we avoid use of datasets that are abundant with pitfalls and could potentially lead to misinterpretation. For example, GWAS hits may not be causal variants of diseases and their inclusion in a database may be due to a linkage disequilibrium with the actual causal variants or due to the artificial p-value threshold used (Bryzgalov et al., 2013; Li et al., 2013; Schaub et al., 2012; Teng et al., 2012; Ward and Kellis, 2012). Instead, we used a candidate gene approach, using specific chromatin accessibility datasets in the relevant cell lines of the analyzed diseases. This will decrease the false positives due to the fact that TFs preferentially occupy regions with low nucleosome occupancy (Levo and Segal, 2014). Most other algorithms do not consider chromatin accessibility information in studying TFBSs (Bryzgalov et al., 2013; Macintyre et al., 2010; Manke et al., 2010; Teng et al., 2012) or it is limited (Boyle et al., 2012; Li et al., 2013; Schaub et al., 2012; Ward and Kellis 2012). Furthermore, our method incorporates the homotypic redundancy information, which has been suggested as essential for rSNPs interpretation of the expression impact (Gotea et al., 2010; Spivakov et al., 2012) as explained in Fig. 3
                     . Despite Manke et al. (2010) algorithm which assesses TF affinities within SNP flanking regions (a similar concept of homotypic redundancy), it ignores chromatin accessibility and is not specific to promoter region. We selected only those TFs whose genes exhibit up- or down-regulation in TB and HIV/AIDS infected cells because it decreases the false positive rate and this feature could enhance the effect of the SNP. For example, if a TF is down-regulated (its concentration is decreased) in disease, the binding of TFs in the TFBS cluster will be affected and the impact of the SNP could be intensified as it is explained in the Fig. 3.

Focusing on candidate genes and plausible biological mechanisms will pave the way for personalized medicine in future research. The reason for using a ΔRBS filter of 10% of the RBS
                        M
                     , which is more restrictive than other works (Bryzgalov et al., 2013), is because we are applying the pipeline to specific disease-related genes where we assume that SNPs must surpass a higher threshold to cause clinical impact besides being functional.

Strikingly, many of the TFs predicted by our method as putative regulators of CAMP and DEFB1 APs have already been associated to the immune response and/or the analyzed diseases. For example, CREB1 (Wen et al., 2010), STAT3 (Olszak et al., 2014; Shui et al., 2012), HIF1A (Dang et al., 2011; Peyssonnaux et al., 2008; Kelly et al., 2013), CEBPA (Di Stefano et al., 2014), JUN (Gao et al., 2004; Glasmacher et al., 2012), NFKB1 (Prado Montes de Oca et al., 2009) and EBF1 (Banerjee et al., 2013) have been associated to innate or adaptive immune responses. Specifically, CREB1 (Agarwal et al., 2009), NFKB1 (Chan and Greene, 2011; Liu et al., 2010; López Campos et al., 2014), CEBPB (Kinoshita and Taguchi, 2008) and BRCA1 (Xu et al., 2013) have already been reported to play a role in the etiology of TB and/or HIV/AIDS.

In particular, some previous works have related CREB1 to LL-37 induction (Chakraborty et al., 2009) and as a precursor of the major histocompatibility complex class II genes (Fontes et al., 1999). Our results suggest that CREB1 also regulate DEFB1 expression. Previously, our group (López Campos et al., 2014) hypothesized that a polymorphism in the CAMP 5′-UTR, potentially related to extrapulmonary TB, diminishes the TFBS affinity to HIF1β::ARNT, although we identified two additional TFBS affected by SNPs in the promoter region of CAMP gene. Peyssonnaux et al. (2008) concluded that HIF1A regulates several key immune effectors including CRAMP (mouse homolog of cathelicidin LL-37) during a bacterial infection that our results support and propose SNPs that could interfere with a putative TFBS. Kelly et al. (2013) found that HIF1A has a fundamental role in the constitutive expression of DEFB1 in intestinal epithelial cells, however, our results did not reveal TFBSs affected by SNP within this region in the analyzed cells.

Based on our results and previous works we can hypothesize that CREB1, BRCA1, CEBPB, JUN and NFKB1 are regulators of the DEFB1 gene, and that a SNP in one of their TFBS could diminish their affinity and modify its transcription rate. This hypothesis is in concordance with the work of Sun et al. (2006) and Prado Montes de Oca et al. (2009), that an altered TFBS of NFKB1 in DEFB1 makes the host more susceptible to TB and or HIV/AIDS. In a similar way, HIF1A::ARNT heterodimer and NFKB1could regulate the CAMP gene and a SNP in their TFBS could alter the transcription rate of CAMP.

The rest of the TFs in Fig. 2 needs to be further investigated, as they might have an unknown connection to the CAMP and DEFB1 genes due to their association to the corresponding diseases according to GXA database and our results.

Some of our putative TFBSs affected by SNPs are in concordance with the ENCODE ChIP-seq database of TFBSs, as the case of CEBPB, MAX and JUN. Some others, as STAT3, CEBPB, JUN and MAX are in concordance with the ‘Txn Factor ChIP’ and ‘Txn Factor ChIP V2’. However, we are not using this database as a filtering step because of the limitations in the TFs and cell line data available at the moment. We might be able to use the ENCODE tracks in the near future when more data is available. Rather, we use JASPAR TF models because they allows us to rank our results and confer flexibility to the algorithm given that users can use the threshold they need. Furthermore, only 56 TFs are shared in both Txn Factor and JASPAR databases.

It is quite interesting that 9/24 (37.5%) of our resulting TFs were found to be involved in both diseases. This could be explained by the shared signaling pathways involved in both diseases, as those of the TNF, T and B cells receptors as well as TLR receptors. Nevertheless, this overlap is higher than the GXA gene overlap between the “HIV-1 infection” genes and the “tuberculosis extract” genes that presented 11.7% (896/7682) overlapping. This could be explained since in the former, the universe is bigger (including not only TFs genes) and the differences between signaling pathways of the diseases are greater than the similarities. In the latter case the universe is smaller (only including TFs) and furthermore, the showed Venn diagram it is a subset of TFs where common SNPs alters their TFBSs in a region with chromatin accessibility in a cell line/tissue relevant for the analyzed disease. Additionally, only 3/24 of the TFs were present in both promoters, 5/24 were exclusive to CAMP and 16/24 were exclusive to DEFB1. These results are in concordance with the facts that the DEFB1 promoter is more variable than the CAMP promoter and that each gene has exclusive pathways as demonstrated by the fact that different antimicrobial peptides elicitors/inhibitors (APEs and APIs) up/down-regulate their expression using different signaling pathways (Prado Montes de Oca, 2013).

As a limitation on our method, many assumptions are made in our PWM-TFBS binding scores, (1) consensus sequences have a fixed length, (2) every TF has only one binding pattern for all cell lines; (3) every position in a PWM is independent of the neighboring positions (Stormo, 2000). Arvey et al., 2012 obtained PWMs using a support vector machine (SVM) algorithm and demonstrated that some TFs have different cell line-specific binding patterns. Actual binding pattern data sets must migrate to a specific cell line data to obtain more accurate predictions; (4) the HWF lacks a TSS-TFBS distance factor, because a general trend of a direct relationship between the distance and the expression rate of genes has been described (Sharon et al., 2012). However, we are currently working on a better quantification of the homotypic redundancy clusters of TFBSs. Recent work demonstrated that histone modification can be predicted from genome wide-TF binding (Benveniste et al., 2014), feature that should be integrated in future work for predicting SNP impact.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

Despite not being able to verify these results in vivo, because of little information regarding the same SNPs in our approach (scarce SNPs coincidences in other reports and patents), our results suggest that our algorithm can perform useful predictions on the TFBSs affected by rSNPs due to the HIV/AIDS and TB relevant TFs obtained according to literature. Our group is already working on more robust in silico and in vitro validation methods to assess the efficacy of the algorithm and to obtain a better understanding of the rSNPs-TFs-genes relationship.

The prediction of gene expression based on DNA sequence and structure involves many factors (reviewed in Levo and Segal, 2014). These include the nucleotide sequence (TFs and enhancers binding sites, their affinity strength and flanking regions), chromosome architecture (tissue and cell cycle-dependent nucleosome occupancy, DNA groove width, rotational parameters, etc.), cofactor neighboring binding sites (homo- and heterotypic clusters) as well as TF concentration among others. This is an overwhelming quantity of factors, and most information is not yet available. However, it is imperative to use as many confident and available datasets from different layers of human gene regulation in order to predict the expression levels/phenotype under specific biological conditions/diseases and to create powerful and clever algorithms and methods to integrate such data. As an example, we propose a novel factor called homotypic redundancy weight factor (HWF) that attempts to assess the influence of a putative rSNP relative to the number of TFBSs binding sites in proximal promoters.

In sum, we propose a novel in silico method to detect true functional rSNPs in antimicrobial peptide genes. Further analysis and in vitro/in vivo validation of the method is required before designing first-in-class drugs as antimicrobial peptide elicitors and inhibitors (APEs and APIs) to restore deficient signaling pathways depending on the genetic and epigenetic variants of TB and HIV/AIDS patients. With further improvement, this novel method might be applied to other promoters in order to design useful probes for the clinic and to discover new drug targets for complex diseases.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This work was supported by National Council of Science and Technology (CONACYT Mexico) grants [Basic Science SEP/CONACYT CB-2008-01-105813, CB-2014-01-222618 and Mixed Funds CONACYT/AGS-2010-C02-143938]. AFSF received a M. Sc. scholarship from Interinstitutional Posgrade in Science and technology (PICYT), CONACYT. EPM and EJHL are National Researchers System Level I (SNII) CONACYT fellows. We are pursuing a patent for the Python-developed software to predict functional rSNPs with Prado Montes de Oca et al. as inventors.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2015.09.002.

The following are Supplementary data to this article:
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

