@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Halogen bonding in complexes of proteins and non-natural amino acids

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We have analyzed the influence of halogen bonding to the stability of complexes of proteins and non-natural amino acids.


                        
                        
                           
                           We employed conservation pattern, structural motif, secondary structure, and solvent accessibility calculation.


                        
                        
                           
                           The roles of key residues and geometry of interactions are also be elucidated.


                        
                        
                           
                           Results from this study will provide valuable insight into rational drug design.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Halogen bonding

Proteins

Non-natural amino acids

Complexes

Stabilization centers

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  In this work, we have analyzed the influence of halogen bonding to the stability of 44 complexes of proteins and non-natural amino acids. Fluorine- and chlorine-containing non-natural amino acids are more prevalent in the dataset, and an even larger number of contacts made by iodine-containing ligands are found. Only few halogen bonds with the hydroxyl oxygens and carboxylate side chains are found in the dataset. Halogen bonds with the nitrogen-containing side chains have higher occurrence than other acceptors. Backbone carbonyl oxygens and nitrogens are to a substantial extent involved in our dataset. We have observed a small percentage of interactions involving water as hydrogen bond donors. Additionally, most of the interacting residues comprising the interfaces also show a great degree of conservation. There is a clear interaction hot spot at distances of 3.5–3.7Å and Θ
                     1 angles of 100–120°. There is also a cluster of contacts featuring short distances (2.6–2.9Å) but only nearly optimal Θ
                     1 angles (140–160°). 51.3% of stabilizing residues are involved in building halogen bonds with the non-natural amino acids. We discovered three types of structural motifs significantly over-represented: beta-turn-ir, beta-turn-il and niche-4r. The halogen-bonding statistics of the dataset do not show any preference for α-helices (36%), β-sheets (36%), or turns/coils (28%) structures. Most of the amino acid residues that were involved in halogen bonds prefer to be in the solvent excluded environment (buried). Furthermore, we have shown that in amino acid–protein complexes halogen atoms can sometimes be involved in hydrogen bonding interactions with hydrogen bonding-donors. The results from this study might be used for the rational design of halogenated ligands as inhibitors and drugs, and in biomolecular engineering.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Supramolecular assemblies, in both the solid state and in solution, rely on a range of weak, noncovalent interactions to hold the constituent molecules together (Anbarasu et al., 2009; Arzhanik et al., 2010; Bissantz et al., 2010; Panigrahi and Desiraju, 2007; Petkau-Milroy and Brunsveld, 2013; Reddy et al., 2008). The most common of these are hydrogen bonding interactions (Steiner, 2002), which are relatively strong and highly directional, and thus they have highly predictable geometries and fine control of the assembly process can be achieved. An alternative interaction that has more recently been exploited as a construction tool in the field of supramolecular chemistry and crystal engineering is the halogen bond (Beale et al., 2013; Erdelyi, 2012; Riley and Hobza, 2011; Wilcken et al., 2013). Halogen atoms usually form a single, covalent bond with one other atom. As a result of this, halogen atoms are typically found on the periphery of a molecule, making them ideally placed for taking part in intermolecular interactions. Despite the fact that halogens have higher electronegativity than carbon, which creates a negative partial charge on halogens in organic molecules, halogens favorably interact with a Lewis base atom, such as oxygen or nitrogen with a lone electron pair (Fig. 1
                     ). This counterintuitive attraction is commonly explained by the existence of a region of positive electrostatic potential (ESP), located on top of the halogen atom (Clark et al., 2007). This region, usually referred to as the σ-hole, is an inherent feature of compounds containing covalently bound halogens; i.e., it is not induced by the interacting partner in a complex. The interaction is typically linear at the (organic) halogen, consistent with maximizing the two main directional attractive contributions to the interaction energy, electrostatics and charge transfer, and minimizing the exchange repulsion, which is also directional (Huber et al., 2013). Its bond strength is similar to that of the hydrogen bond, in the range 1–40kcal/mol. Its strength increases in the order fluorine<chlorine<bromine<iodine (Clark et al., 2007).

Numerous computational and experimental studies have been performed to better understand halogen bonding, and in recent years, there has been an increasing interest in studying halogen bonding in biological systems and drug discovery (Wilcken et al., 2013 and references therein). A large number of pharmaceutical ligands have halogens incorporated into their structures. There are several reasons for this, the most important of which are that halogens tend to increase the membrane permeability of small molecules while also increasing their catabolic stability (Parisini et al., 2011). Protein data bank survey studies done in the past several years have identified many halogen bonds that occur within protein ligand complexes (Auffinger et al., 2004; Lu et al., 2010a). One of the principle findings in these surveys is that most of the halogen bonds in these complexes involved halogens bound to aromatic groups. Halogen bonds involving aromatically bound halogens are generally stronger than those of aliphatic halogens because aromatic moieties have electron withdrawing properties that lead to larger σ-holes. Halogen bonding has found applications in a number of fields including liquid crystals (Prasang et al., 2008), conducting materials (Yamamoto et al., 2008), and structural biology (Auffinger et al., 2004) as well as via supramolecular chemistry in anion recognition (Kilah et al., 2010) and polymerization (Sun et al., 2006).

Amino acids form the building blocks of all proteins. Naturally occurring amino acids are restricted to a few tens of sidechains, even when considering post-translational modifications and rare amino acids such as selenocysteine and pyrrolysine. However, the potential chemical diversity of amino acid sidechains is nearly infinite. Exploiting this diversity by using non-natural sidechains to expand the building blocks of proteins and peptides has recently found widespread applications in biochemistry, protein engineering and drug design. For instance, in a recent study, it was shown that non-natural sidechains dramatically increase the affinity of amyloid fiber inhibitors (Sievers et al., 2011). Similarly, several cyclic and other kinds of modified peptides with non-natural amino acid sidechains have been developed for therapeutics use, such as cilengitide (Burke et al., 2002) or crafilzomib (Parlati et al., 2009). Non-natural sidechains have also been used as independent ligands. For instance, l-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine is a non-natural amino acid used in Parkinson disease treatment (Smith et al., 2012), and 5-hydroxytryptophan (oxitriptan) has been used as an antidepressant (Turner and Blackwell, 2005). In addition to therapeutics use, non-natural sidechains have found many other applications in biochemistry and protein studies (Wang et al., 2009). These include photo-crosslinking amino acids to probe in vivo protein interactions (Ai et al., 2011; Kessler et al., 1999), fluorescent amino acids used as markers of specific proteins (Wang et al., 2006) or phosphorylated amino acid mimetics to probe the effect of post-translational modifications (Lemke et al., 2007).

In this work, we have analyzed the influence of halogen bonds in complexes of proteins and halogen-containing non-natural amino acids. We have focused our study at the interface between proteins and halogen-containing non-natural amino acids and hence the halogen bonds within a protein are not considered. The quantification of such bonds in binary complexes, as well as its in silico prediction, can provide not only insights into the mechanism by which the ligand achieves specificity but also a greater understanding of the binding pocket that will enable more selective drug candidates to be discovered.

@&#METHODOLOGY@&#

For this study we used the molecular and structural database of non-natural sidechains (SwissSidechain) (Gfeller et al., 2013). The SwissSidechain database contains molecular and structural data for 210 non-natural alpha amino acid sidechains, both in l- and d-configurations, in addition to the 20 natural ones. These amino acids have been selected based on two main criteria: first, the presence of non-natural sidechains in publicly available protein structures in the PDB (Protein Data Bank) (Rose et al., 2011). We used the following procedure to select the desired complex structures for further analysis: (1) no theoretical model structures and no NMR structures were accepted; these structures were not included since it was difficult to define the accuracy of the ensemble of structures in terms of displacement that was directly comparable to the X-ray diffraction studies. (2) Only crystal structures with the resolution of 3.0Å or better and a crystallographic R-factor of 25.0% or lower were accepted, and (3) halogen-containing amino acid–protein complexes. To avoid redundancy in our data set, a standalone PISCES package was used to select a single structure with the best resolution in cases where proteins in different complexes had >30% sequence identity (with all other options set to their default) (Wang and Dunbrack, 2005). Using these criteria, we created a dataset of 44 protein–halogen containing amino acid complexes. The PDB IDs are as follows: 1C0L, 1CF0, 1CZI, 1GA1, 1NLU, 1OKW, 1OL2, 1ORW, 1PFV, 1PN3, 1RRV, 1TF9, 1TZM, 1WQ3, 2AG6, 2AKW, 2AR8, 2AXI, 2C5V, 2GV2, 2NW9, 2UUE, 2V7L, 2WDX, 2WHB, 2X1N, 2X68, 2XAD, 2ZP1, 3D39, 3D3V, 3F3C, 3FEA, 3GFD, 3GH8, 3KTJ, 3MG9, 3Q4K, 3Q9I, 3RUL, 3TNZ, 3VFJ, 4EAR, and 4EEC.

If not already present, all hydrogen atoms were added using the program Discovery Studio Visualizer 3.5 (Accelrys Software Inc., 2012). The H-atom positions were then refined, keeping the position of the non-H atoms fixed, using the MMFF94 force field (Halgren, 1996). When multiple alternative conformations of certain residues were present, as indicated by the altLoc field in the PDB file, only the first conformation was considered. All the optimized structures were exported to the hydrogen bond analysis tool (HBAT) for calculation of halogen and hydrogen bonds and their properties (Tiwari and Panigrahi, 2007) with default settings. The positions and geometry of donor and acceptor atoms are shown in Fig. 1. The used criteria for hydrogen bonds are d (H⋯A)≤3.0Å and Θ (DH⋯A)≥90°. Parameters are d, distance between the H atom and the A (acceptor, A=N, O, S) atom; Θ, defined as the angle between the DH bond and the center of the acceptor atom. The geometry of the halogen bond is defined by the d (X⋯Y) distance (≤3.7Å), the Θ
                        1 angle (≥90°) of the Y atom relative to the CX bond, and the Θ
                        2 angle (≥90°) of the halogen relative to the YB bond.

The program HBAT was used for statistical analysis, providing distance–angle distributions as well as furcation and halogen–water interactions.

We computed the conservation of amino acid residues in each protein using the ConSurf server (DeLano, 2002). This server computes the conservation based on the comparison of the sequence of a PDB chain with the proteins deposited in Swiss-Prot (Boeckmann et al., 2003) and finds the ones that are homologous to the PDB sequence. The number of PSI-BLAST iterations and the E-value cutoff used in all similarity searches were 1 and 0.001, respectively. All the sequences that were evolutionary related to each one of the proteins in the dataset were used in the subsequent multiple alignments. Based on these protein sequence alignments the residues are classified into nine categories from highly variable to highly conserved. Residues with a score of 1 are considered to be highly variable and residues with a score of 9 are considered to be highly conserved.

Stabilization centers are the clusters of residues that make cooperative, non-covalent and long-range interactions (Dosztanyi et al., 1997). Thus, they are likely to play an important role in maintaining the stability of protein structures. Residues can be considered as parts of stabilization centers if they are involved in medium- or long-range interactions and if two supporting residues can be selected from their C and N terminal flanking tetrapeptides, which together with the central residues form at least seven out of the nine possible contacts. We used an online server, available at http://www.enzim.hu/scide (Dosztanyi et al., 2003), to analyze the stabilization centers of interaction-forming residues. This server defines the stabilization center based on the following criteria: (1) two residues are in contact if there is at least one heavy atom–atom distance smaller than the sum of their van der Waals radii plus 1Å. (2) A contact is recognized as “long-range” interaction if the interacting residues are at least ten amino acids apart. (3) Two residues form a stabilization center if they are in long-range interaction, and if it is possible to select one–one residues from both flanking tetrapeptides of these two residues that make at least seven contacts between these two triplets (Dosztanyi et al., 2003).

The secondary structure and solvent accessibility of the amino acid residues were among the key factors that were essential for understanding the environmental and structure–function relationship of proteins. Hence, a systematic analysis of each interaction forming a residue was performed based on its location in different secondary structures of complexes of proteins and non-natural amino acids and their solvent accessibility. We used the program DSSP (Kabsch and Sander, 1983) to obtain information about secondary structures and solvent accessibility. The secondary structures have been classified into alpha helix, beta turn, beta strand and coil, as suggested by the DSSP output. Solvent accessibility is the ratio between the solvent accessible surface area of a residue in a 3D structure and in an extended tripeptide conformation. Solvent accessibility was divided into three classes: buried, partially buried, and exposed, indicating respectively; the least, moderate and high accessibility of the amino acid residues to the solvent.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

Using the geometrical criteria described in Section 2, in the Protein Data Bank database (PDB), we found 44 complexes of proteins and halogen-containing non-natural amino acids. We have noticed that most of the complexes are involved in halogen bonding. The quantification of such bonds in binary complexes, as well as its in silico prediction, can provide not only insights into the mechanism by which the ligand achieves specificity but also a greater understanding of the binding pocket that will enable more selective drug candidates to be discovered (Wilcken et al., 2013).

The distribution of halogen bonds, is shown in Table 1
                        , based on data in complex interfaces in our dataset. There were a total of 78 interactions. Thus, on average, every protein forms 1.8 halogen bonds with the non-natural amino acid. Some of the complexes have no halogen bonds, while most of them have several bonds. Some of the complexes have up to 10 halogen bonds (PBD ID code 3GH8).

One of the principle findings in these surveys is that most of the halogen bonds in these complexes involved halogens bound to aromatic groups containing electron withdrawing groups, including structures with multiple halogens on one aromatic ring (Supplementary data). Halogen bonds involving aromatically bound halogens are generally stronger than those of aliphatic halogens because aromatic moieties have electron withdrawing properties that lead to larger σ-holes (Parisini et al., 2011).

Fluorine- and chlorine-containing non-natural amino acids are more prevalent in the dataset (Supplementary data), and an even larger number of contacts made by iodine-containing ligands are found (Table 1). The PDB analysis shows that numerous compounds containing iodine are clustered inside the energy hot spot, indicating close to optimal interactions (Wilcken et al., 2013). Only a few have shorter than optimal contact distances. Larger distances and smaller σ-hole angles are found quite frequently.

Because of the prevalence of side chain halogen bonds in this analysis, we have depicted contacts with different types of side chains separately (Table 1). We evaluated whether the database contains examples of suitable halogen bonds with interaction partners such as (a) the oxygen in serine, threonine, or tyrosine, (b) the carboxylate in aspartate or glutamate, (c) the sulfur in methionine or cysteine, or (d) the nitrogens in histidine, lysine, arginine, asparagine, or glutamine.

Only few halogen bonds with the hydroxyl oxygens and carboxylate side chains are found in the dataset. Nevertheless, there are some examples for fluorine and iodine. On the basis of the anisotropy of the electron density of halogens and the possibility that the hydroxyl functions may donate a hydrogen bond as well, some of these contacts may in fact represent hydrogen bonding rather than halogen bonding. However, competition of halogenated ligands with hydrogen-bond donors, cationic atoms, and solvent molecules (Kumar and Nussinov, 2002) most likely limits the number of effective targetable carboxylate side chains significantly. Halogen bonds with the nitrogen-containing side chains have higher occurrence than other acceptors. Iodine–nitrogen is the most frequent pair involved in halogen bonds. This tendency cannot be explained by higher frequencies of particular amino acid residues. Hence, we suggest that the contacts of iodine–nitrogen pair through halogen bonding are important for the stability of protein–ligand complexes.

Backbone carbonyl oxygens and nitrogens are the primary halogen bond acceptors in proteins (Wilcken et al., 2013). These backbone atoms are to a substantial extent involved in our dataset (Table 1 and Fig. 2
                        ). Interestingly, it has recently been proposed that hydrogen bonds and halogen bonds can be orthogonal to each other (Voth et al., 2009); i.e., they may share a common Lewis base by binding with perpendicular interaction vectors. Within α-helices and β-sheets, backbone carbonyl oxygens accept hydrogen bonds to form stable secondary structures.

The importance of water in biological systems has long been recognized in chemistry and biology communities (Lu et al., 2010b; Parisini et al., 2011). We have observed a small percentage of interactions involving water as hydrogen bond donors, called halogen–water–hydrogen bridge (XWH bridge), that is, one hydrogen bonding (H-bonding) in water-mediated H-bond bridge is replaced by halogen bonding (X-bonding). Although behaving similarly to water-mediated H-bond motif, the XWH bridge usually stands in multifurcated forms and possesses stronger directionality.

In our analysis, we have investigated multiple halogen bonds. The binding pocket of cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (CDK2) in complex with CK4 (4-(2,4-dimethyl-1,3-thiazol-5-yl)-n-[4-(trifluoromethyl)phenyl]pyrimidin-2-amine) from Homo sapiens (PDB ID code 2C5V), as an illustrative example for multiple halogen bonding, is shown in Fig. 2. An example of halogen multiple interactions are fluorine atoms F1B and F8B from CK4 making interactions with Lys89(NZ), HOH2018(O), Asp86(OD2) and Asp86(N-backbone). This type of interaction is marked as furcation. The analysis shows that about 26% of the total halogen bonds in the dataset are involved in the formation of multiple halogen bonds. This conveys that furcation is an inherent characteristic of macromolecular crystal structures (Stojanović et al., 2012). The majority of furcated interactions exhibit longer distances than the simple non-furcated interactions as expected (Dimitrijević et al., 2012).

We used the ConSurf server to compute the conservation score of residues involved in halogen bonding in complexes of proteins and non-natural amino acids. Conservation score is a parameter used to identify the conserved regions in protein. Among the halogen bonding residues 65.8% of them had a conservation score of ≥6, the cutoff value used to identify the stabilizing residues. The highest conservation score of 9 is observed in 18,0% of halogen interacting residues. Additionally, most of the additional residues comprising the interfaces also show a great degree of conservation. Analysis of the conservation patterns of halogen bonding have shown that the multiple interactions (74.2%) have been conserved more than the single interactions (55.1%), and it is considered that structurally conserved residues are important in protein stability and folding (DeLano, 2002).

The charge distribution, commonly described as “δ-hole” and resulting from an electron-deficient outer lobe of a halffilled p orbital on the covalently bonded halogen atom, is responsible for halogen bonding formation. As a result, halogen bonds are highly directional interactions (Huber et al., 2013). Hence, in this work we investigate the interaction geometries of halogen bonds found in our dataset (Fig. 3
                        ).

The analysis of the geometry of the halogen bonds has revealed that the distance (d
                        X⋯Y) value falls into distinct ranges corresponding to the multiple (3.3–3.7Å) and single (2.7–3.2Å) halogen bonds (Fig. 3a). We thus examine the angles Θ
                        1 and Θ
                        2 of halogen bonds as well as the interdependence of distance and Θ
                        1 angle (Fig. 3b–d). With respect to the Θ
                        1 and Θ
                        2 angles, various structural surveys have statistically identified that the Θ
                        1 angle is ideally near 180°, typically greater than 130°. For the Θ
                        2 angle, there are two main possibilities, i.e., about 120° when the interaction of the halogen atoms occurs with the lone pair of the Y atom, and about 90° which occurs when the interaction occurs with the π system of the double bond between Y and R′ (e.g. backbone carbonyl). The single halogen bonds show better linearity and shorter distances compared with multiple interactions. The multiple halogen bonds have variable geometry.

There is a clear interaction hot spot at distances of 3.5–3.7Å and Θ
                        1 angles of 100–120° (Fig. 3d). There is also a cluster of contacts featuring short distances (2.6–2.9Å) but only nearly optimal Θ
                        1 angles (140–160°). The optimal distance for a particular Θ
                        1 angle shifts slightly toward higher distances for smaller Θ
                        1 angles. This trend can be explained by visualizing that the electron-rich belt of the halogen will collide more dramatically with the electronrich areas of the Lewis base when rotating the ligand around the halogen atom at shorter distances. These collisions of negative electrostatic potentials also lead to an increase of the distance below which only repulsive interactions occur at larger deviations from the optimal Θ
                        1 angle of 180°.

It is important to notice that the geometric arrangement of the halogen bonds observed in small molecule–protein complexes sometimes shows non-minor deviations from the “ideal” linearity. These deviations, which are larger than those observed in small molecule systems, are a likely consequence of the geometrical and chemical complexity of biological macromolecules and of the simultaneous optimization of an often very large number of attractive and repulsive contacts between the small molecule and the surrounding amino acids. Moreover, these deviations are usually more pronounced when moving from iodine to fluorine, i.e., they tend to increase as the strength of the halogen bond weakens, as already widely observed in co-crystals of small halogenated molecules (Auffinger et al., 2004; Wilcken et al., 2013).

Stabilization centers are composed of certain clusters of residues, involved in the cooperative long range interaction of proteins that regulate flexibility, rigidity and stability of protein structures. Stabilization centers are important in regulating the turnover of certain proteins by preventing their decay with cooperative long range interactions. The most frequent stabilization center residues are usually found at buried positions and have a hydrophobic or aromatic side-chain, but some polar or charged residues also play an important role in stabilization. The stabilization centers show a significant difference in the composition and in the type of linked secondary structural elements, when compared with the rest of the residues. The performed structural and sequential conservation analysis showed a higher conservation of stabilization centers over protein families (Dosztanyi et al., 1997; Magyar et al., 2005). In addition, sequence and structure motifs have an application in drug design (Craik et al., 2001) when motifs map to active-sites and ligand binding sites.

We have computed the stabilization centers for all halogen bonds forming residues in our database. Fig. 4
                         shows the percentage contribution of the individual amino acid residue which is part of the stabilizing center involved in halogen bonding.

Considering the all halogen bonds forming residues in our database stabilizing residues were found to have one or more stabilization centers, 40 (51.3%) are involved in building halogen bonds with the non-natural amino acids. Most of amino acids which are SC residues are present with around 50%, except Val (100%), Gly (88%), Asp (80%) and Ile (67%). Interestingly, these residues are not abundant amino acids at our dataset, suggesting that these amino acids when part of SC are at non-natural amino acid environment involved in the building of halogen bonds. A similar distribution of amino acids which are part of SC has been previously reported (Dosztanyi et al., 1997). Namely, it is well known (Dosztanyi et al., 1997) that nonpolar amino acids are predominant in SC, especially Ile and Val. Markedly, Lys, Arg, Ser and Tyr were the least abundant amino acids which are stabilizing centers. This could be explained by the fact that these amino acids are involved in various strong and weak hydrogen bonds with ligands and is located in the environment. These observations strongly reveal that these residues can contribute significantly to the structural stability of these proteins in addition to participating in halogen bonding.

We have elucidated the structural motifs of residues responsible for the halogen bonding using the PDBeMotif web interface (Golovin and Henrick, 2008). We discovered three types of structural motifs significantly over-represented in complexes of proteins and non-natural amino acids: beta-turn-ir, beta-turn-il and niche-4r (Supplementary data). It has been shown that these small structural motifs could be involved in protein functions such as determining the conformation of enzyme active sites or binding sites (Golovin and Henrick, 2008; Watson and Milner-White, 2002). Our underlying hypothesis was halogen bond forming residues are probably linked to structural implications.

The propensity of the amino acid residues to favor a particular conformation is well described. Such a conformational preference is not only dependent on the amino acid alone, but also on the local amino acid sequence and environment influences (Chakkaravarthi et al., 2006; Cysewski and Szefler, 2010). In order to obtain the preference and pattern of each halogen bond forming residue in complexes of proteins and non-natural amino acids, we conducted a systematic analysis based on their location in different secondary structures and their solvent accessibility.

Thus, we have analyzed amino acid secondary structure preferences for the whole data set of 44 proteins. Among all interface amino acids, 52% belong to a secondary structure: 25% to helices, 16% to sheets, and 11% to turns/coils. Further, we have analyzed the percentage occurrence of the halogen bonds in a particular secondary structure, irrespective of the amino acid. The halogen-bonding statistics of the dataset do not show any preference for α-helices (36%), β-sheets (36%), or turns/coils (28%) structures.

We have estimated the solvent accessibility of all residues that are involved in halogen bonds with the program DSSP (Kabsch and Sander, 1983). The relation between the amino acid residues in these interactions and solvent accessibility is given in Fig. 5
                        . The solvent accessibility of amino acid residues has been categorized as buried (0–20%), partially buried (20–50%), and exposed (>50%).

Most of the nonpolar amino acid residues that were involved in halogen bonds prefer to be in the solvent excluded environment (buried). The data indicate that the basic amino acid residues (Lys and Arg) prefer to be partially buried when they are involved in a halogen bonds. Considering the Asp residues, 67% of residues are in solvent-buried region whereas the remaining residues are in exposed regions (33%). The polar uncharged amino acid residues Met, Cys, and Tyr prefer to be in the partially buried environment. Therefore, this analysis indicates that the majority of the amino acid residues prefer to involve in halogen bonds only when they are excluded from the solvent. It is quite possible that the competition between the halogen bonds among the amino acid residues and the solvation patterns might contribute to the absence of these interactions in the solvent exposed amino acid residues, because the contribution to the global energy is much greater in solvation than that of the halogen bonds.

The δ-hole charge distribution forms an electron-poor cap at the tip of the CX bond extension and a belt-like negative charge distribution is localized on the halogen atom and coaxial with the CX bond. Due to this negative charge distribution, the halogen atom can act also as an electron donor by allowing the formation of stabilizing interactions such as hydrogen bonds (Lu et al., 2009). Hydrogen bondings of this nature might also exist in large biological molecules and provide stabilizing energy to small molecule–protein complexes. Therefore, we have estimated hydrogen bonds of halogens in complexes of proteins and non-natural amino acids. The results are depicted in Table 2
                        .

Because of its high electron density and low polarizability, fluorine's preference for dipolar interactions is more pronounced than for the other halogens (Bissantz et al., 2010). Chlorine and other heavy halogens also form hydrogen bonds with amino acids, but we have found no such interactions with bromine- and iodine-containing non-natural amino acids. The backbone groups are the less frequently involved, because their atoms are not as accessible as the side-chain atoms and also because the backbone groups are involved in intrachain CH⋯O interactions to a substantial extent (Stojanović et al., 2012). The hydrogen bonds of side chain CH groups are the most frequently involved, followed by NH and OH groups. The higher occurrence of CH groups may be explained in terms of the larger abundance of CH groups in the protein part. Furthermore, we have observed a small percentage of interactions involving water as hydrogen bond donors. While these interactions are weak they seem to play a definite role in protein–ligand stabilization when halogenated ligands are present.

Halogens can form bonds with water molecules, and water can be bridge to the amino acid residues. It is known that water networks in protein interfaces can complement direct interactions contributing significantly to molecular recognition, function, and stability of protein association (Ball, 2008; Zhou et al., 2010). We have identified water molecules that are bridges between chlorine and amino acids. Our results show hydrogen bonds of the amino acid residues with halogen-containing non-natural amino acids interacting through water, emphasizing the importance of the inclusion of solvent in protein–ligand interaction studies. 1.73Å resolution of d-amino acid oxidase (DAAO) in complex with d-trifluoroalanine (FLA1364(A)) from Rhodosporidium toruloides (PDB ID code 1C0L) provides a clear example of a halogen hydrogen bondings (Fig. 6
                        ). The fluorine atoms (F2 and F3) clearly interact with Tyr1238 (OH) and water molecules (2167 and 2071) by forming a strong hydrogen bonds. At the same time, other atoms from d-trifluoroalanine forms a hydrogen bonding interaction with surrounding amino acids, thus forming a stabilizing bridge between the ligand and the protein.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

We have systematically analyzed the influence of halogen bonding to the stability of complexes of proteins and non-natural amino acids. Further, the characteristic features of residues involved in halogen bonding have been evaluated in terms of the distribution of halogen bonds, interaction geometry, conservation score, stabilization centers, structural motifs, secondary structure, solvent accessibility, and halogen as nucleofile.

We have shown that halogen bonding can occur by direct amino acid–protein contact or via a water-mediated mechanism whereby a water molecule can form a bridge between the amino acid and the protein, simultaneously engaging in halogen- and hydrogen bonds. Furthermore, we have shown that in amino acid–protein complexes halogen atoms, despite being usually surrounded by hydrophobic residues, can sometimes be involved in hydrogen bonding interactions with hydrogen bonding-donors. Fluorine's preference for dipolar interactions is more pronounced than for the other halogens. Chlorine and other heavy halogens also form hydrogen bonds with amino acids, but we have found no such interactions with bromine- and iodine-containing non-natural amino acids. Additionally, most of the interacting residues comprising the interfaces also show a great degree of conservation. 51.3% of stabilizing residues are involved in building halogen bonds with the non-natural amino acids. We discovered three types of structural motifs significantly over-represented in complexes of proteins and non-natural amino acids: beta-turn-ir, beta-turn-il and niche-4r. The halogen-bonding statistics of the dataset do not show any preference for α-helices (36%), β-sheets (36%), or turns/coils (28%) structures.

In conclusion, observations obtained in this study identify halogen bonds and structural motifs that contribute to the stabilization of the complexes of proteins and non-natural amino acids, relevant to the understanding of structure–function relationships, and useful to the efforts made to design these complexes.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This work was supported by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technological Development of the Republic of Serbia (Grants No. 172001, 173034).

Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2013.10.002.

The following are the supplementary data to this article:
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

