@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Tri-peptide reference structures for the calculation of relative solvent accessible surface area in protein amino acid residues

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Geometry-optimised extended conformation tri-peptides obtained for 43 amino acids.


                        
                        
                           
                           Peptide models suitable for relative residue accessible area calculations in proteins.


                        
                        
                           
                           Systematic effects of internal energy strain on solvent accessibility are observed.


                        
                        
                           
                           Results accord with conformational dependence of protein backbone covalent geometry.


                        
                        
                           
                           Use of standard covalent peptide geometry in conformational searching is discussed.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Peptide reference structure

Relative amino acid solvent-accessible surface area

Peptide geometry

Protein conformation

Quantum chemical modelling

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Relative amino acid residue solvent accessibility values allow the quantitative comparison of atomic solvent-accessible surface areas in different residue types and physical environments in proteins and in protein structural alignments. Geometry-optimised tri-peptide structures in extended solvent-exposed reference conformations have been obtained for 43 amino acid residue types at a high level of quantum chemical theory. Significant increases in side-chain solvent accessibility, offset by reductions in main-chain atom solvent exposure, were observed for standard residue types in partially geometry-optimised structures when compared to non-minimised models built from identical sets of proper dihedral angles abstracted from the literature. Optimisation of proper dihedral angles led most notably to marked increases of up to 54% in proline main-chain atom solvent accessibility compared to literature values. Similar effects were observed for fully-optimised tri-peptides in implicit solvent. The relief of internal strain energy was associated with systematic variation in N, Cα and Cβ atom solvent accessibility across all standard residue types. The results underline the importance of optimisation of ‘hard’ degrees of freedom (bond lengths and valence bond angles) and improper dihedral angle values from force field or other context-independent reference values, and impact on the use of standardised fixed internal co-ordinate geometry in sampling approaches to the determination of absolute values of protein amino acid residue solvent accessibility. Quantum chemical methods provide a useful and accurate alternative to molecular mechanics methods to perform energy minimisation of peptides containing non-standard (chemically modified) amino acid residues frequently present in experimental protein structure data sets, for which force field parameters may not be available. Reference tri-peptide atomic co-ordinate sets including hydrogen atoms are made freely available.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Solvent-accessible surface area is a widely used physical environmental parameter in the comparison, prediction and design of protein structure (Hubbard and Blundell, 1987; Šali and Blundell, 1990; Rost and Sander, 1994; Eyal et al., 2004; Worth et al., 2009; Li et al., 2013). Fast surface area calculation methods allow implicit solvent models to be used to take account of solvation energy contributions in scoring protein conformations, or in simulations of protein folding and dynamics (Chen et al., 2008; Vorobjev, 2011; Kleinjung and Fraternali, 2014).

Relative amino acid residue solvent accessibility values provide a convenient means with which to compare solvent accessible surface areas in different residue types, or residues in different protein environments. These values can be calculated by normalising summed atomic solvent-accessible surface areas with respect to summed areas in the same residue type in a common solvent-exposed conformation available to all residue types. The relative amino acid residue solvent accessibility metric affords a basis upon which different structural regions in proteins can be defined (Levy, 2010). It has been found that evolutionary rates of residues at protein interfaces depend on the extent of surface burial (Eames and Kortemme, 2009; Franzosa and Xia, 2009), and relative residue accessibility is an important parameter in the prediction of protein interaction sites (Porollo and Meller, 2007; Zellner et al., 2012). Normalisation permits the meaningful comparison of solvent accessibility between different amino acid residue types, for example, at structurally aligned positions within protein families and superfamilies (Mizuguchi et al., 1998; Holm and Rosenström, 2010). Relative accessibility-based physical environmental class descriptors are used in protein structural alignment algorithms (Madhusudhan et al., 2009; Topham et al., 2013) and as conditional feature variables in multi-dimensional amino acid substitution tables with diverse predictive applications (Overington et al., 1992; Topham et al., 1993; Worth et al., 2011).

Tri-peptide models in extended conformations of sequence Ala-X-Ala or Gly-X-Gly where X is the residue of interest, often serve as reference molecules to represent the maximally solvent-exposed state (Lee and Richards, 1971; Chothia, 1976; Satow et al., 1980; Miller et al., 1987; Hubbard and Thornton, 1993; Samanta et al., 2002; Ahmad et al., 2003; Nguyen and Rajapakse, 2005). Extended conformation peptidic fragments containing all the naturally occurring residue types are frequently observed in proteins, and are represented in structural alphabet block descriptions of local protein structure (Etchebest et al., 2005). Molecular dynamics simulations of short terminally-blocked alanine- and glycine-containing peptides carried out in explicit solvent with additional provision for solute polarisation reveal heavy sampling of extended conformations in the β-sheet and polyproline II regions of the Ramachandran plot (Hu et al., 2003; Wang et al., 2006). Recently, Gly-X-Gly tri-peptide reference models in residue-specific conformations not available to all residue-types have been proposed in order to accommodate a minority of surface residue positions in protein structures that yield relative solvent accessibilities in excess of 100% with respect to maximal solvent accessibilities in extended conformations (Singh and Ahmad, 2009; Tien et al., 2013).

Ideally, model tri-peptide structures in the designated reference conformation should exist in or close to (local) minima on potential energy surfaces, or at population maxima identified in statistical analyses of protein conformation databases. Reference tri-peptide atomic co-ordinate sets are generally built using selected values for the main-chain and side-chain proper dihedral angles observed in experimentally determined protein or peptide structures, whilst bond length, valence bond angle and improper dihedral internal co-ordinates are set to molecular mechanics force field or other reference values. However, force field reference values are not true equilibrium values in a minimum energy configuration, but correspond to values adopted when all other terms in the force field are set to zero. Thus unless the full form of the potential energy function is applied to minimise the energy, the accumulation of small deviations from equilibrium values may exert significant effects on inter-atomic separation, and hence solvent accessibility. An analogous argument applies concerning the use of context-independent average bond length and valence bond angle parameter values obtained from analyses of experimental structure databases in which distinct component conformation-dependent data distributions can remain hidden (Berkholz et al., 2009). The fixing of main-chain and side-chain proper dihedral angles to inappropriate or mutually incompatible combinations may also lead to poor estimates of maximal atomic solvent accessibility in reference state models, even when all other degrees of freedom have been optimised.

Given the widespread availability of software packages for geometry optimisation based on either classical molecular mechanics force field or quantum chemical methods, it is perhaps surprising that neither constrained nor full energy minimisation protocols have apparently hitherto been implemented. In consequence, the literature abounds with calculated values of solvent accessible surface areas of amino acid residues in model-built tri-peptides in extended and other conformations. However, reference sets of the atomic co-ordinates themselves are generally not readily available. Not only does this render assessment of tri-peptide structural quality difficult, it also precludes the calculation of surface area using alternative parameter sets, such as solvent probe size and solute van der Waals radii, or the choice of alternative surface types and algorithms other than those used to report the original values. For example, the AGBNP (Gallicchio and Levy, 2004) Generalised Born rapid surface area calculation method is based on a Gaussian description of molecular shape (Grant and Pickup, 1995), and depends upon the use of a smaller increase in the solute van der Waals radii (0.5Å) than is typically employed (1.4Å) to represent the radius of a water molecule. In contrast, a larger water probe radius of 2.0Å used to approximate the dielectric boundary in Poisson–Boltzmann solvation energy calculations was found to give optimal agreement with molecular dynamics results for alanine decapeptide in explicit solvent (Aguilar et al., 2010). Moreover, solvation free energy calculation methods, whether physical–chemical or empirical (e.g. Wang et al., 2001; Hou et al., 2005) in origin, require the presence of both hydrogen and heavy atoms.

Here we report on the application of density functional theory (DFT) quantum chemical modelling methods (Burke, 2012) in the geometry optimisation of solvent-exposed reference-state tri-peptides in extended conformations. These methods take explicit account of electronic structure, and their improved accuracy over pair-wise additive molecular mechanics methods with fixed partial charges that neglect polarisation effects has been demonstrated in benchmarking studies of relative performance on di-peptide (Kaminský and Jensen, 2007) and tetra-peptide (Jiang et al., 2010) systems containing cognate amino acids. Density functionals in popular use do not in general require further parametrisation for main-group chemistry applications. This affords an additional advantage in the treatment of non-standard (chemically modified) amino acid residue types, present in significant number in recombinant protein atomic co-ordinate data sets and structural bioinformatics databases (Chandonia et al., 2002; Garavelli, 2004), and for which molecular mechanics force field parameters are often lacking.

@&#METHODS@&#

Density functional theory (DFT) allows for a more accurate representation of electron correlation effects than does Hartree–Fock theory at relatively modest increased computational cost. Although DFT methods are less accurate than ab initio wave function theory methods, which in principle can provide exact molecular geometries and energies, the use of full electron correlation and completely flexible basis sets is impracticable for tri-peptide systems. The B3LYP density functional used here is one of the first standard exchange-correlation density approximations, but continues to remain the most popular for a broad range of general applications in chemistry (Burke, 2012). Known deficiencies of DFT methods in the handling of dispersion forces, the attractive part of the van der Waals interaction, have more recently led to the development of the Minnesota functionals by Zhao and Truhler (2011). These functionals use the same basic generalised gradient approximations as standard approximations such as B3LYP, and achieve improved performance on energy training sets through the fitting of additional adjustable parameters. Benchmark testing by Jiang et al. (2010) of the B3LYP and Minnesota M05-2X density functionals on five different constrained tetra-peptide geometries yielded similar reference molecular geometries and conformation-dependent energy difference profiles.

The B3LYP hybrid Hartree–Fock/density functional method in the GAUSSIAN 94 program suite (Frisch et al., 1995) was used to perform gas-phase constrained geometry optimisations on model (N-acetylated) tri-peptides in internal co-ordinate space. Conformational constraints were applied by holding selected dihedral angles in the input Z-matrices to fixed values as detailed below in Section 2.2 and Table 1
                        .

Unconstrained B3LYP geometry optimisations in implicit solvent were performed using the (C-PCM) conductor-like polarized continuum model (Barone and Cossi, 1998; Cossi et al., 2003) implemented in the October 2010 and August 2011 releases of GAMESS (Schmidt et al., 1993). Solute-solvent repulsion and dispersion nuclear gradient contributions were calculated using the empirical method of Floris and Tomasi (1989) or the (SMD) solvation model density method (Marenich et al., 2009). Constrained minimisations of Asp and Asn side-chain-containing tri-peptides in implicit solvent, described in Section 2.2, were carried out using the C-PCM implementation with Floris–Tomasi non-polar energy gradient corrections in the September 2006 GAMESS release. The 6-311++G(d,p) triple zeta basis set with diffuse functions on both hydrogen and heavy atoms was used for first and second row elements. The selenium atom in selenomethionine (Mse) and the iodine atoms in 3,5-diiodotyrosine (Tyi) were respectively represented using the 6-31++G(d,p) and 3-21++G(d) basis sets. Default maximum energy and energy gradient convergence criteria were satisfied in all cases.

A set of partially geometry-optimised N-terminally blocked extended conformation Ace(0)-Ala(1)-X(2)-Ala(3) peptides with standard amino acids at the central position (X(2)) was first constructed using fixed dihedral angle values culled from the literature. Solvent accessible surface areas in the conformationally constrained structures serve as a convenient reference against which values for non-minimised tri-peptides built from identical sets of dihedral angles using standard molecular modelling techniques and values reported in the literature can be compared.

All the conformationally constrained N-terminally blocked Ace(0)-Ala(1)-X(2)-Ala(3) peptides containing non-proline standard amino acids at the central position (X(2)) were modelled in an anti-parallel β-sheet conformation with fixed values of φ
                        =−140°, 
                           ψ
                        
                        =135° and ω
                        =180°. Main-chain dihedral angles defined by the atom quartets C(0)
                        N(1)
                        CA(1)
                        C(1) and N(3)
                        CA(3)
                        C(3)
                        OXT(3) were analogously set to −140° and 135°, respectively. Side-chain dihedral angles, as defined by IUPAC-IUB (1970) nomenclature, for non-proline amino acids in the conformationally constrained N-acetylated tri-peptide set were either held fixed at values indicated in Table 1, or geometry optimised to final values given in Table 1 from the following starting conformations: Phe and Tyr χ
                        1
                        =180°, χ
                        2
                        =90°, after Satow et al. (1980); Trp χ
                        1
                        =−66.84°, χ
                        2
                        =60.59°, after Satow et al. (1980); Asp and Asn χ
                        1
                        =180°, χ
                        2
                        =11°, in accordance with side-chain rotamer preferences in protein β-sheets (Lovell et al., 2000). The φ
                        (2) and ψ
                        (2) main-chain and the side-chain pyrrolidine ring dihedral angles were not constrained in the proline-containing tri-peptide, which was modelled in two conformations with UP (Cγ-exo) or DOWN (Cγ-endo) ring puckers. Geometry optimised dihedral angle values for proline are given in Table 1 according to the side-chain dihedral angle definitions of Milner-White et al. (1992).

All OXT atoms in C-terminal carboxylic acid functions were protonated to ensure overall neutrality of the N-acetylated peptide backbone. The side-chain carboxylic acid functions in Asp and Glu were unprotonated. Unconstrained Asp and Asn side-chains are able to hydrogen bond with the main-chain NH of Ala(3) in a β-sheet conformation. In order to take account of the effects of solvent electrostatic screening on the hydrogen bond geometry, constrained energy minimisation of the Asp and Asn tri-peptides was performed in implicit solvent, as described in Section 2.1. All other constrained geometry optimisations were carried out in the gas phase.

For comparative purposes, a tri-peptide co-ordinate data set with proper dihedral angle values identical to those in partially constrained quantum chemically optimised tri-peptides was constructed without further refinement using the PROTEIN building module in the TINKER (V 5.1.09) molecular modelling package (Ponder, 2010). Fixed values of the main-chain and side-chain dihedrals at the central residue position are those in Table 1. An additional proline-containing tri-peptide (ProSATOW) was built using the Satow et al. (1980) main-chain (ψ
                        (1)
                        =153.4°, ω
                        (1)
                        =175.2°, φ
                        (2)
                        =−68.2°, ψ
                        (2)
                        =161.9°, ω
                        (2)
                        =175.6°, φ
                        (3)
                        =−176.8°) dihedral angle values and average values (χ
                        1
                        =22° and χ2
                        =−30°) reported by Milner-White et al. (1992) for non-redundant side-chain dihedral angles with Cγ-endo (DOWN) pyrrolidine ring puckers in 68 high resolution protein crystal structures.

Quantum chemical geometry optimisations of the N-acetylated tri-peptides containing standard amino acid residues without constraints in continuum solvent were started using internal co-ordinates obtained from the constrained geometry optimisations (Table 1). The final optimised values of the dihedral angles are tabulated in Table 2
                        . An additional geometry-optimised tri-peptide co-ordinate data set for 23 non-standard amino acids without dihedral angle constraints in continuum solvent was obtained as described in the Supplementary methods. Optimised values of the dihedral angles (defined in Supplementary Table S1) for these tri-peptides are given in Supplementary Tables S2 and S3.

The structure integrity of the quantum chemically modelled tri-peptides was evaluated using the MolProbity web server (Chen et al., 2010). Geometric quality around the Cα atom is measured as the deviation of the Cβ atom from an ideal position, constructed using the bond and angle parameters of Engh and Huber (1991), determined from database analyses of small molecule structures. Cβ deviations of <0.25Å were recorded in all cases. Atomic contacts were assessed in the tri-peptides by inspection of the small-probe contact dot surfaces (Word et al., 1999). No inter-penetration of ≥0.4Å of the 0.25Å extended van der Waals surfaces of non-covalently bonded atoms (not involved in hydrogen bonding), indicative of an unfavourable non-bonded clash, was observed in any of the geometry optimised structures.

All calculations of atomic solvent-accessible surface area (SASA) in the tri-peptides, following excision of the N-acetyl blocking groups and all hydrogen atoms, were carried out using the NACCESS version 2.1.1 (Hubbard and Thornton, 1993) implementation of the Lee and Richards (1971) algorithm with a (default) probe size of 1.4Å and a z slice value of 0.05Å. The NACCESS default Van der Waals radii of Chothia (1976) were used for atoms in the 20 standard amino acid residues and for chemically equivalent atoms in the non-standard residues. Van der Waals radii for phosphorus (Hip, Nep, Sep, Tpo and Ptr), selenium (Mse) and iodine (Tyi) were respectively taken as 1.70Å (Lesk, 1991), 1.91Å and 2.15Å (Flower, 1997).

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

Extended conformation peptide fragments may be operationally defined as segments in which the scalar product of unit vectors pointing along Cα
                        Cβ bonds at successive residue positions in the chain is negative. Flanking residue side-chains in extended conformation reference tri-peptide structures are thus orientated in opposing directions to that at the central residue position thereby limiting solvent shielding effects of side-chain-side-chain interactions. The majority of the maximally solvent-exposed extended conformation reference tri-peptide structures described in the literature (Chothia, 1976; Satow et al., 1980; Miller et al., 1987; Hubbard and Thornton, 1993; Ahmad et al., 2003) are based on those originally proposed by Lee and Richards (1971). Non-proline structures have been built using φ, ψ main-chain dihedral angle combinations falling within “strictly allowed” β-sheet regions identified in high-resolution protein structures (Kleywegt and Jones, 1996). In a departure from this practice, Samanta et al. (2002) modelled extended conformations of all the standard amino acid residues with the φ and ψ main-chain dihedral angles set to 180°. This maximally extended conformation lies at the boundary of β space defined by Muñoz and Serrano (1994), but remains inside the “allowed” Ramachandran diagram contour capturing 99.95% of φ, ψ data in an analysis of high resolution protein data sets (Lovell et al., 2003). However, the all-trans configuration is unsuitable for proline, for which the φ main-chain dihedral angle value is restricted to approximately −65°, within tolerance limits of −50° and −100° (Lovell et al., 2003). Accordingly, the proline residue in an Ala-Pro-Ala tri-peptide was modelled by Lee and Richards (1971) in a polyproline II conformation (φ
                        =−75°, ψ
                        =150°), whilst Satow et al. (1980) used backbone dihedral angle values abstracted from a crystal structure of the Leu-Pro-Gly tri-peptide (Leung and Marsh, 1958). Although the presence of a proline is known to place conformational restraints on the preceding residue in the chain (MacArthur and Thornton, 1991; Karplus, 1996), the φ, ψ dihedral angle space available to pre-Pro residues embraces extended conformation regions of the Ramachandran plot including β-sheet (Lovell et al., 2003). Using quantum chemical geometry optimisation methods we have defined φ and ψ dihedral angle pairings for proline residues with UP (Cγ-exo) or DOWN (Cγ-endo) ring puckers at the central position in N-acetylated tri-peptides when flanked by alanines constrained to be in a β-sheet conformation (Table 1).

Historically, reference tri-peptides used to compute atomic solvent-accessible surface area in maximally-exposed amino acid residue types have been built from sets of proper main-chain and side-chain dihedral angle values using modelling software without further refinement or optimisation. A dihedral angle set for extended conformation Ala-X-Ala tri-peptides containing standard amino acid residues at the central position is given in Table 1. The dihedral angle values have been culled from the literature, and where appropriate refined using constrained geometry optimisation. Table 3
                         lists summed absolute atomic solvent-accessible surface areas (SASA) for TINKER-built tri-peptides in the same reference conformations. Use of the NACCESS default Van der Waals radii of Chothia (1976) and a standard solvent probe size of 1.4Å permits valid comparison with available SASA data calculated in the same way for other Ala-X-Ala models in the literature. These include the widely referenced NACCESS (Hubbard and Thornton, 1993) and Samanta et al. (2002) tri-peptide SASA data sets.

Respectable average agreement to within a standard deviation of 2% is obtained between relative SASA values for the TINKER-built models and the NACCESS data for all 20 standard residue types over both side-chain and main-chain atom sets (Table 3). The NACCESS SASA data were derived from Ala-X-Ala tri-peptide models, mainly built in conformations proposed by Satow et al. (1980), which are in turn modifications of the Lee and Richards (1971) “β, trans” conformation set. Apart from asparagine, aspartate, phenyl alanine, tyrosine, tryptophan and proline tri-peptides, all main-chain and side-chain proper dihedral angles in the (14) remaining TINKER-built models are the same as in the corresponding NACCESS reference structures. The average relative SASA values for this subset of 14 tri-peptides are 100.7% (±0.9%), 101.3% (±1.4%) and 99.1% (±0.8%) for all-residue atoms, and side-chain and main-chain atom sets, respectively. These values provide baseline estimates of differences in reproducibility.

Asparagine and aspartate side-chain SASA values for the TINKER-built models with pre-optimised fixed side-chain dihedral angle values for a β-sheet backbone conformation are notably 8.8% and 4.5% respectively higher than the corresponding NACCESS values. SASA values for phenyl alanine, tyrosine and tryptophan aromatic side-chains are not significantly changed compared to the NACCESS values. The solvent accessibility of the serine side-chain is found to be slightly increased in the (χ
                        1
                        =−65°) g
                        − conformation, compared to the (χ
                        1
                        =180°) trans conformation typically cited in the literature.

Summed main-chain and side-chain solvent-accessible surface areas values for the TINKER Ala-Pro-Ala tri-peptide model built using backbone dihedral angle values in the Leung and Marsh (1958) Leu-Pro-Gly tri-peptide crystal structure as proposed by Satow et al. (1980), and DOWN (Cγ-endo) pyrrolidine ring puckering, consistent with this being the major (59%) conformation in a refined crystal structure comprising a disordered Cγ atom (Marsh, 1980), are in also good overall agreement with the NACCESS values (Table 3). The TINKER ProSATOW tri-peptide model in Fig. 1
                        (A) shows that the proline carbonyl oxygen atom is screened from the solvent by both the carbonyl group of Ala(1) and the Ala(3) Cβ side-chain atom. Re-modelling of the central proline residue using the optimised the (φ
                        (2), ψ
                        (2)) backbone dihedral angle pairings listed in Table 1 with flanking alanine residues held in a β-sheet conformation leads to striking 48% and 52% respective increases in main-chain SASA for the DOWN (Cγ-endo) and UP (Cγ-exo) ring pucker peptides. The increases are predominantly confined to the proline carbonyl oxygen atom as the tertiary amide nitrogen and carbonyl carbon atoms that possess three heavy atom attachments are intrinsically less accessible to the solvent probe. The increases in proline carbonyl oxygen solvent accessibility in the tri-peptide conformers are mirrored by an increased solvent accessibility of the Ala(3) Cβ side-chain atom. The reduced solvent shielding of the proline carbonyl oxygen by the Ala(3) side-chain can be discerned in the non-minimised TINKER and partially geometry optimised ProDOWN tri-peptide models, respectively illustrated in Fig. 1(B and D).

When compared to the published SASA values of Samanta et al. (2002) for their “all-trans” tri-peptide, calculated by the authors using NACCESS software, the TINKER-built models show an average 5.1% increase in side-chain solvent accessibility and a 6.7% decrease in main-chain solvent accessibility for all 20 standard residue types (Table 3). A small net increase in average SASA of 2.1% is observed over all residue atoms, although this is less than the observed variation across different residue types.

Reference tri-peptide model building typically involves the use of residue-type invariant force field equilibrium reference parameter values for bond lengths, bond angles and improper dihedral angles defined by chemical atom type combinations. This can lead to the unwanted introduction of internal energy strain. The B3LYP hybrid Hartree–Fock/density functional method was used to perform constrained geometry optimisations of solvent-exposed N-acetylated tri-peptides of sequence Ace-Ala-X-Ala containing a centrally positioned standard amino acid residue. The main-chains of non-proline tri-peptides were held fixed in a β-sheet conformation at all three residue positions. The φ
                        (2) and ψ
                        (2) backbone dihedrals were optimised in proline-containing peptides with UP (Cγ-exo) or DOWN (Cγ-endo) ring puckers. All the main-chain and side-chain proper dihedral angles in the partially optimised tri-peptides (see Table 1) are therefore identical to those in the corresponding TINKER-built models.

The set of partially geometry-optimised tri-peptide models shows an average increase in SASA of 3.8% (±1.8%) over all residue atoms compared to the NACCESS values. Inspection of Table 4
                         reveals that, the average net increase (in non-proline tri-peptides) derives from a proportionally larger average increase of 6.2% (±2.4%) in side-chain solvent accessibility, accompanied by an average decrease of 4.4% (±2.0%) in main-chain atom solvent exposure. These differences are significantly larger than would be expected to arise from errors in reproducibility. Comparison of the SASA values for partially minimised tri-peptide structures with the corresponding values in non-minimised models with nominally identical conformations (Table 3) thus indicates that the removal of internal strain acts to increase side-chain solvent accessibility at the expense of main-chain accessibility at least in non-proline tri-peptides.

The two geometry-optimised Ala-Pro-Ala tri-peptide conformers with equally preferred UP (Cγ-exo) or DOWN (Cγ-endo) pyrrolidine ring puckering (Némethy et al., 1992; Word et al., 1999) are shown in Fig. 1(C and D). The proline UP (Cγ-exo) conformer, in which the Cγ atom and the carbonyl group are on opposite sides of the plane defined by the N, Cα and Cβ atoms, has a larger main-chain and side-chain solvent exposed surface than the DOWN conformer, the latter in accord with previous quantum chemical studies (Improta et al., 2001; DeRider et al., 2002) being of only marginally lower energy (−0.39kcalmol−1). Large 47% and 55% respective increases in main-chain SASA for DOWN (Cγ-endo) and UP (Cγ-exo) ring puckers are again obtained when compared to the NACCESS data that pertain to the alternative ProSATOW tri-peptide backbone conformer (Fig. 1(A)). The seemingly anomalous increase in main-chain solvent accessibility observed in proline residues is attributed to the dominating influence of changes in the backbone conformation that mask smaller opposing losses in main-chain atom accessibility due to internal strain relief.

Comparison of TINKER-built (Fig. 1(B)) and partially geometry-optimised (Fig. 1(D)) proline DOWN tri-peptide conformers, described by identical non-redundant sets of proper dihedral angles, illustrates how the neglect of geometry optimisation of improper dihedral angles, valence angles and bond lengths can lead to the introduction of poor steric contacts. The removal of steric clashes between the Cδ side-chain ring atom and the peptide backbone results in the significant loss of 4.7Å2 (13.6%) in the Cδ atom solvent accessible surface area. Compensatory increases in the solvent accessibilities of the Cα, Cβ and Cγ atoms limit the overall loss for the geometry-optimised side-chain to 1.3Å2.

Similar trends and effects are observed when solvent accessibility data for the partially geometry-optimised quantum chemical models are compared to data for the 20 “all-trans” Ala-X-Ala tri-peptides of Samanta et al. (2002), modelled in fully extended conformations with the φ and ψ main-chain dihedral angles set to 180°. The average increase in the SASA value summed over all residue atoms is 5.0%, and 8.7% for (non-proline) side-chain atoms (Table 4). Larger increases of 17.3% in the total summed SASA value for our Ala-Gly-Ala peptide, or 14.0% with reference to the NACCESS tri-peptide, reinforce the view that a β-sheet conformation is a more appropriate representation for the fully solvent-exposed extended conformation state than an “all-trans” configuration for non-proline residues.


                        Samanta et al. (2002) note that SASA values for fully-exposed residues in proteins, obtained by extrapolation to a neighbour atom contact number of zero, were in better agreement with values for “all-trans” Gly-X-Gly reference tri-peptides, rather than their Ala-X-Ala counterparts. This is unexpected since protein residues will be statistically overwhelmingly most often flanked by residues bearing side-chains. The increased summed atomic solvent accessibilities for the Ala-X-Ala reference peptide structures reported here suggest that a possible explanation for the finding of Samanta et al. (2002) may lie in an underestimation of maximum residue solvent accessible surface areas when “all-trans” Ala-X-Ala peptides are used as extended conformation reference structures.

The release of all conformational constraints in tri-peptides on atomic solvent accessibility was investigated by performing quantum chemical geometry optimisations in continuum solvent. Tri-peptide structural quality was assessed using the MolProbity server (Chen et al., 2010). No significant Cβ atom deviations, which are valence bond angle combinations, were found. Geometry optimised values of the Ala-X-Ala tri-peptide dihedral angles for all standard residue types are recorded in Table 2. Main-chain φ
                        (2), ψ
                        (2) dihedral angle values at central residue positions all fall within the favoured smoothed contoured regions of the Ramachandran plot (Lovell et al., 2003) as shown in Fig. 2
                        .

Summed solvent accessible surface areas for all residue atoms, and side-chain and main-chain atom subsets are given in Table 5
                        . In comparison with the partially geometry optimised tri-peptides, the fully geometry optimised structures show smaller respective average increases of 2.7% and 3.8% in total SASA with respect to the NACCESS and the Samanta et al. (2002) data (c.f Table 4). Differences are most pronounced for the two proline conformers. Significant average increases in side-chain solvent accessibility and decreases in main-chain solvent accessibility are again evident for non-proline residues in the fully optimised structures.

Studies of accurately refined high-resolution protein crystal structures have uncovered significant and systematic conformation-dependent variation in covalent peptide geometry (Karplus, 1996; Berkholz et al., 2009). Kernel regression analysis of the structural data contributed to the development of the (CDL) conformation-dependent backbone bond length and angle covalent geometry library now used in the refinement of experimental protein structures (Moriarty et al., 2014). Deviations from context independent standard geometry have been attributed to the accommodation of strain in the avoidance of atomic clashes and optimisation of electrostatic interactions. The most striking variation from standard reference values as a function of φ and ψ was observed for the main-chain NCα
                        C (or τ) valence bond angle. Regression-fitted local average values of the τ bond angle in φ, ψ space for general (non-glycine, non-proline, non-isoleucine and non-valine) residues were reported by Berkholz et al. (2009) to span a range from 107.5° to 114.0°. Bond angle distributions in the β region of the Ramachandran plot were centred at the lower tail of the observed range. In good agreement with the analyses of protein structures, the average value for the τ valence bond angle at central positions in fully-geometry optimised (non-glycine and non-proline) tri-peptides in β-sheet conformations was here found to be 107.5°±0.8° (Supplementary Table S4). This represents a lowering of 3.7° with respect to the average reference value of 111.2°, obtained by Engh and Huber (1991) from an analysis of peptide crystal structures in the Cambridge Structural Database. Average values of NCα
                        Cβ and CCα
                        Cβ valence bond angles in the fully-geometry optimised tri-peptides were altered to much lesser extents compared to the Engh and Huber (1991) reference values, although compensatory differences of more than 2° in these two bond angles were clearly manifest in the g−
                         and trans side-chain rotamers of the serine tri-peptide (Supplementary Table S4).

The influence of strain relief on the solvent accessibility of the Cα and covalently attached atoms in partially and fully geometry-optimised tri-peptides was explored through direct comparison with the atom solvent accessibility data for the TINKER-built non-minimised models. A detailed breakdown of results for N, Cα and Cβ atoms and the >CO backbone carbonyl group for each residue type is presented in Tables S5 and S6 of the Supplementary material. An average SASA loss of 1.15Å2
                        ±0.43Å2 for the backbone N atom, set against an average increase of 0.99Å2
                        ±0.43Å2 for the Cα atom, was recorded across all amino acid residue types, including proline, for the partially optimised tri-peptides, nominally in the same conformations as their non-minimised model counterparts. Average net losses in SASA were also found for the Cβ atom and backbone carbonyl group, although these losses were not systematically observed in all residue types. A further increased systematic average SASA loss of 1.56Å2
                        ±0.63Å2 and an increased average gain of 1.55Å2
                        ±0.86Å2 were respectively observed for N and Cα atoms in the fully-geometry optimised tri-peptides. In this case the changes were also accompanied by the systematic loss in Cβ atom SASA in all residue types, the average loss being 1.74Å2
                        ±0.86Å2.

Taken together the results reveal an apparent correlation between conformation-dependent systematic deviations from average covalent geometry and the differential effects on main-chain and side-chain atom group solvent accessibility in the extended conformation tri-peptides.

Fully geometry-optimised tri-peptide reference structures in solvent-exposed extended conformations in continuum solvent have been obtained for 23 non-standard amino acid residues. The non-standard residue types were identified as being amongst the most commonly encountered in the SCOP–ASTRAL 40% shared sequence identity compendium of protein domains (Chandonia et al., 2002) during their extraction from PDB atomic co-ordinate data sets (Topham et al., 2013). The residues include sulphinic and sulphonic acid cysteine oxidation states, and phosphorylated forms of histidine, serine, threonine and tyrosine, as well as other chemically modified forms of cysteine, glutamate, histidine, leucine, lysine, methionine, proline, tyrosine and valine. Details of summed atomic solvent accessible surface areas for the non-standard residue types are given in Table S7 of the Supplementary Material. It is expected that the reference tri-peptide solvent accessibility data for non-standard residue types, which to the best of our knowledge have not been previously reported, will be of value in structural bioinformatics tools for the analysis of experimental and computer modelled protein structures.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

High quality tri-peptide reference structures in maximally solvent-exposed extended conformations generally available to all residue types have been obtained for 43 amino acid residues using quantum chemical geometry optimisation methods in continuum solvent. The Ala-X-Ala tri-peptides constitute suitable representative reference structures for the calculation of relative residue solvent accessibility in proteins. The data set may also serve as a reference for the calculation of other potentially useful relational physical quantities in the comparison, prediction and design of proteins, such as residue solvation energy or relative distance from the protein surface.

The motivation behind this work lay both in the lack of available reference atomic co-ordinate data sets, most particularly for chemically modified amino acid residues, and an understanding that published values of atomic solvent accessible surface areas correspond to values in potentially strained tri-peptide configurations. Strain can be caused by the introduction of idealised internal co-ordinate reference parameters describing bond length and bond angle “hard” degrees of conformational freedom, whereas these are expected to vary as a function of protein backbone conformation (Berkholz et al., 2009; Moriarty et al., 2014). Values of the NCα
                     C (or τ) valence bond angle, which exhibits the most systematic variation, were well reproduced in the quantum chemically geometry-optimised Ala-X-Ala tri-peptides containing standard residue types in solvent exposed β-sheet (or polyproline II in the case of proline) extended conformations. For these peptides, we find that side-chain atomic solvent accessibility is increased, whilst that for main-chain atoms is decreased, relative to values for models in strained configurations and those reported in the literature. The net effect of strain removal in the extended conformations is to increase the all-residue atom solvent accessibility by an average of approximately 3% to 4%. Quantum chemical optimisation of proper dihedral angle sets typically used in model building of maximally solvent-exposed tri-peptide structures also led to residue-specific variations in summed atomic solvent accessible surface areas. This was most apparent in the case of the main-chain carbonyl group in proline, and for aspartate and asparagine side-chains participating in hydrogen bond interactions with the peptide backbone in extended conformations.

The effects of geometry optimisation on solvent accessibility can be expected to apply to other model-built peptide residue conformations and sequences. Residue hydrophobicity scales have been derived as functions of relative residue solvent accessibility in proteins, determined by normalisation with respect to solvent exposure in Gly-X-Gly tri-peptide reference structures (Rose et al., 1985; Miller et al., 1987; Tien et al., 2013). Higher maximum upper bound estimates of residue solvent accessible surface area in protein structures, when compared to values for the Rose et al. (1985) or Miller et al. (1987) (non-minimised) model Gly-X-Gly reference tri-peptides, were interpreted by Tien et al. (2013) as evidence that reference tri-peptide conformations other than right- and left-handed helical conformations underestimate maximum residue solvent accessibility in proteins. Singh and Ahmad (2009) previously reached a similar conclusion. Solvent accessibility data for the Miller et al. (1987) extended conformation Gly-X-Gly tri-peptide reference models are (almost) systematically lower (on average by 8.8±5.0%) than the Tien et al. (2013) upper bound estimates in proteins. Some or all of this difference, which is of a similar magnitude to that found here for Ala-X-Ala tri-peptides in the same conformation, could be due to normalisation using reference tri-peptides with non-optimised geometry. Conversely, solvent accessible surface areas in Gly-X-Gly model reference tri-peptides, built by Tien et al. (2013) in (mostly right- or left-handed helical) residue-specific conformations using rigid geometry sampling techniques with average bond lengths and angles, are systematically higher (by on average 5.4±2.8%) than values for similar residue conformations in actual X-ray crystal structures. Main-chain τ bond angle distributions for general residues in right- and left-handed helical conformation regions in proteins predominantly lie above the CDL covalent geometry library conformation-independent mean of 110.8°, whereas τ values for the β-sheet region lie below it, approximately 6° to 8° lower than values for helical conformations (Berkholz et al., 2009; Moriarty et al., 2014). Observations of overestimation of the solvent accessible surface area in helical conformation tri-peptide models, rather than underestimation in extended conformations, may be related to the backbone conformational dependence of the τ bond angle.

Many protein conformational sampling methods and loop closure algorithms make use of conformation-independent peptide (bond length and angle) covalent geometry as a means of reducing effective search space and computation time. These include procedures used for the generation of atomic models of unfolded protein ensembles from which sequence-specific solvent residue accessibilities are calculated in the prediction of protein stability (Gong and Rose, 2008; Estrada et al., 2009). The grafting of context-independent covalent peptide geometry onto experimentally observed residue conformers may lead to anomalies in computed solvent accessible surface areas and dielectric boundary definitions, affecting physics-based (Sitkoff et al., 1994) and empirical (Wang et al., 2001; Hou et al., 2005) methods for the calculation of solvation free energy. Approaches to the modelling of the unfolded protein state that employ energy minimisation protocols (Elcock, 1999; Seki et al., 2011) may provide more robust estimates of amino acid residue solvent accessible area in a sequence-specific context compared to peptide conformational sampling methods that rely on average bond length, valence bond angle and improper dihedral angle internal co-ordinates.

Tri-peptide atomic co-ordinate sets including hydrogen atoms, conforming to the re-mediated version 3 RCSB PDB (Henrick et al., 2008) chemical component dictionary (http://www.wwpdb.org/ccd.html) are available as a downloadable supporting data archive file from http://cmb.ornl.gov/material/tripeptide-reference-structures. The data includes results of the MolProbity structural validation analyses (Chen et al., 2010) as Kineimage files, viewable using the KING molecular graphics package (Chen et al., 2009). For NACCESS users, we provide modified data files for use in calculations of relative amino acid residue solvent accessibility of the 20 standard and 23 non-standard residue types with default (1.4Å) probe radius and (0.05Å) z slice parameter values.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

CMT is grateful to the University of Tennessee and the Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education (ORISE) for the award of visiting scholarships.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2014.11.007.

The following are Supplementary data to this article:
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

