@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#From NGS assembly challenges to instability of fungal mitochondrial genomes: A case study in genome complexity

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Fungal mitochondrial genomes can have complex repeat systems.


                        
                        
                           
                           Repeats in mitochondrial genomes can mislead short-read assembly programs.


                        
                        
                           
                           Repeats can also lead to illegitimate intrachromosomal recombination and large-scale deletions.


                        
                        
                           
                           Where persistent repeats are stably present, their locations can indicate functional or structural importance.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Next generation sequencing

Repetitive DNA

Fungal mitochondria

Genome assembly

DNA secondary structure

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The presence of repetitive or non-unique DNA persisting over sizable regions of a eukaryotic genome can hinder the genome's successful de novo assembly from short reads: ambiguities in assigning genome locations to the non-unique subsequences can result in premature termination of contigs and thus overfragmented assemblies. Fungal mitochondrial (mtDNA) genomes are compact (typically less than 100kb), yet often contain short non-unique sequences that can be shown to impede their successful de novo assembly in silico. Such repeats can also confuse processes in the cell in vivo. A well-studied example is ectopic (out-of-register, illegitimate) recombination associated with repeat pairs, which can lead to deletion of functionally important genes that are located between the repeats. Repeats that remain conserved over micro- or macroevolutionary timescales despite such risks may indicate functionally or structurally (e.g., for replication) important regions. This principle could form the basis of a mining strategy for accelerating discovery of function in genome sequences. We present here our screening of a sample of 11 fully sequenced fungal mitochondrial genomes by observing where exact k-mer repeats occurred several times; initial analyses motivated us to focus on 17-mers occurring more than three times. Based on the diverse repeats we observe, we propose that such screening may serve as an efficient expedient for gaining a rapid but representative first insight into the repeat landscapes of sparsely characterized mitochondrial chromosomes. Our matching of the flagged repeats to previously reported regions of interest supports the idea that systems of persisting, non-trivial repeats in genomes can often highlight features meriting further attention.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Repeats along a chromosome of a eukaryotic genome can severely inhibit the success of de novo or reference assemblies of the chromosome's sequence from short reads in silico, i.e., the stability of the assembly process. This problem is especially pronounced in next-generation sequencing (NGS) pipelines when the short (currently ≤300bp) reads obtained are then piped through a de Bruijn graph-based de novo assembly program (Compeau et al., 2011). Such programs consider in a first instance the NGS reads’ subsequences of a fixed length k (k-mers, words of length k), and use them to build up and analyze a quasi-flow on a de Bruijn or de Bruijn-like graph. Concurrently or in a second instance, such programs may then also integrate the information of the full read sequences per se and/or, where the reads are paired-end, the pairing information.

A good example of a genome or chromosome that illustrates the repeat assembly problem is a familiar and long-studied mitochondrial genome of a unicellular fungus, the S288C strain of baker's yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae. In a previous study (Muñoz et al., 2014), we fed subsequences of this completely sequenced mitochondrial genome, i.e., ideal, short, paired in silico-generated subsequences of read length 100bp, without any sequencing errors and without any competing nuclear genomic DNA, to a widely used NGS assembly program. We confirmed what is perhaps already obvious on fundamental grounds: over a large range of k value choices ranging up to 63bp, repeated sequences from the eight ori (origin of replication) regions consistently prevented full assembly: the ori's were precisely the positions where the contigs or scaffolds could no longer be extended. In addition to fundamental (i.e., assembler-independent) limits that repeats can impose on the assembly process, there are also assembler-specific problems or complexities that can cause unexpected profiles of the assembly variation as one changes the k value (Gallo et al., 2014).

Persistent repeats preventing full de novo assembly, i.e., presenting limits to the contiguity of scaffolds/contigs that can be achieved using typical NGS pipelines, can be interpreted as compromising the stability of the assembly process in silico. The same repeats that can prevent a satisfactory assembly, such as the ori repeats in the mitochondrial genome of baker's yeast, can also compromise the stability of the genome itself in vivo or in vitro, i.e., they can destabilize processes within the cell and affect the structural stability of the genome (Bernardi, 2005). Just as a de novo short-read assembly program can get confused if it encounters a sequence of moderate length that is repeated (i.e., not unique), and may then terminate contig extension because it is not clear where the sequence continues, so a process of the cell such as recombination can apparently get confused at the same places in a mitochondrial genome because of ambiguity, and then create a deletion mutant in which DNA located between the two repeats is lost (such as in the well-studied petite-colony mutants in baker's yeast; Marotta et al. (1982)). In the human mitochondrial genome, a particularly common block deletion that entails clinical consequences, called the common deletion, deletes almost 5kb. This may be a result of two copies of a 13-bp sequence at the ends of the deleted segment (Samuels et al., 2004), or the cause may be secondary structures co-localizing with those two copies rather than the copies’ sequences themselves, as has been proposed based on deletional spectra (Guo et al., 2010).

In the present study, we focused on mitochondrial genomes of 11 unicellular fungi that appear to have been completely and reliably sequenced. We used a simple strategy, namely a search for recurring oligonucleotides (
                        w
                     -mers) of a fixed length, to screen for presence of possibly longer sequences that are repeated many times within the genome; an ultimate goal, towards which this study can offer only a first start, would be to understand the repeats and repeat systems in those and other mitochondrial genomes in the light of their possible function and evolution.

The working hypothesis motivating our study was that precisely the risks taken by a mitochondrion that continues to maintain sizable repeats, persisting in numerous copies that are interspersed around its relatively small genome, could often be a clue signaling functionally and/or structurally important sequence features at or flanking the repeats’ genomic locations. Indeed, in the absence of any benefit, one might expect that natural selection will tend to eliminate variants exhibiting risky repetition, and to favor variants exhibiting no or only benign repetition. Such a principle, if consolidated by testing, could then be applied to efficiently ‘mine for meaning’, in a high throughput fashion, across mitochondrial or even nuclear genomes. As a start, we went through the steps of systematically screening our 11 chosen fungal mitochondrial genomes.

In this study we use the term “mitochondrial genome” as synonymous with “mitochondrial DNA genome” or “mtDNA genome”. Most genome reports use this definition. However, some authors include also nuclear-encoded mitochondrial genes in the definition. Thus, Wallace (2013) defines the mitochondrial genome via the role, not the physical location, of the DNA and its genes, so that the “mitochondrial genome consists of thousands of copies of the maternally inherited mtDNA plus between 1000 and 2000 nDNA genes”.

An objective of the present study was to gain a first insight into the presence and types of repeats in fungal mitochondrial genomes that can be highlighted using a simple strategy, namely a search for persistently recurring oligonucleotides of a fixed length. For reasons given below, we focused primarily on 17-mers. Since repeats can be the most difficult sequences to assemble from reads, we took care to select only fungi represented by a complete mitochondrial genome sequence that appeared reliable, with no obvious gaps that might correspond to unsequenced repeats. We therefore did not include partially sequenced/assembled genomes, in order to avoid mistaking ‘absence of evidence’ for ‘evidence of absence’ of repeats.

We sampled transversally across fungi associated with animals and well-studied model fungi, but did not include, for example, non-model fungi associated exclusively with plants, and our list of 11 mtDNA sequences does not include all complete mitochondrial genome sequences of such fungi now available (see, e.g., van de Sande, 2012; Joardar et al., 2012).

BLASTN searches showed that a short segment of the mitochondrial genome sequence of Paracoccidioides brasiliensis Pb18 was of non-fungal origin, and it was removed.

For the study conducted here, unless otherwise mentioned, we chose a pilot criterion that considers persistent repeats to be those sequences of length at least 17bp that are repeated at least 4 times in a given mitochondrial genome. Fourfold repeats of sequences longer than 17bp always correspond to two or more overlapping 17-bp repeats and are therefore also represented.

We justify our choice of 17bp by our interest in (a) risk of genome-destabilizing ectopic recombination,
                           1
                        
                        
                           1
                           We note that the mitochondrial processes that typically interest us here do not involve routine crossovers between two homologous chromosomes during meiosis, so it is not clear if borrowed terms such as ‘ectopic’, ‘illegitimate’, or ‘out-of-register’ recombination really make sense for intra-chromosomal recombination of (haploid) mitochondrial DNA. It is not evident what a corresponding ‘non-ectopic’ or ‘in-register’ recombination would be in such a context, as there is no expected, natural, routine or programmed ‘in-register’ mtDNA recombination event in the mitochondrion's life cycle to which one could refer as an obvious standard. We will however still borrow traditional metaphors such as ‘ectopic’ to refer to intra- or inter-chromosomal recombination between non-overlapping regions that have high sequence similarity.
                         (b) risk of assembly-destabilizing repetition, and (c) secondary structures possibly associated with repeats. In these contexts, we note that (a) experimental, quantitative recombination studies consistently suggest that a perfectly repeated 17-mer should generally pose a risk of ectopic recombination, when the repeats occur within short distances similar to those found within a circular fungal mitochondrial genome; (b) some NGS short read assembly programs, such as SOAPdenovo2, offer k-mer size choices starting at around 17bp; and (c) 17bp is approximately the size of a conceivable, minimal compact stemloop/hairpin with flanks (e.g., flank 2bp+stem 5bp+loop 3bp+stem 5bp+flank 2bp; see also Forsdyke (1995) and related oligonucleotide symmetry searches in (Bultrini et al., 2003; Baisnee et al., 2002)). We also note that a recent analysis of frequently repeated words in the human nuclear genome focused on words of a similar length, 15–16bp (Zahradnik et al., 2014).

Our cutoff at 4 copies was chosen to pick up only clear signals. We were interested where the 17-nt repeats’ perseverance is unlikely to be transient, to be retained just by chance, or to have arisen via independent convergent mutations, as might conceivably be the case if only two copies of a 17-mer are present in the mitochondrial genome. In other words, our pilot criterion for fungi was chosen to screen for ‘provocative’ repetition in fungal mitochondrial genomes. It avoids false positives at the expense of missing repeats that could be relevant, e..g., our criterion misses the clinically important 13-bp repeat pair associated with the ‘common’ deletion in human (Samuels et al., 2004; Chen et al., 2011).

When counting repeats, we did not distinguish among possible relative orientations, e.g., between direct and inverted repeats.

We deliberately focused almost exclusively on exact (100% identical) repetition of short (e.g., ≤40bp) sequences, and not on less stringent (<100% identity) repeats as is customary in some other contexts. This was in order to keep the criteria and the analyses simple, and to avoid ‘curses of dimensionality’ when one simultaneously allows several freely variable parameters (number of mismatches allowed, gap creation and extension penalties, levels of similarity for mismatches, etc.). Other contexts require more relaxed stringency, e.g., when one explores distributions of (possibly degraded) transposons or other families of interspersed repeats in nuclear genomes.

In the initial pre-scanning of genomes we considered different possible minimum lengths 
                           w
                         for the exact repeats. Afterwards, we used 
                           w
                           =
                           17
                        
                        bp throughout, for our ‘proof of principle’. We did not explore the question of optimizing 
                           w
                         for a given purpose in a given genome. We refer to (Li and Freudenberg, 2014b) for quantitative studies of the variation of 
                           w
                         (or D) for the human nuclear genome, and a (possibly fundamental) duality between them and copy-number (C) variation analyses such as we present here.

Following Li et al. (2014), we used DSK (Rizk et al., 2013), and as an independent technical check also RepeatScout's pre-processing module build_lmer_table with the -tandem 0 option (Price et al., 2005). These programs were used to extract, from each of the chosen mitochondrial genome sequences, all 17-mers (types) together with the number of times each of them were found in the sequence (number of tokens). We verified that both programs correctly manage reverse complements, i.e., that they correctly identify a token such as ACGTACGTACGTACGTA with its reverse complement TACGTACGTACGTACGT and count the two sequences together as belonging to one double-stranded 17-mer type (labelled by one of the two strands’ sequences).

In contrast to RepeatScout's pre-processing module build_lmer_table, which tabulates k-mers and their frequencies and always gave correct results, the main part of RepeatScout uses additional criteria to then extend overlapping repeats. This second part of the RepeatScout program may not have been intended or optimized for the kind of maximal extension tasks (≳30bp) and short initial repeat lengths (≳17bp) that interested us. Indeed, RepeatScout often did not assemble the overlapping 17-mers to their actual maximal repeat sequence or extension. We therefore complemented exploratory use of RepeatScout with extension by eye and re-running of the build_lmer_table module for larger repeat sizes (from 18bp to over 30bp).

@&#RESULTS@&#

An aim of this study was to explore a very simple word-size structured, exact-repeat based approach for flagging regions of fungal mitochondrial genomes that are likely to be enriched for potential functional or structural significance.

We focused on a small number of fungal mitochondrial genomes that were represented by relatively high quality, bona fide complete, annotated and/or curated mitochondrial genome sequences, i.e., genomes for which we could expect exhaustive k-mer lists and ‘final’ repeat statistics. In NGS short-read de novo assemblies, for example, precisely those regions with substantial repeats can be preferentially missing, so a partial NGS-derived fungal mitochondrial genome would give an unreliable picture of the actual genome's repeat structures (see Section 2.2).

In line with our laboratory's interest, we restricted our search to human pathogenic fungi and model fungi; we chose only one genome/strain per genus, with the exception of Candida where we chose two. We found that many fungi having sequenced nuclear genomes do not have complete high-quality mitochondrial genome sequences. (For comments on the more general phenomenon of neglected mitochondrial genomes, see Pesole et al. (2012), Picardi and Pesole (2012)).


                        Table 1
                         presents the 11 fungal mitochondrial genome sequences we chose, which range from 19.4kb for Schizosaccharomyces pombe to 100.3kb for Podospora anserina, and cover a representative range for fungi. For comparison, we also included in our analyses the mitochondrial reference genome of human Bandelt et al. (2014, and refs. therein; length 16.6 kb), to serve as an outgroup external to fungi.

To find a working criterion for our pilot study, we pre-scanned the selected 11 fungal mitochondrial genomes for perfect repeats of a fixed length. We looked for values 
                           w
                         of that length that were neither too small, in the sense that repetition is inevitable, nor too large, in the sense that there is no repetition at all.

The pre-scanning suggested that a pilot criterion including only ≥17-nt repeats, occurring ≥4 times within the same mitochondrial genome, might be an appropriately poised choice for the mining task we consider. As we describe below, the criterion succeeds in picking up documented, main repeat types previously observed and/or characterized in our chosen mitochondrial genomes, and suggests additional ones that have not yet been characterized. The repeat length 
                           w
                           =
                           17
                        
                        nt is within the range of k-mer or ‘window’ sizes (de Bruijn graph dimensions) currently used by short-read based de novo assembly programs; furthermore, it is within the range of repeat lengths for which an illegitimate recombination event (possibly leading to deletion of functionally important DNA and genome instability) becomes a risk (see Section 2.3).

When we then applied this pilot criterion to scan the 11 selected fungal mitochondrial genomes, we observed a wide variability: from no repeats in some species, through very simple repeats, to rich and complex vocabularies or systems of highly non-trivial repeats, sometimes with clear propensity to form stable secondary structures as in baker's yeast. We therefore chose to report results for the ‘17×4′ criterion in this study.


                        Table 2
                         reports some basic repeat statistics for each of the chosen mitochondrial genomes, using the ‘17×4′ pilot criterion for persistent repeats. We included also two traditional, kinetic DNA complexity measures in the statistics for these genomes, calculated at word size 17bp. These and some other complexity measures essentially indicate levels of repetitiveness: for a given genome size, less repetitive genomes are assigned higher traditional complexities. Early reassociation studies reported kinetic complexities for essentially 
                           w
                        
                        ≈400bp, allowing some mismatches (Britten and Kohne, 1968); in Table 2 we apply the original formulae with 
                           w
                        
                        =17bp, allowing no mismatches. At a repeat or word length of 17bp, these and other repetitiveness measures calculated for Table 2 agree that 4 of the 12 genomes we examined, Calb, Ncra, Pbra, and Scer, have distinctly more repeats than the others. Indeed, the rightmost column of the table also reports, for each strain studied, the number of ‘persistent’ 17-mer types (including overlapping 17-mer types) that were represented four or more times in the strain's mitochondrial genome. All persistent 17-mer types that are present in a genome in 4 or more copies (i.e., 4 or more tokens) are listed in Supplementary Table S1, grouped first by species/strain (pages) and then by number of occurrences, i.e., tokens (columns).


                        Fig. 1
                         shows frequency plots of the three mitochondrial genomes having the highest yields of persistently repeated 17-mers: Scer (mtDNA genome size 85.8kb), Pbra (size 71.3kb) and Ncra (size 64.8kb). For the double-logarithmic scales used in the figure, these genomes exhibit a linear decrease with a slope close to −3, which agrees well with slopes observed in the human nuclear genome (see Supplementary Material, section A4).

The three mitochondrial genomes that had no 4-fold persistent repeats at the 17-bp level were Spom, TreS and the non-fungal ‘negative control’ Hsap. Spom is of interest as a model example, as it was observed already decades ago that the nuclear genome of S. pombe has more introns and is less compact than that of S. cerevisiae, whereas for the mitochondrial genomes that compactness ranking is reversed; in a similar way, human has a much bigger nuclear genome than any fungi yet a smaller mitochondrial genome than most fungi (cf. Table 2).

One might expect a very compact mitochondrial genome to lack persisting repeats, and indeed the small (<20kb) mitochondrial genomes of Spom and Hsap are both repeat-poor. However, the converse need not hold: the repeat-poor genome of TreS is intermediate in size, 42.1kb.

For the other 9 mitochondrial genomes that we chose to study, Fig. 2
                         displays the persisting 17-mers’ alphabet usage, i.e., their information content at the single-base level in bits, −f
                        Alog2
                        f
                        A−f
                        Clog2
                        f
                        C−f
                        Glog2
                        f
                        G−f
                        Tlog2
                        f
                        T, where f denotes base frequency (Khinchin, 1957). Such alphabet usage is sometimes used as a simplistic complexity measure at the single-base level. For example, sequence comparison programs or web servers such as NCBI BLAST may report that a region of DNA has ‘low complexity’ when its alphabet usage is low.

In Fig. 2, it can be seen that 3 of the 9 genomes with persistent 17-mers exhibit only DNA with low alphabet usage in those 17-mers, namely Cgla, Tmar and Wcan. Their persistently repeated 17-mers are composed of only two of the four bases, namely A and T, and thus have alphabet usage of at most 1 bit. These 17-mers were found to consist entirely of perfect or slightly imperfect runs of the simple repeats (AT)
                           n
                         and (AAT)
                           n
                        .

Such two-letter sequences could in principle be created and then readily stretch (expand) or shrink (contract) by slippage. Sequences shaped by such events might appear to be so unstable, in microevolutionary time, that they could not play a conserved functional role benefiting the fungus. Reasoning of this kind may be justified for AT-only sequences, but appears not to be justified for GC-only sequences. For example, the well-documented GC clusters in S. cerevisiae can flag structurally significant features with an apparently stable role in replication Bernardi (2005, and refs. therein), Bernardi (2004).

After eliminating genomes that had no 4-fold repeated 17-mers other than AT-only repeats, six genomes remained.

In two of the six genomes that contained persistent 17-bp repeats with high alphabet usage (>1 bit), namely Scer and Pbra, most of the ≥ 4-fold repeated 17-mers still belonged to the ‘low alphabet usage’ component (Fig. 2).

In Scer, all 17-mers that were repeated 44 or more times (reaching a maximum of 99 times) were AT-only. They consisted entirely of the simple repeats (AT)
                           n
                        , (AATT)
                           n
                        , (AAT)
                           n
                        , (ATAAT)
                           n
                         and (AAAT)
                           n
                        , with a few minor imperfections in the runs. Among the persistent 17-mers repeated fewer than 44 times, such AT-only runs continued to have a strong presence, but a substantial number of less simple 17-mers were also found, using more than 2 bases.

In Pbra, all 17-mers that were repeated 21 or more times (reaching a maximum of 165 times) were again AT-only; AT-only 17-mer types had a strong but not exclusive presence also among the 17-mer types represented fewer than 21 times.

In the following subsubsections we focus individually on the high alphabet usage components of the 6 mitochondrial genomes and, within those components, on those 17-mers with high alphabet usage that do not turn out to be simply trivial composites of smaller sub-repeats, e.g., of repeated 3-mers.

We present the 6 genomes in order of increasing intricacy of the repeat systems they revealed in our ‘17×4′ analyses. A few examples of high alphabet usage repeats found in the 6 genomes are listed in Table 3
                        ; more detailed descriptions and matching of repeats to known features are given in Supplementary Material, section A6.

The persistent 17-mer landscape of the published mitochondrial genome sequence of A. fumigatus strain AF293 (Afum) was the least intricate, since all persistent 17-mers were simply subsequences of a single 37-mer, namely
                              
                                 
                                    TATTAGTTAAGGTTACCTTACTTAAAGGGTTGAACAC.

A similarity search showed that this 37-mer appears exactly 4 times in each of the mitochondrial genome sequences of A. fumigatus strains AF293, AF210 and A1163; it also appears once, with two mismatches, in the mitochondrial sequence of another Aspergillus species, A. clavatus (strain NRRL 1; JQ354999). No extended similarity to this 37-mer was found in any additional fungal sequences, or in any other sequences in the nr database of NCBI/GenBank.

In Afum, the one copy that was well conserved between Afum and A. clavatus is located between positions −17bp and −53bp upstream of the ATG start codon of the atp9 gene. Possibly of interest, one of the other Afum copies is located at an identical distance from another, hypothetical, gene with a very different protein/coding sequence (see Supplementary Material, subsection A6.1). We did not find references to a demonstrated functional role of the 37-mer in the literature, but its proximity to the start codon and/or promoter of gene(s) suggests a potential role related to gene transcription and/or translation.

Twenty-five 17-mers of the P. anserina mtDNA were repeated at least 4 times. We allocated these 25 17-mers to groups of overlapping 17-mers by simple alignment and reverse complementation, and also considered extensions proposed by RepeatScout; we then used the NCBI MegaBLAST server (Graphics link) and Geneious to locate and visualize where each of the extended sequences had matches to the full Pans mt sequence. We also used the same protocol for other fungal species (below).

The 4-fold repeated (persistent) 17-mers included just one AT-only 17-mer, A9T8, but a variety of 17-mer types with high alphabet usage, including several that were subsequences of previously reported palindromes of length reaching up to 34 nt. Table 3 lists some of the extensions found; references and more details are given in Supplementary Material, subsection A6.2.


                           Fig. 2 showed that C. albicans (Calb) stands out compared to the other fungi studied here: almost all persistent 17-mers in its mitochondrial genome make use of the full 4-letter alphabet of DNA, i.e., Calb has essentially only the component of high alphabet usage (only three persistent 17-mers consisted entirely of AT). It is interesting that in this respect it is the opposite of the other Candida species we examined, C. glabrata (Cgla): the mitochondrial 17-mers of Cgla have only a low alphabet usage component and no high alphabet usage component.

The Calb mitochondrial genome landscape, as viewed in silico, has been described (Gerhold et al., 2010) as containing “potentially hairpin-forming sequences, GC clusters and nonanucleotide promoter-like sequences that might serve as sites for RNA priming”, which are scattered along the mtDNA sequence rather than clustering into ori/rep or other structural loci as in Scer (cf. subsection 3.5.6). For matching of individual repetitive 17-mer types to some of these features, and a possible ambiguity in structure prediction, see Supplementary Material, subsection A6.3; two of the extensions of repeated 17-mers (of lengths 21 and 30 nt) that corresponded to previously noted likely hairpins are given in Table 3.

The mitochondrial genome of Ncra is characterized by a rich repeat landscape, some of which was characterized and discussed already in the 1980's. For example, our most frequent 17-mer (repeated 124 times in the genome) defines a palindromic 18-mer motif, CCCTGCAGTACTGCAGGG (repeated 120 times). Longer GC-rich palindromic sequences, containing the 18-mer as their loop region, appear in the Ncra mtDNA and correspond to often impressively long stemloops (perfect or with few bulges) or other predicted secondary structures having possible roles in replication. The impressively long predicted structures were pointed out in 1981 Yin et al. (1981, see esp. Figs. 3 and 5), and were observed to flank tRNA genes; more results were obtained by Nargang et al. (1983). The positional distribution of the highly repeated 18-mer in the Ncra mtDNA (Fig. 3
                           ) shows that its presence, although clustered, is not restricted to few sector(s) of the genome.

When we selected the forty 17-mers that were repeated at least 10 times, stripped their ends of any perfect or nearly perfect single-nucleotide runs, and looked at the remaining subsequences of the 17-mers, we saw that they always formed part of one of three distinct consensus sequences: the 18-bp palindrome motif mentioned above (notably with no mismatches/variation), the 6-mer ACGGCT/AGCCGT, and the palindromic 12-mer GCAAGCTTGC.

Given the Pbra repeats’ promising metrics, robust power-law trend and high alphabet usage (Figures 1 and 2), its persistent repeat motifs of length ≤17bp were disappointingly simplistic. As in several other mt genomes, the frequently repeated 17-mers were mostly AT-only sequences. Thus, the 17-mers occurring 11–165 times were AT-only or, in very few cases, were imperfect AT-only with one C or G, or consisted entirely of (AGG)
                              n
                           /(CCT)
                              n
                            triplet repeats. However, 17-mers occurring 4–10 times also showed the same tendencies, or were formed of other perfect or imperfect 3-, 4- or 5-nt repeats such as (AAGG)
                              n
                           /(CCTT)
                              n
                           , (AAGT)
                              n
                           /(ACTT)
                              n
                           , (AGG)
                              n
                           /(CCT)
                              n
                           , (ACT)
                              n
                           /(AGT)
                              n
                           , (TCA)
                              n
                           /(TGA)
                              n
                           , (AGTA)
                              n
                           / (TACT)
                              n
                           , (CGAT)
                              n
                            or (AATTC)
                              n
                           , which in some cases were interrupted by single-nucleotide runs. There were also a few GC-rich sequences, which were however consistently purine-only (A's and G's) / pyrimidine-only (C's and T's).

Since structural mutants, repeats, and/or potential secondary structures of the mtDNA genome of the model fungus S. cerevisiae have been given much attention over several decades, it is not surprising that many of the particularly abundant 17-mers we found corresponded to previously studied regions of this genome (see colored 17-mers in Supplementary Table S1; an unedited alignment of the genome's documented origin of replication or ori regions, which accounted for a large portion of the more persistent 17-mers, is shown in Supplementary Figure S1).

We applied a similar ‘distilling’ procedure to our repeated 17-mers as we had used for some other mitochondrial genomes: selectively removing 17-mers with exclusive AT usage and then screening the remaining yield of 17-mers using various criteria, such as having low ΔG, having high repetitiveness, and/or belonging to longer repeated supersequences that could be assembled exclusively from the obtained yield of 17-mers. Low (i.e., highly negative) ΔG flags those 17-mers that have higher propensity to alone form secondary structures, but cannot capture those contributing, e.g., to stem-halves of long stemloop structures.

A scatterplot illustrating screenings of the yield of 17-mers is shown in Fig. 4
                           . The Figure shows a few examples from the most energetically favorable structures, and also how the tokens (instances) of the most highly repetitive (≥36-fold) 17-mers from the scatterplot are distributed around the ‘master’ chromosome: the strongest clustering is observed at or close to the ori's (located as specified in the GenBank sequence).

Longer sequences reconstructed from the persistent 17-mers included classic ori sequences, surrogate ori sequences and classic GC cluster sequences (Bernardi, 2004) as well as a few sequences that to our knowledge have not been studied before; examples are shown in Table 3.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

We have analyzed repeated DNA in 11 fungal mitochondrial genome sequences that are considered complete, by focusing on persistent repeats of approximately 17bp that appear at least four times in the same genome. The results we obtained are compatible with the idea that such repeated k-mers appear frequently enough, but not too frequently, in order for them to be useful as markers or flags of structurally and/or functionally interesting features. We have illustrated this for a number of fungi, where the regions they flagged often corresponded to regions that happened to have received particular attention by other authors in the past, in some cases largely irrespective of the regions’ repeated occurrence. The fungi we chose for study include human pathogens (Afum, Calb, Cgla, the dermatophyte TreS and the thermally dimorphic pathogens Pbra and Tmar) and model organisms (Ncra, Pans, Scer and Spom).

Compared to fungi, mammalian mitochondrial genomes tend to have shorter or infrequently repeated non-unique sequences Lakshmanan et al. (2012, Fig. 1A). Repeats that have attracted interest in the model fly Drosophila occurred in tandem (Lewis et al., 1994; Kann et al., 1998; Rand, 2001). In angiosperm plants the sometimes large (e.g., > 500 kb) sizes and large noncoding DNA content of mtDNAs has provided opportunities for exploring their repeats, but perhaps because of size and task complexity, sequencing of entire mtDNA genomes has been slow (Kubo and Newton, 2008; Negruk, 2013), and exhaustive analysis of the mtDNAs’ noncoding regions can be less straightforward than for fungi. In summary, fungi currently appear to be a good choice of taxonomic group in which to address repeat-related mtDNA questions.

We proceeded in our analyses of fungal mtDNA genomes and their repeats via stepwise elimination or ‘shelling’ of repeat types, which we grouped into ‘shells’ using a number of criteria that the frequency data suggested (or, in some species, dictated). The first shell to be removed was that of repeats that consist entirely, or with very few exceptions, of A and T; the abundance of these repeats was an mtDNA trait that differed among species, even within the same genus (Calb 
                        vs. 
                        Cgla), but in general such individual AT-only repeats or repeat stretches were not sufficiently rare or species-specific to appear useful as flags of structural or functional features, and we did not analyze them further. Subsequent shelling depended on the genome of interest, and its shellability: one criterion we used for shelling was decomposability of the 17-mers into smaller repeats; another expedient variable that revealed distinct groups of repeat types in some genomes was the magnitude of the free energy (−ΔG) of the 17-mer's own folding. The inner shells often coincided with salient or species-specific features of previously noted structural or functional interest. Some of the 17-mers observed in these inner shells and their repetitiveness are understood; others still await follow-up analyses and explanation.

The procedure we followed in this study, and the diversity of the repeat ‘flora and fauna’ it allowed us to observe (viewed as linear sequences and/or as their likely folding patterns or shapes), led us to revisit notions of complexity that are often used for describing whole-genome and other eukaryotic sequences. We propose that a concept of complexity is needed here that goes beyond the most commonly used complexity measures, which typically penalize deviations from uniform word frequencies, or categorically consider that repetition should lower complexity. In a nutshell: repeats, if not present in overwhelming quantities, can serve roles that are able to facilitate or catalyze the genesis or growth of semantically complex systems. We propose the term ‘repeat-associated complexities’ for complexity notions that reflect this point of view. A discussion with examples is given in Supplementary Material, section A7.

While we were writing this manuscript, Illumina increased the maximum length of paired-end reads offered by its sequencing machines, from around 100–150bp to 250 –300bp. As Illumina and other NGS technologies advance, offering reads that are longer and/or cost less, the repeat-associated instability of genome assemblies caused by short reads could soon become a problem of the past, even if the fascination of some theoretical and algorithmic questions surrounding short reads’ de novo assembly may remain.

By contrast, some parallel problems of instability or loss of integrity of mtDNA genomes in vivo are likely to remain clinically relevant. Human mtDNA deletion-related detriments to health can be serious (Chen et al., 2011; Sequeira et al., 2012; Zaragoza et al., 2011). In fungal pathogens containing repeats that could lead to structural mutants via ectopic pairing, one could imagine virulence being reduced by some deletions or enhanced by others (in relation to mitochondrial activity changes that may be needed by the fungus for pathogenic activities, cf. e.g. Maresca et al., 1981); insights into fitness- or virulence-modulating mtDNA changes, e.g., affecting respiration, might ultimately translate to ways of managing infections.

We motivate this section with a parallel example, a hypothesis that also involves mitochondria, namely the CoRR hypothesis for the retention of genes in mtDNA (Allen and de Paula, 2013; Allen, 2003). The rationale for this hypothesis is summarized by Lane (2006, italics in the original): “there must be a very strong positive reason” why the existing mitochondrial genes were retained in the mitochondrial genome rather than having been moved to central control in the nuclear genome as one might have expected. The idea is that the genes that have persisted in the mtDNA “have not remained there by chance, but because natural selection has favoured their retention despite the manifold disadvantages”. The proposed reason is that the speed of respiration is very sensitive to changing circumstances so, to respond effectively to abrupt changes, mitochondria “need to maintain a genetic outpost on site”.

In a similar way, words in a DNA sequence that consistently occur far more often than expected may suggest that there is a biologically significant benefit or reason for their persisting repetitiveness (Pesole et al., 1992), especially where such repetition is known to be associated with potential disadvantages or risks. In this study, a biological risk that has guided some of our explorations is the risk of ectopic recombination or pairing, and the deletions of DNA segments that such pairing can entail. After addressing the risk itself, we address possible benefits of repetition that could balance those risks, i.e., tradeoff scenarios that might be relevant.

The risk, or efficiency, of an ectopic pairing or recombination event in a genome that could result in the deletion of intervening DNA has not been easy to quantify, or quantitatively predict, from only information contained in the genome's DNA sequence. Over decades, attempts in this direction have been published for dozens of systems, but the quantitative results on recombination frequencies or efficiencies from those systems have not yet converged to a generally applicable formula or procedure for estimating recombination probabilities directly from a genome sequence. A few of the many reports are Baker et al. (1996), Lichten and Haber (1989), Mezard et al. (1992), Sugawara and Haber (1992), Bollag et al. (1989). The variable findings from studies using different systems illustrates that it is not easy to find factors external to the sequence that could improve sequence-based risk prediction. In mtDNA and if a good predictor were available, risk of a deletion event might be best calculated from the repeats themselves (Samuels et al., 2004; Chen et al., 2011) and/or from joint secondary structures favoring pairing that can preferentially occur in the vicinity of the repeats (Guo et al., 2010).

Although quantification of risk remains difficult, the numerous studies focusing on ectopic recombination do, however, firmly consolidate the presence of an ectopic pairing risk, across many contexts and scenarios. The studies strongly suggest that such risks, and their possible consequences, should be anticipated when thinking about non-unique DNA copies located at relatively short distances from each other, as is the case in the relatively small mtDNA chromosomes.

We now consider ways in which risky (potentially genome-destabilizing) ectopic recombination or deletion events, which it would be advantageous to prevent in some circumstances, could in fact be beneficial under other circumstances.

Roles in mechanisms of replication and/or transcription have been invoked as one possible benefit of repeat presence in the mitochondrial genomes of some fungi, and we have considered them in some concrete fungal contexts in this article so far (see Results). Proof of relevance for replication appears to be strong in the well-studied case of the yeast S. cerevisiae, more tentative for some other fungi, and absent for the clinically important and also well-studied common deletion in human (see also Section 4.3.6 below).

The discovery of CRISPR sequences in prokaryotes, associated with the organism's self-defense against viruses, raises the question if any eukaryotic genomes (mtDNA or nuclear) might contain sequences derived from a similar or related defense function, and that have possibly now been adapted to a different role. In the context of repeats with stemloop potential, such we have described here in fungal mtDNA, we note that prokaryotic CRISPR sequences can contain two or more direct repeats, often around 30–40bp or so in length, separated by spacer(s) of a similar length. The direct repeats are, in turn, often palindrome-like or with some dyad symmetry, possibly corresponding to stemloop-like structures. A few fungal mtDNA repeats observed in this study were located in sequences that appear compatible with a CRISPR sequence, but the agreement was not extensive enough to suggest a CRISPR-like or defense-derived function of repeated sequences in fungal mtDNA (see Supplementary Material for details and references).

In contrast to the possible or shown benefits or needs for replication, transcription, defense or other cellular processes, we now mention a different type of benefit that could in principle be associated with the robust presence of repeats in mitochondrial genomes. This hypothesized benefit partly extrapolates insights from angiosperms’ mitochondrial genomes (e.g., Kubo and Newton, 2008 
                           
                              2
                           
                           
                              2
                              In 2008 these authors could already summarize the situation for angiosperm mtDNAs as follows: “With one reported exception... each angiosperm master chromosome harbors one to several sets of repeated sequences where active recombination events occur between the repeat copies. Due to this property, isomeric forms of the master chromosome would be expected when the repeat copies of a set are present in inverted orientation to each other; alternatively, two subdivided molecules (subgenomes) would be expected when two copies of the same repeat are present in direct orientation.”
                           ), which can be much larger than those of most fungi (e.g., 588 kb in the legume Vicia faba; Negruk, 2013).

A strong form of the hypothesis we now consider is that selection could have maintained some repeat pairs because they provide, via ectopic pairing, a mechanism to easily switch between alternative structural forms when these become advantageous, for example when some environmental condition favors such a ‘structural switch’. A consequence could be the creation of structural diversity among mtDNAs depending on environmental circumstances. In larger organisms such as human, a related principle might lead to structural heteroplasmy (an example of this class of phenomena, although not necessarily generated in this way, might be the condition-dependent dimeric molecules, branched structures and four-way junctions observed in adult cardiac muscle mtDNAs by Pohjoismäki et al. (2010)). A down side would be the creation of mtDNA deletion mutants causing clinical phenotypes in human. Such consequences are what we indeed observe, in human and (where applicable) in fungi.

In a related context, namely the stretches of tandem repeats often found in nuclear genomes, Trifonov (Trifonov, 1999, 2004; King et al., 2006) has introduced the metaphor of an evolutionary or adaptive “tuning knob” to emphasize how small changes in the repeats can produce fast adaptation. Tandem repeats can also, as their down side, cause clinical disease in human, as in the case of excessively expanding or ‘runaway’ trinucleotide repeats in the FMR-1 gene/Fragile X syndrome or in Huntington's disease. Tandem repeats can expand or contract by slippage; non-tandem repeats, on which we focus in our study, cannot use this mechanism, but can typically only use ectopic pairing in order to produce fast adaptation, in this case by generating structural variants.

Interestingly, a recent analysis of 15- and 16-mer repeats (tandem and non-tandem) in the human nuclear genome by Zahradnik et al. (2014) showed that the most repeated words were various mono- and dinucleotide repeats, subsequences of Alu repeats, and the sequence T
                           11
                           GAGA/TCTCA
                           11 and its truncations. The authors point out that such massively repeated words are likely to have been the generator sequences that then led also to a smaller number of mutated sequences, and propose as a conservative suggestion “that all high occurrences in the vocabulary are due to higher use of the words for whatever special intragenomic function they serve”, a proposal that is paralleled by our view that frequency is likely to imply function also in mtDNAs.

The view considered here has consequences for the understanding of genome sequences. It suggests that the notion of a consensus or master structure or master chromosome (Kubo and Newton, 2008), constituting ‘the’ mitochondrial genome, may continue to be useful as an idealized placeholder, but that this concept may not satisfactorily mirror the existing, substantial structural diversity or structural heteroplasmy that can often be observed among mtDNA chromosomes of the same organism or isolate. The view postulates that, whether in fungi or human, we may sometimes need to consider the possibility of a distribution of different mtDNA chromosomal sizes, structures or forms (see also Supplementary Material, Section A5).

A corollary is that for many species we may never succeed in sequencing the mitochondrial genome of a species or strain, because there may actually be several such viable genomes, which may be structurally different. Moreover, in some conditions a smaller variant(s) could be ‘better’ (e.g., replicate more efficiently when needed while continuing to serve some useful function) than the maximal sequence, which one might traditionally have thought of as being the only complete one, and for which one wished ‘stability’. The maximal or ‘complete’ circular construct that has often interested us so much in the past may, however, be just one of many constructs or topologies (e.g., circular, linear or branched) that co-exist in an organism, or in a Petri dish of fungal colonies deriving from a single isolate (e.g., in co-existing petite and wild-type colonies of yeast).

The sooner we realize that a distribution, not a single ‘wild type’ or variant chromosome, could often be the relevant paradigm when we try to parse or assemble raw NGS mtDNA reads of a eukaryotic individual or sample, the quicker we will be able to appropriately adapt existing assembly tools or develop new ones in order to arrive at assembled sequences of the major structural types, without getting into a tug-of-war of apparently contradictory assemblies, of which some are believed to be more correct than others.

Furthermore, as the title of this article indicates, there may be a duality between the in vivo or in vitro situations in which repeats can confuse ‘faithful’ transmission of a chromosomal sequence to the future, e.g., via replication, and in silico situations in short-read de novo or reference assembly where repeats can confuse the reconstruction of a master chromosome sequence of a fungal mitochondrion. The duality may not stop here, however. Just as we are now imagining a distribution of possible structural chromosome variants, rearranged in accordance with the repeat pairs that could potentially favor the creation of those variants, we can also, in parallel, imagine a distribution of possible assemblies of a set of short NGS reads that is compatible with the information in the read set. To what extent the possible assemblies reflect the possible or observed genomes remains speculative at this point. Figuring out which (more global) assembly topologies or structures are compatible with a set of (more local) segments or fragments of those structures (e.g., short reads) is a classic problem that goes back at least as far as Benzer's early analyses (Benzer, 1959, 1962; Golumbic, 2004); for reconstructions of topologies in yeast mitochondria, see Rayko and Goursot (1999). This classic problem received much attention from combinatoricists in the 1970s and 1980s, e.g., in Golumbic (2004), Berge (1983), Ch. 16, and Berge (1987), Ch. 5. It might soon merit revisiting in light of the various interrelated open problems of structural mitogenomics we have briefly touched upon in this article (cf. also Supplementary Material, Section A6.3).

An initial ectopic pairing event may or may not lead to a viable mutant mtDNA chromosome that can survive, replicate and succeed. In yeast mitochondria, some petite mutants can survive even if they have only a single origin of replication (ori sequence) left but no genes at all (Bernardi, 2004, 2005; de Zamaroczy et al., 1981; Rand, 2001), and these can have replicative advantage over the wild-type. Conversely, in human mitochondria, large-scale deletion mutants that do not contain both the OH and the OL origins of replication are only very rarely observed (Chen et al., 2011). Because replication and replicative efficiency are so important, they provide hard constraints shaping the evolution of the population.

The common ori2–ori7 mtDNA deletion (Marotta et al., 1982) of the yeast S. cerevisiae might be seen as partly analogous to the common 13-base pairing mtDNA deletion in human, although in yeast the portion of the genome that is deleted is far smaller than in human, only around 2kb, and contains no gene or other feature of known function (Foury et al., 1998). In S. cerevisiae, the origins of replication ori2 and ori7 have been associated with repetitiveness (see also Section 3.5.6 above) as well as with roles and utility in replication (reviewed with references in Bernardi (2004)). By contrast, to our knowledge the extensively studied 13-bp repeats in human mtDNA leading to the common deletion (Samuels et al., 2004), and the putative duplex pairing structures within 100bp of the 13-bp repeats, which may be important for efficiency of the common deletion (Guo et al., 2010), have not been associated with a role in mtDNA replication in human; we also note that, unlike the ori2–ori7 context in yeast, the human origins of replication OH and OL are both far from the two 13-bp repeats.

An analysis of human deletion spectra by Guo et al. (2010) suggests that the 100-bp regions around the two 13-bp repeats of the human common mtDNA deletion might be even more important for efficient pairing, and the resulting deletion of a large region of DNA, than the 13-bp repeats themselves. Based on their results, the authors suggest that in the sample studied, common deletions can occur even without having two intact copies of the 13-bp repeat, because the pairing events could be mediated by the surrounding sequences, which however contain no such perfect repeats. Such a scenario, in which 13-bp repeats are also robustly ‘backed up’ by strong pairing tendencies of the surrounding DNA, would seem particularly incompatible with the idea that the propensity for pairing of different regions of the mtDNA is just some erroneous danger left uncorrected or unheeded by evolution, without any advantage. The situation would be more compatible with a tradeoff involving a possible direct benefit of maintaining structural mtDNA variety or heteroplasmy in an individual or population. More strongly: we might ask if an occasional need for the pairing event itself might be a major, or conceivably even the main, pressure maintaining the propensity for the common deletion in many human individuals.

More generally, we might ask if a possible benefit of furthering structural mtDNA variants, one that has not received much attention in the literature, could be to facilitate fast adaptation or fine-tuning of respiration in the cell, and respiration rates in the mitochondria, by differential generation/elimination of structural variants.

The small mtDNA genomes or chromosomes of the mitochondria of fungi, which are usually much smaller than 100kb, belong essentially to a genetically closed system, physically separate from the nucleus and the nuclear genome, with DNA being transferred only rarely or transiently between the two types of genome. This fact, together with the proneness of intra-chromosomal repeats to pair if they are separated by typical short distances within a fungal mtDNA chromosome (kb to tens of kb), suggest that significant repetition of sequences within the mtDNA could often pose a threat of genome instabilities (e.g., large block deletions); for this reason, fungal mtDNA sequences should be an attractive option for further exploring some of the hypotheses we have considered here and extending or consolidating our results.

At least in the case of fungal sequencing, however, the mitochondrial genome has gone through a phase of being ‘the neglected genome’ (Picardi and Pesole, 2012; Pesole et al., 2012; Rand, 2001). Many complete nuclear genome sequences have only incomplete or missing mitochondrial genomes to accompany them. Obtaining full mitochondrial genome assemblies of fungi from short reads or 454 sequencing can be particularly difficult. Sometimes the reasons are fundamental (repetitiveness of the genome vs. short reads), i.e., the assembly limits cannot be avoided by using a different assembly program (Muñoz et al., 2014). Thus, Lynch et al. (2008) reported specific mtDNA assembly problems for Scer isolates from 454 reads, and Dimitrov et al. (2009) and Steinmetz et al. (2002) addressed variation in mitochondrial properties among Scer isolates, but in the end they analyzed only nuclear DNA sequences to explain the mitochondrial variation.

The mitochondrial genome has, in addition, well-known fundamental differences compared to the nuclear genome: different genetic codes, different gene transcription and regulation paradigms, haploidy, heteroplasmy, absence of nuclear chromatin processes, and different genetics and evolution due to e.g. maternal inheritance, no crossing over, transitions more common than transversions, and phylogeny correlating with land geography. Programs optimized for nuclear genomes do not always have a ‘mitochondrial’ switch, presumably because program authors do not anticipate frequent use for mtDNA; incomplete mtDNA gene annotations in UCSC human genome releases (e.g., of hg19) may be partly due to such problems.

The period of neglected mitochondrial genomics may soon be over. Simple, bulk screening strategies such as those described here should then aid exploratory analyses of new, previously uncharacterized fungal mtDNA sequences, and may give us deeper insight into the roles of repeat landscapes across fungal mitochondrial genomes.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#


                     
                        
                           1
                           The degree of sequence repetition within mitochondrial genomes of fungi spans a wide range, from only trivial or no repeats to rich, complex repeat systems with clear propensity to form secondary structures. A good example of a fungus with such rich, complex repeat systems is baker's yeast (Scer).

Ectopic intrachromosomal recombining or pairing entails risks of segmental deletions and genome instability, but these risks may be compensated by a (possibly unknown) benefit of a particular repeat, repeat system, or repeat-pairing product. Persistence can be indicative of functional importance.

We have illustrated the potential of the above principle, for mitochondrial sequence mining, by screening 11 complete fungal mitochondrial genomes for repeated words of at least 17bp occurring at least 4 times, and then using those occurrences to identify elements of repeat landscapes and possible structure/shape vocabularies in the genomes. Many such elements were part of genome features that had previously attracted interest, but some were novel.

In the 11 complete mitochondrial genomes we analyzed, we used a simple ‘layer-peeling’ strategy for exhaustively analyzing and interpreting the set of persistently repetitive 17-mers; this proved to be effective, and a similar strategy should also be useful for other 
                                 w
                              -mer sizes close to 17. Briefly, the strategy is to successively remove first the 
                                 w
                              -mer repeats that consist of only A and T (up to perhaps one instance of another base), and then those 
                                 w
                              -mer repeats that decompose into much smaller subrepeats. For the 
                                 w
                              -mers that remain, we apply methods such as: screening for intrinsically likely secondary structures by calculating ΔG of the the 
                                 w
                              -mers themselves and looking for strongly negative values; local assembly to larger repeated sequences; and recognition of highly repetitive core sequences within the 
                                 w
                              -mers. For the fungi we studied this was a tractable protocol.

Some complexity measures, when applied to DNA sequences, will assign low complexities when repeats are frequent. From a semantic or a task viewpoint, however, the same repeat systems and/or their associated structures would increase structural or functional complexity. This reasoning suggests the need for a new notion, repeat-associated complexity.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

We thank Wentian Li for sharing key method strategies prior to publication, for pointing out the parallels with CRISPRs in prokaryotes, and for helpful discussions and references. OKC would like to thank Regina Goursot for recent stimulating discussions and for sharing unpublished results on mutant mtDNA structures, Giorgio Bernardi, Regine Goursot and Edda Rayko for introducing him to this field, and Edward Trifonov for reading the manuscript and for helpful comments. This work was partly supported by Colciencias grants 1222-56934875, “A gene atlas for human pathogenic fungi” and 2213-65842971, “A comprehensive genomic and transcriptomic analysis of dimorphic human pathogen fungi and their relation with virulence,” and by Sostenibilidad grants (2013/2014, 2014/2015) from the University of Antioquia. Colciencias National Doctorate Program funding supported JFM and EM and the University of El Rosario partly supported JEG.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2016.02.016.

The following are the supplementary data to this article:


                     
                        
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

