@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Analysis of sequence repeats of proteins in the PDB

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           PDB-wide analysis of sequence repeats in a non-redundant set of proteins.


                        
                        
                           
                           Use of different bioinformatics tools such as RADAR, PDBeFOLD, PDBsum and Pfam to identify and characterize the sequence repeats in a protein.


                        
                        
                           
                           Sequence identity of the repeats falls in the range of 20–40% and, their superimposed structures of the sequence repeats maintain similar overall folding.


                        
                        
                           
                           Sequence repeats are involved in the function of the protein through functionally important residues in the repeat regions.


                        
                        
                           
                           Sequence repeats in the domains of the proteins show that repeats involved in the function of protein possess conserved sequence motifs.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Sequence repeats

PDB

Structure

Function

Domain

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Internal repeats in protein sequences play a significant role in the evolution of protein structure and function. Applications of different bioinformatics tools help in the identification and characterization of these repeats. In the present study, we analyzed sequence repeats in a non-redundant set of proteins available in the Protein Data Bank (PDB). We used RADAR for detecting internal repeats in a protein, PDBeFOLD for assessing structural similarity, PDBsum for finding functional involvement and Pfam for domain assignment of the repeats in a protein. Through the analysis of sequence repeats, we found that identity of the sequence repeats falls in the range of 20–40% and, the superimposed structures of the most of the sequence repeats maintain similar overall folding. Analysis sequence repeats at the functional level reveals that most of the sequence repeats are involved in the function of the protein through functionally involved residues in the repeat regions. We also found that sequence repeats in single and two domain proteins often contained conserved sequence motifs for the function of the domain.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Proteins containing repeats of two or more contiguous segments of amino acid residues with identical and similar sequences often correspond to structural or functional units (Sarani et al., 2009). An estimated 25% of eukaryotic proteins contain repeats (Biegert and Sodjing, 2003) suggesting that internal duplication is an important mechanism in the evolution of multi-cellular organisms (Björklund et al., 2006). The length of the sequence repeats vary considerably such as single amino acid repeats (Julien and Kajava, 2010), three to seven residues simple sequence repeats (Fraser and MacRae, 1973) and complex repeat units of lengths ranging from 10 to >100 residues (Luo and Nijveen, 2013). Based on the distance between adjacent units, the repeats in the sequence are classified as tandem repeats that are continuously distributed in the sequence and non tandem repeats that are sequentially interspersed.

A number of bioinformatics tools, databases and servers have been developed for the identification of diverged repeats in protein sequences (Heger and Holm, 2000; Szklarczyk and Heringa, 2004; Gruber et al., 2005; Newman and Cooper, 2007; Jorda and Kajava, 2009) as well as in structure of the proteins (Holm and Sander, 1995; Abraham et al., 2008; Sabarinathan et al., 2012). As sequence and structure comparison methods improve, more distantly related protein regions irrespective of their three-dimensional (3D) structures are shown to be homologous (Ponting and Russell, 2002). The analysis of sequence repeats of proteins with known structures provides a unique opportunity to better understand the role of repeats at the structural and functional level. Previous studies have been carried out to analyze proteins containing array of tandem repeats and their array of repeated structure motifs and functions (Katti et al., 2000; Andrade et al., 2001; Kajava, 2012). It has been suggested that sequence patterns in the repeats may be a mechanism to provide regular arrays of spatial and functional groups, useful for structural packing or for interactions with target molecules (Katti et al., 2000). Common structural features and functions of different tandem repeats types such as tetratricopeptide, leucine-rich repeats, ankyrin and armadillo/heat have been reviewed (Andrade et al., 2001). Recent analysis of the repeats of the protein with known structure explores the straightforward relationship between length of the repetitive units and protein architectures (Kajava, 2012).

The general trend is that structure and function of the repeats in proteins is often conserved even though sequence repeats possess only weak identities due to extensive divergence (Holm and Sander, 1993). However, repeat regions with the same general fold differ in structure in proportion to the divergence of the amino acid sequences. Thus, it is possible that functional constraints exist on the assembly rather than on the individual repeats (Sarani et al., 2009). The level of sequence conservation in repeats correlates with their propensities to be intrinsically disordered (Hoang et al., 2012). While the relationships between divergence of sequence and structure of homologous proteins have been extensively studied (Chothia and Lesk, 1986; Sander and Scheider, 1991; Wood and Pearson, 1999), the extents of structural divergence in proteins containing internal repeats and their functional involvement have not been characterized.

The present study analyzes sequence repeats in proteins of known 3-D structure available in the PDB for sequence and structure similarity and their involvement in the function of the proteins using different bioinformatics tools. We have used the RADAR server (Heger and Holm, 2000) for ab initio detection of different types of repeats in the query sequence. RADAR uses sequence–sequence alignment as well as sequence profiles to find internal repeats in proteins. Subsequently, we examined the conservation of structure in the sequence repeats in terms of RMSD as well as in terms of structure z-scores using PDBeFOLD server (Krissinel and Henrick, 2004), the functional involvement of sequence repeats using PDBsum (Laskowski, 2001), the existence of sequence repeats in single domain and two domains from the same family using Pfam-A domain assignment (Punta et al., 2012). In this study, we are showing that most of the sequence repeats retained same general fold by considering not only common cores but the whole repeat segmented region and involved in the functions of the proteins.

The overall work flow is summarized as a flowchart (Fig. 1
                     ). First we detect repeats in a non-redundant set of PDB sequences using RADAR and then the sequence and structural similarity of the sequence repeats were identified. The functional role of the sequence repeats was analyzed using PDBsum. Further, we assign domain to protein's containing sequence repeats using Pfam database search and then analyze the functional role of sequence repeats in the domain region.

The sequences of proteins with known structures were downloaded from the RCSB server (Henrick et al., 2008). A dataset of 3243 non-redundant sequences that share less than 40% sequence identity and less than 3Å resolution was compiled using PISCES server (Wang and Dunbrack, 2003).

The RADAR program was efficient for ab initio detection of approximate gapped repeats of length more than 15 in the query sequence. The RADAR program source code was downloaded from the website address http://sourceforge.net/projects/repeatradar. A perl program was written that incorporates RADAR executable to detect sequence repeats present in all sequences in the dataset in a single run.

The sequence repeats similarity of the protein in terms of % identity and z-score was calculated using the Needleman–Wunsch algorithm (Needleman and Wunsch, 1970) implemented in the ggsearch36 program of the FASTA-36.3.5b package (Henikoff and Henikoff, 1992). Needleman–Wunsch alignment scores were calculated using the BLOSUM50 scoring matrix (Pearson, 2000) with a penalty of −12 for gap opening and −2 for gap extension. The statistical significance of sequence repeats similarity scores in terms of z-score was estimated using statistical parameters for the input query sequences from ggsearch36 database search.

The structural relatedness of the proteins involves consideration of average Cα root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) and z-score between structures. The structural similarity of the sequence repeats was carried using PDBeFOLD server (Krissinel and Henrick, 2004). The PDB structures of repeat containing proteins were downloaded from RCSB website and the PDB coordinates of the repeat fragments were uploaded to the server for finding structural similarity. PDBeFold structural similarity searches were conducted using WWW interface at http://www.ebi.ac.uk/msd-srv/ssm/. The PDBefold compares two structures by matching the graph built on secondary-structure elements followed by iterative 3D alignment of protein backbone Cα atoms. The statistical significance of a match is evaluated by PDBeFOLD z-score which represents the significance of a structure similarity in terms of Gaussian statistics. The structural z-score and RMSD reported by PDBeFOLD were saved for later analysis.

The structure of the protein and their repeat regions were viewed using PyMol viewer. The functionally involved residues of the proteins are identified using PDBsum server (Laskowski, 2001). The PDB id of the repeat containing proteins were given as input to PDBsum and analyzed whether the residues in the repeated regions were involved in ligand/metal binding. The Pfam-A domains assignments of the sequences were found by giving the query sequence as input to Pfam database server (Punta et al., 2012). The Pfam-A domains along with regions were assigned for each sequence in the dataset using Pfam database search.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Using the RADAR program, sequence repeats in 1303 proteins out of 3243 proteins were identified with varying repeat lengths. Fig. 2A shows a histogram of number of proteins containing sequence repeats length in the range of <20, 21–30, 31–40, 41–50, >50. While observing the percentage of sequences repeats as a function of sequence length, a linear dependency for the presence of sequence repeats of proteins with length>500 amino acids is obtained (Fig. 2B). We considered a set of 144 proteins sequence repeat pairs with minimum 50 residues in length and continuous PDB co-ordinates in the repeat regions for the analysis. Table 1
                         shows the details of the repeats containing proteins PDBID, molecule, sequence length, repeat region, % identity, sequence z-score, RMSD, structure z-score and functionally involved or not.

We found sequence identity of the repeat pairs falls in the range of 20–40% which shows sequence repeats are diverged with mutations or insertions/deletions. The structural similarity of the sequence repeats in terms of RMSD falls in the range of 1–5Å. Fig. 3
                         shows the relationship between percentage sequence identity and RMSD of the superimposed structure of the sequence repeats. The RMSD (<3Å) of the superimposed structure of the sequence repeats was observed in 101 out of 144 (70%) proteins repeats. The low RMSD between most of the repeat regions suggests that they are structurally similar in spite of low sequence identity. For example, the sequence repeats of the B.thetaiotaomicron SusD protein (PDB 3CKC) were identified in the region 2–130/313–444 with 21% sequence identity and, the RMSD of their superimposed structures is 1.18Å. The correspondence between divergence in sequence and structure in the internal repeats thus follow the general trend of structural divergence observed in homologous proteins. Further, our analysis showed statistical significance in the relationship of the sequence and structure similarity of the sequence repeats. Fig. 4
                         shows that the statistical significance of structure similarity increases with the increase of statistical significance of sequence similarity. Through the present analysis, structure z-score>2 was found in 114 out of 144 sequences repeats of the proteins. This suggests that more than 80% of the identified sequence repeats are statistically significant at the structural level.

Both repeat regions that are involved in the function of the proteins were identified in 89 out of 144 proteins (Table 1). We observed that sequence repeats were involved in the function of the protein through the functionally important residues in the repeat region. For example, repeats of the cell surface heme transfer protein Shp (PDB 2Q7A) were identified in the region 36–99/110–173 with RMSD 2.48Å. Fig. 5A shows the functionally involved residues R(41), Y(43), E(57), H(58), I(62), GMVEGTVY(65–72), L(93), YSGN(96–99) of the protein from repeat I and residues N(127), V(150), M(153), R(155), V(156) of the protein from repeat II. The present analysis was also found that sequence repeats with higher RMSD in their superimposed structures were also involved in the function of the proteins. For example, the sequence repeats of the Photoprotein berovin from Beroe abyssicola (PDBID 2HPK) were identified in the region (42–105/134–194) with RMSD 3.95Å. Fig. 5B shows the functionally involved residues D(46,48,50), K(52) and E(57) from repeat I and residues D(138,140,142), T(144), E(149) and D(172,174), S(176), E(180,183) from repeat II. Similarity, the sequence repeats of O-sialoglycoprotein endopeptidase (PDBID 2IVN) were identified in the region 6–144/158–299 with RMSD 4.43Å and found that repeats I residues TA(9–10), H(106), H(111), YVSGGN(127–132) and repeat II residues D(159), GGP(171–173), E(176), D(196), GGVA(2252–253), AN(256–257), Y(280), RDN(284–286) of the protein are involved in the interactions. This analysis shows that sequence repeats are involved in the function of the protein through functionally involved residues in the repeat regions.

The existence of the sequence repeats in single domain and two domains region of the protein were examined in 144 proteins and found that 52 sequence repeats are in the domain regions. Sequence repeats of 35 proteins in single domain and 17 proteins in two domains from the same family (Tables 2 and 3
                        
                        ) were found out. The Pfam database has been used to assess the quality of the repeats detected by RADAR. In the present work, the repeats in the set were also coupled with Pfam database search. We found that most of sequence repeats are in good coverage and reasonable borders with Pfam-A domain regions. We found that most of repeats in the domain were involved in the function of the domain through conserved sequence motifs in the repeats. We discuss few examples of repeats regions in both single domain and two domain proteins.

We examined the sequence repeats in single domain for the functional involvement of the protein. For example, Sulerythrin protein (PDBID 1J30) has a binuclear metal center of rubrerythrin-like domain in the region 11–137 for binding Fe/Zn ions (Fushionbu et al., 2003). The sequence repeats of the protein (5–57/76–130) and residues conservation in the repeats is shown in Fig. 6A. The residue pairs E20:E92, E53:E126 and H56:H129 in repeat alignment (boxed) are liganded to the binuclear metal center. The Fe site is formed by residues E20, E53 and H56 and Zn site is formed by residues E92, E126 and H129 (Fig. 6B) along with residues from chain B of the protein. The internal repeats of the protein indicate the duplication in the single rubrerythrin-like domain and the sequence motifs in the repeats of the domain for binding with metal ions FE/ZN for electron transport. Similarly, tetra-heme Cytochrome from Nitrosomonas europaea (PDBID 1FT5) has a cytochrome c554 domain in the region 10–139 for covalent attachment of four heme groups (Iverson et al., 2001). The repeat region 11–79/88–158 of the protein shows that the internal duplication in cytochrome c554 domain region and the sequence motifs CxxCH in the repeats of the domain regions are covalently attached to heme groups.

We examined the existence of the sequence repeats in two domain proteins for the function of the protein. For example, Thrombospondin-1 (PDBID 1LSL) has thrombospondin-1 type 1 repeat (TSR) at the sequence region 6–56/63–113 and region 434–546 at the structure level (Tan et al., 2002). The internal repeats (2–56/59–113) of the protein and the residues conservation in the repeats are shown in Fig. 7A. The sequence repeats is in the structural fragment region 417–471/474–528. The internal repeats of the sequence indicate the duplication in thrombospondin-1 type 1 repeat and the motifs CSVTCG and WxxW (boxed) of the thrombospondin-1 type 1 repeat. The sequence motifs CSVTCG is for linking ligand fucose through threonine (T 432 from repeat I and T 489 from repeat II) (Fig. 7B) and C-mannosylation is through first tryptophan of the WxxW motifs. The killer cell inhibitory receptor for human natural killer cells (PDBID 1NKR) has the immunoglobulin domain at two regions 22–82/122–180. The internal repeats regions (4–98/104–196) of the protein indicate the duplication in the immunoglobulin domains and the motifs WSKSS and VSAPS (boxed) in the repeats of the domain are for the signaling mechanism in NKR cells.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Our survey of proteins with repeats has highlighted the similarity of the sequence repeats in sequence and structure and, their involvement in the function of the protein. Previous studies have focused on proteins containing strings of tandem repeats and their structures of tandem arrays of a repeated structural motif and function (Baxa et al., 2006; Nelson and Eisenberg, 2006). The repetitive and elongated nature of the tandem repeats are dominated by short-range and regularized interactions in contrast to the dominance of long-range interactions in globular proteins (Main et al., 2005). However, most of the repeats in the present analysis are not tandem and hence lack tandem arrays of a repeated structural motif. The number of repeats containing proteins shows a linear dependence upon proteins longer than 500 amino acids which supports the earlier conclusion on sequence repeats in proteins (Marcotte et al., 1998). The repeats detected using RADAR are usually of length >15. However, single amino acid and simple cryptic sequence repeats are also prevalent in protein sequences (Simon and Hancock, 2009; Haerty and Golding, 2010). Since short amino acid residues with higher similarity are likely to be fortuitous (Brenner et al., 1998), we considered sequence repeats of minimum length 50. We identified 316 proteins containing repeats of minimum 50 residues in length among repeats in 1303 proteins in the non-redundant set of 3243 proteins. Among these most of the sequence repeats are unstructured (Tompa, 2003; Jorda et al., 2010) and hence do not have co-ordinates in the PDB. In order to analyze the structural role of the sequence repeats, continuous PDB coordinates are essential and this resulted in a reduced set of 144 proteins. As the present study considered sequence repeats of minimum length 50 and having continuous PDB coordinates, we did not attempt to detect single and simple sequence repeats.

In most cases, only a low identity (20–40%) between sequence repeats was observed suggesting the accumulation of mutations in both segments after the gene duplication event. It has been suggested that the divergence of the duplicated segments may be nature's mechanism to prevent aggregation (Wright et al., 2005). The segments in homologous proteins are defined to have the same fold when RMSD deviations are no greater than 3Å (Chothia and Lesk, 1986). The structure similarity of the sequence repeats has suggested that in spite of low % sequence identities in the repeats, most of the repeats still retain similar fold. It has been shown that RMSD of the homologous proteins are related to the fraction of mutated residues by considering common core residues of divergence of sequence and structure (Chothia and Lesk, 1986). In this study, RMSD of the sequence repeats was calculated by considering not only common cores but the whole repeat segmented region.

Analysis of functional role of the sequence repeats has revealed that sequence repeats are involved in the function through functional residues in the repeats without any obvious functional motifs. However, some of the analyzed sequence repeats contained functional motifs such as the photoprotein berovin (PDBID 2HPK) contains DxDxDG motifs in the repeat regions for magnesium metal ion binding to emit visible light (Fig. 5B). Similarly, we found that sequence repeats in the domain region are involved in the function of the domain through conserved sequence motifs in the repeats. For example, functional motifs were observed in the repeats of the domain such as the CxxCH motif in cytochrome c554 for metal ion binding and CSVTCG motif in thrombospondin-1 for binding fucose (Figs. 6 and 7). It has been noticed that low complexity regions of the proteins that are enriched in repetitive motifs are rare among the known 3D structures from the Protein Data Bank (PDB) (Huntley and Golding, 2002). Previous study has shown obvious types of structural/functional motifs observed in sequence repeats of fibrous proteins (Parry, 2005). Through the analysis of sequence repeats in the domain region, we have found the presence of repeats in single domain proteins as well (see Table 2) whereas, the presence of sequence repeats in multi-domains proteins have been discussed in earlier studies (Björklund et al., 2005, 2006).

Our present study has suggested that finding the presence of repeats in proteins and then evaluating the similarity of the sequence repeats at the structural level using available web servers may bring to light many repeats of the proteins available in the PDB. Our present study has also suggested that finding and analyzing the sequence repeats of the protein with known structure at the structure and function level of the protein through bioinformatics tools will lead to a better understanding of sequence–structure–function and evolutionary relationships of the proteins.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

