@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Characterizing the protonation states of the catalytic residues in apo and substrate-bound human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 protease

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Protonation states of the catalytic residues in HTLV-1 protease were investigated.


                        
                        
                           
                           In apo HTLV-1 protease, the two catalytic residues are both unprotonated.


                        
                        
                           
                           In HTLV-1 protease–substrate complex, Asp32 is protonated, Asp32′ is unprotonated.


                        
                        
                           
                           Substrate binding favors a protonated Asp32 over protonated Asp32′ by 2.8kcal/mol.


                        
                        
                           
                           The HTLV-1 protease–substrate complex structure was analyzed in detail.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

HTLV-1 protease

Catalytic residues

Protonation states

Free energy simulations

QM/MM

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) protease is an attractive target when developing inhibitors to treat HTLV-1 associated diseases. To study the catalytic mechanism and design novel HTLV-1 protease inhibitors, the protonation states of the two catalytic aspartic acid residues must be determined. Free energy simulations have been conducted to study the proton transfer reaction between the catalytic residues of HTLV-1 protease using a combined quantum mechanical and molecular mechanical (QM/MM) molecular dynamics simulation. The free energy profiles for the reaction in the apo-enzyme and in an enzyme – substrate complex have been obtained. In the apo-enzyme, the two catalytic residues are chemically equivalent and are expected to be both unprotonated. Upon substrate binding, the catalytic residues of HTLV-1 protease evolve to a singly protonated state, in which the OD1 of Asp32 is protonated and forms a hydrogen bond with the OD1 of Asp32′, which is unprotonated. The HTLV-1 protease–substrate complex structure obtained from this simulation can serve as the Michaelis complex structure for further mechanistic studies of HTLV-1 protease while providing a receptor structure with the correct protonation states for the active site residues toward the design of novel HTLV-1 protease inhibitors through virtual screening.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) protease cleaves a viral polyprotein precursor to form individual mature proteins during the life cycle of human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (Martins et al., 2012), which has been convincingly associated with adult T-cell leukemia (ATL) (Poiesz et al., 1980; Yoshida et al., 1984), tropical spastic paraparesis/HTLV-1 associated myelopathy (TSP/HAM) (Gessain, 1996), and numerous chronic diseases, including inflammation of the eye (uveitis) (Mochizuki et al., 1992), joints (arthritis) (Abe et al., 2004), muscles (myositis) (Inose et al., 1992), and skin (dermatitis) (McGill et al., 2012). Currently, no effective therapies are available for these HTLV-1 associated diseases. HTLV-1 protease is an attractive target for the development of inhibitors that treat HTLV-1 associated diseases due to its critical roles for HTLV-1 virion replication (Tözsér and Weber, 2007). Understanding the catalytic mechanism of HTLV-1 protease is essential when designing improved inhibitors for this enzyme.

Like other retroviral proteases (Wlodawer and Gustchina, 2000), HTLV-1 protease is a homodimeric aspartic protease with two catalytic aspartic acid (Asp) residues from each subunit in its active site. The catalytic mechanism of HTLV-1 protease remains poorly understood at the atomic level. The catalytic process of aspartic proteases may involve a general acid-base mechanism; specifically, one aspartic residue at the active site is protonated to serve as a general acid, while the other remains unprotonated to serve as a general base (Suguna et al., 1987; Hyland et al., 1991; Dunn, 2002; Brik and Wong, 2003). Although the enzymatic properties of HTLV-1 protease have been thoroughly studied (Louis et al., 1999; Kadas et al., 2004) and molecular dynamics simulations have been performed on both the apo and ligand-bound forms of HTLV-1 protease (Rucker et al., 2011), a detailed study of the protonation states of the catalytic residues (Asp32 and Asp32′) in HTLV-1 protease have not been reported; these data are important for understanding the catalytic mechanism and designing novel inhibitors for HTLV-1 protease. Correspondingly, the protonation states of the active site Asp residues of the homologous HIV-1 protease have been widely studied (Smith et al., 1996; Piana and Carloni, 2000; Piana et al., 2001; Wang et al., 1996; Czodrowski et al., 2007; Torbeev and Kent, 2012). Smith et al. (1996) used 13C NMR experiments to characterize the protonation states of the active site Asp residues in the apo and pepstatin-bound HIV-1 protease. They concluded that in the apo enzyme, both Asp residues are deprotonated; in the HIV-1 protease–pepstatin complex, one Asp is protonated and the other is not. Wang et al. (1996) performed solution state NMR studies on a complex of HIV-1 protease with inhibitor KNI-272. They also reported that one Asp is protonated in the active site while the other is not in this enzyme–inhibitor complex. During a recent 13C labeled NMR study, Torbeev and Kent (2012) reported that one active site Asp is protonated and the other is unprotonated in the apo HIV-1 protease, and the same conclusion was also reached by Piana and Carloni (2000), who performed an ab initio study on the apo form of HIV-1 protease. Piana et al. (2001) carried out ab initio molecular dynamics simulations on simplified models of HIV-1 protease–pepstatin complex, suggesting that both of the active site Asp residues are protonated in this enzyme–inhibitor complex. After performing pK
                     a calculations on a complex of HIV-1 protease with a pyrrolidine containing inhibitor, Czodrowski et al. (2007) reported that both catalytic Asp residues are deprotonated in this complex. Evidently, the protonation states of the catalytic Asp residues remain uncertain for the apo and ligand-bound forms of HIV-1 protease; therefore, additional studies are required to understand the protonation states of the active site residues in HIV-1 and HTLV-1 protease. In this work, combined quantum mechanical and molecular mechanical (QM/MM) (Warshel and Levitt, 1976; Field et al., 1990; Gao and Xia, 1992) molecular dynamics (MD) simulations have been performed to determine the protonation states of the two catalytic aspartic acid residues in the apo and substrate-bound HTLV-1 protease.

The X-ray crystal structures available for HTLV-1 protease are all hexamers with three active sites (Li et al., 2005; Satoh et al., 2010). Because the active form of HTLV-1 protease is a homodimer, we focused on one of the three active sites during our simulations. The structure of HTLV-1 protease in complex with a statine-containing peptide inhibitor (PDB ID: 3LIY) (Satoh et al., 2010) and its A, B, and I subunits have been used during our simulations, where ‘A’ and ‘B’ are the two subunits of HTLV-1 protease (Asp32 is from subunit A and Asp32′ is from subunit B. The atom names and residues from subunit B are labeled with a prime throughout this paper), and ‘I’ represents the inhibitor (Fig. 1
                     ).


                     Fig. 1(b) shows that when protonated, any one of the four carboxylic oxygen atoms in Asp32 and Asp32′ can form a strong hydrogen bond with the inhibitor. And the OD1 of Asp32 and Asp32′ form hydrogen bonds with the N of Gly34 and Gly34′, respectively. Therefore, the protonation states of the two active site residues Asp32 and Asp32′ cannot be determined from the X-ray crystal structure. To characterize the protonation states of Asp32 and Asp32′ during catalysis, we constructed a complex structure of HTLV-1 protease with a substrate, then undertook combined QM/MM molecular dynamics simulations on the complex structure. Our simulations demonstrated that the enzyme–substrate complex structures with OD2 protonated in both Asp32 and Asp32′ led to the CBCG bond rotation; therefore, the enzyme–substrate complex structures converged to a state where the OD1 atom from either Asp32 or Asp32′ is protonated. To further determine whether the OD1 atom of Asp32 or Asp32′ is protonated in the complex structure of HTLV-1 protease and its substrate, we carried out free energy simulations for the proton transfer reaction between Asp32 and Asp32′. In addition, we performed free energy simulations for the same proton transfer reaction in the apo HTLV-1 protease, to understand the effects of substrate binding on the protonation states of the active site aspartic acid residues.

All of the available X-ray crystal structures of HTLV-1 protease are enzyme–inhibitor complexes. Our simulation began with one of these structures (PDB ID: 3LIY) (Satoh et al., 2010), which is a hexamer with three active sites. Because the active form of HTLV-1 protease is a homodimer, we focused on one of the three active sites. Fig. 1(a) shows a homodimer of the HTLV-1 protease in complex with a substrate-analog inhibitor (Ace-Ala-Pro-Gln-Val-Sta-Val-Met-His-Pro where ‘Sta’ represents statine) bound to the active site. The A, B and I subunits from the original structure (3LIY) were used in our simulations, where ‘A’ and ‘B’ are the two subunits of the HTLV-1 protease, and ‘I’ represents the inhibitor. To simulate the proton transfer reaction between Asp32 and Asp32′ in the apo HTLV-1 protease, we removed the inhibitor from the active site and equilibrated the structure in solvent before undertaking the free energy simulations.

Studies comparing the substrate specificity of HTLV-1 protease have indicated that a substrate with a sequence of Lys-Gly-Pro-Pro-Val-Ile-LEU-ǀ-PRO-Ile-Gln-Ala-Pro showed the highest specificity (Louis et al., 1999; Kadas et al., 2004). Therefore, during our simulations, we decided to choose a shorter substrate (Ace-Pro-Val-Ile-LEU-ǀ-PRO-Ile-NMe) that includes the same LEU-PRO cleavage site, with the N- and C-termini capped by an acyl (Ace) group and an N-methyl amino (NMe) group, respectively. This substrate is long enough to include the cleavage site between the Leu and Pro and when it is docked to the active site of HTLV-1 protease, the entire system can be effectively simulated using the combined QM/MM method. The complex structure of HTLV-1 protease with the selected substrate (Ace-Pro-Val-Ile-LEU-ǀ-PRO-Ile-NMe) was obtained by modifying the structure of the statine-containing peptide inhibitor to that of the substrate using the Maestro graphical user interface (Maestro, 2012). Four complex structures were constructed, each with a different protonation state on the OD1 or OD2 atom of either Asp32 or Asp32′.

To model the proton transfer reaction between the two catalytic aspartic acid residues in HTLV-1 protease, a combined quantum mechanical and molecular mechanical method has been employed. The semiempirical AM1 method (Dewar et al., 1985) could correctly calculate the heat of formation for acetic acid (−103.1kcal/mol (AM1) vs. −103.3kcal/mol (exp) (Lias et al., 1988)) and acetate (−115.5kcal/mol (AM1) vs. −120.5kcal/mol (exp) (Lias et al., 1988), which are the model compounds for the protonated and unprotonated aspartic acid side chain. In addition, the AM1 method has been found to perform well in calculating the geometries and energetics of a model system (containing two malonic acid molecules and one water molecule) that mimic the catalytic center of penicillopepsin, a monomeric aspartic protease (Ciarkowski and Oldziej, 1993). Therefore, the AM1 method was employed in the combined QM/MM potential. During our simulations, the side chains (15 atoms in total) of the two catalytic Asp residues (Asp32 and Asp32′) were treated quantum mechanically, unless otherwise stated. In all of the equilibrated HTLV-1 protease–substrate complex structures, one water molecule (wat1 in Fig. 13) enters the active site and forms hydrogen bonds with the substrate and the catalytic Asp residues, this water molecule will serve as the lytic water during the substrate hydrolysis catalyzed by HTLV-1 protease.

In order to investigate whether including wat1 in the QM region might affect the energetics for the proton transfer reaction between the two catalytic Asp residues, for the enzyme–substrate complex structure with OD1 of Asp32 being protonated, we undertook an additional QM/MM simulation with wat1 being partitioned to the QM region along with the side chains of the two catalytic Asp residues (18 atoms in total). In both QM/MM partitions, the C
                           α
                         (named CA throughout this paper) atoms of Asp32 and Asp32′ served as the boundary atoms and they were treated by the generalized hybrid orbital (GHO) method (Gao et al., 1998; Amara et al., 2000). The rest of the system, including the rest of HTLV-1 protease, the substrate (for the enzyme–substrate complex), and water were all treated using the CHARMM22 force field (MacKerell et al., 1998) and a TIP3P water model (Jorgensen et al., 1983).

The initial setup included the apo form of HTLV-1 protease and four structures of HTLV-1 protease in complex with its substrate. The only difference among the four complex structures was the protonation states of Asp32 and Asp32′; the OD1 or OD2 atom of Asp32 or Asp32′ was protonated, respectively in each complex structure. All of the other Asp and Glu residues were unprotonated, while Lys and Arg residues were protonated. In addition, when inspecting the hydrogen bond interactions with other residues, His23 was set neutral with the proton on NE2, and His66 was also neutral with the proton assigned to ND1. The total charge of the system was neutralized by five chloride ions.

For each of the complex structures, the substrate was first minimized for 30 steps using the adopted basis set Newton–Raphson (ABNR) method (Brooks et al., 2009), then the system was fully solvated in a rectangular box (80×60×60Å3) of water molecules (Fig. 2
                        ). The water molecules that were within 2.5Å of any heavy atoms of the system were deleted, and the crystal water molecules were kept. The chloride counter ions were positioned approximately 5–6Å away from positively charged residues on the protein surface, and all of these chloride anions are far away from the active site. To remove any close contacts, the enzyme and substrate were minimized over 30 steps using the adopted basis set Newton–Raphson method, which was followed by another 30 steps of ABNR minimization for the water and chloride ions. The apo enzyme system was dissolved into a water box of the same size, and then minimized in the same way, 30 steps of ABNR minimization of HTLV-1 protease followed by another 30 steps of ABNR minimization of water and chloride ions.

The entire system was then partitioned into the quantum mechanical (QM) and molecular mechanical (MM) regions as described in Section 2.2, which was followed by 30 steps of minimization for the protein, the substrate (for complexes) and QM atoms, and another 30 steps of minimization for the water and chloride ions, using the AM1/MM potential and the ABNR method. Next, the system was gradually heated to 298K for the first 15ps. After heating, the system was equilibrated at 298K for 100ps with periodic boundary conditions and the isothermal–isobaric (NPT) ensemble at 298K and 1atm. The particle mesh Ewald summation method (Darden et al., 1993) was employed to calculate the long-range electrostatic interactions. The integration time step for the MD simulations was 1fs and the Nose–Hoover (Nose, 1984; Hoover, 1985) thermostat algorithm was used throughout. A cutoff distance of 13Å was used for the nonbonded interactions, and the nonbonded pair list was updated every 25 steps. All of the bond lengths involving hydrogen atoms were constrained by the SHAKE algorithm (Ryckaert et al., 1977).

We started the free energy simulations from the equilibrated structures described in Section 2.3 and computed the free energy changes for the proton transfer reactions during the following processes (atom names are corresponding to Fig. 3
                        (a) and (c)): transferring HD1 from Asp32 to the OD1′ of Asp32′, transferring HD1′ from Asp32′ to the OD1 of Asp32 in the HTLV-1 protease–substrate complexes, and the transferring of HD1 from Asp32 to the OD1′ of Asp32′ in the apo HTLV-1 protease. During all of these free energy simulations, the reaction coordinate (RC) was defined as: RC=
                        R
                        OD1–HD1
                        −
                        R
                        HD1–OD1′ for the proton transfer from Asp32 to Asp32′, where R
                        OD1–HD1 represents the bond length of the breaking bond, and R
                        HD1–OD1′ represents the forming bond; or RC=
                        R
                        OD1′–HD1′
                        −RHD1′–OD1 for the proton transfer from Asp32′ to Asp32, where R
                        OD1′–HD1′ and RHD1′–OD1 represent the breaking and forming bond, respectively.

The free energy changes were determined using the umbrella sampling (Kottalam and Case, 1988; Hooft et al., 1992) technique during the molecular dynamics simulations. Each simulation was divided into 13 simulation windows with reaction coordinates from −1.0 to 1.0Å. The force constants of 30.0–100.0kcalmol−1
                        Å−2 were employed in these simulation windows, with smaller force constants being applied to the reactant and product states and larger values to the transition state. For each simulation window, we performed at least 100ps of equilibration, followed by another 100ps for averaging and trajectory collection; 500 structures were saved for further analysis. The weighted histogram analysis method (WHAM) (Kumar et al., 1992) was used to obtain the free energy profiles.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

Four independent molecular dynamics simulations were performed with the OD1 or OD2 atom of Asp32 or Asp32′ being protonated in the initial structures, respectively. A combined QM/MM method was employed during each of these simulations and the semiempirical AM1 method was used to treat the side chains of the two catalytic residues. Fig. 3 illustrates the comparisons of the structures before and after 100ps of MD simulations.

It can be found from Fig. 3 (a) and (c) that when the OD1 of Asp32 or Asp32′ was protonated with HD1 in the initial structural setup, HD1 interacts with the OD1 of the other catalytic Asp residue through hydrogen bond and maintains this interaction during the molecular dynamics simulations. However, if the OD2 was protonated on Asp32 or Asp32′ in the initial structural setup, OD1 and OD2 exchange positions through the rotation of CBCG bond in the course of molecular dynamics simulations. Eventually, HD2 forms a hydrogen bond with the OD1 of the other catalytic Asp residue, as observed from Fig. 3(b) and (d). Overall, the protonation on OD1 or OD2 of Asp32 or Asp32′ in the initial structures converged to the same structural state (i.e., OD1 or OD1′ being protonated) after the MD simulations.

To understand how the structures of the protonated catalytic residues change during the MD simulations, we analyzed the change in the dihedral angle of OD1–CG–CB–CA (for OD1 protonated structures) and OD2–CG–CB–CA (for OD2 protonated structures), respectively. Correspondingly, we also tracked the changes in the distance between HD1 (or HD2) of one Asp and the OD1 of the other Asp residue.


                        Fig. 4
                        (a) illustrates the change in the dihedral angles of Asp32 over time. When the OD1 of Asp32 was protonated, the dihedral angle OD1–CG–CB–CA fluctuated around an average value of −20 degrees throughout the MD simulations. In the OD2 protonated structure, the dihedral angle OD2–CG–CB–CA was approximately 170 degrees in the beginning, representing a trans conformation along the CGCB bond; CGCB bond began to rotate after a few picoseconds, and OD2 was adjusted to a cis conformation with CA along the CGCB bond after about 20ps of MD simulations. The dihedral angle OD2–CG–CB–CA reached the same range of values as OD1–CG–CB–CA and maintained the cis conformation throughout. This change in conformation can also be described by comparing the distances of HD1–OD1′ and HD2–OD1′ during the two simulations, as shown in Fig. 5
                        (a).

When the OD1 of Asp32 was protonated, the hydrogen bond distance for HD1–OD1′ remained approximately 2.0Å throughout, while in the OD2 protonated structure, HD2 was far away from OD1′ (about 4.0Å) in the beginning of the MD simulation, but this distance constantly decreased over time. The HD2–OD1′ distance shrank to the same hydrogen bond distance as the HD1–OD1′ distance in the OD1 protonated structure within 20ps. Similar changes in the HD1′–OD1 and HD2′–OD1 distances were found for the protonated Asp32′, as shown in Fig. 5(b). The dihedral angles for the protonated Asp32′ changed differently (Fig. 4(b)). In protonated OD1′ structure, OD1′–CG′–CB′–CA′ was changed from a cis to a trans conformation during the heating step (first 15ps of the molecular dynamics) before it adjusted itself back to the cis conformation and maintained at an average value of approximately 4 degrees throughout the MD simulations. In the protonated OD2′ structure, OD2′–CG′–CB′–CA′ changed steadily from a trans conformation (approximately 165 degrees) to a cis conformation (approximately −50 degrees on average).

These MD simulations results confirm that both Asp32 and Asp32′ prefer to be protonated at OD1 position.

To determine the most favorable protonation state of the two catalytic residues, we carried out free energy simulations for the proton transfer reaction between Asp32 and Asp32′ in both directions using the equilibrated structures in which the OD1 of Asp32 or the OD1′ of Asp32' was protonated. To understand the effects of substrates binding on the protonation state of the catalytic residues, we also performed a similar free energy computation for the proton transfer reaction from Asp32 to Asp32′ in the apo HTLV-1 protease. The change in free energy along the proton transfer reaction path are depicted in Fig. 6
                         (red: proton transfer from Asp32 to Asp32′ in the apo HTLV-1 protease; black: in the complex structure of HTLV-1 protease with its substrate) and Fig. 7
                         (the proton transfer from Asp32′ to Asp32 in the HTLV-1 protease–substrate complex).

The results indicate that in the apo HTLV-1 protease, the free energy change (ΔG) for the proton transfer reaction from Asp32 to Asp32′ is −0.5kcalmol−1. This small absolute value for ΔG implies that Asp32 and Asp32′ are chemically equivalent (both protonated or both unprotonated). Because both Asp32 and Asp32′ are exposed to the solvent in the apo HTLV-1 protease, we suggest that they are both unprotonated, which is consistent with the 13C-labeled NMR experiments on the catalytic Asp residues of HIV-1 protease by Smith et al. (1996). Although Piana and Carloni (2000) concluded that the catalytic Asp residues in HIV-1 protease were monoprotonated, they actually proposed that an almost completely unbound proton formed hydrogen bonds with both of the negatively charged Asp residues. Our result also agrees with Piana and Carloni’s model in that the HTLV-1 protease is in an acidic environment; however, the pH cannot be controlled during our simulations. It is worth mentioning that the crystals of the HTLV-1 protease–inhibitor complexes were grown at a pH of approximately 5 (Li et al., 2005; Satoh et al., 2010).

In the HTLV-1 protease–substrate complex (Michaelis state), the ΔG for the same reaction became 2.3kcalmol−1, favoring a protonated Asp32 and unprotonated Asp32′ state for the catalytic residues in the Michaelis state. That is, the substrate binding caused a 2.8kcalmol−1 increase for the proton transfer reaction from Asp32 to Asp32′. A free energy simulation on the proton transfer reaction from Asp32′ to Asp32 generated a ΔG value of −2.7kcalmol−1(Fig. 7), which is consistent with the results shown in Fig. 6. The free energies of activation (ΔG
                        ≠) as well as the reaction free energies corresponding to Figs. 6 and 7 are summarized in Table 1
                        , which indicated that ΔG
                        ≠ is also consistent for the Asp32 to Asp32′ proton transfer process between the two independent simulations (13.3kcalmol−1 from Fig. 6 and 13.4kcalmol−1 from Fig. 7) with the HTLV-1 protease–substrate complexes.

In order to investigate whether including the lytic water (wat1 in Fig. 13) in the QM region might have an effect on the energetics for the proton transfer from Asp32 to Asp32′, the HTLV-1 protease–substrate complex structure with OD1 of Asp32 being protonated was repartitioned so that wat1 was included in the QM region (Section 2.2). After equilibration as described in Section 2.3, a free energy simulation was performed on the newly partitioned QM/MM system and the AM1 method was employed to treat the QM atoms. The free energy profile for this simulation is shown in Fig. 8
                        . The corresponding free energy of activation and reaction free energy are also summarized in Table 1.

Comparing the black free energy profile in Fig. 6 and the one in Fig. 8, as well as the ΔG
                        ≠ and ΔG values in Table 1, we found that including the lytic water (wat1) in the QM region does not affect the reaction free energy, but it leads to a slight increase in the free energy of activation by 1.2kcal/mol.

In short, our free energy simulation results demonstrated that the catalytic residues form a singly protonated state (protonated Asp32 and unprotonated Asp32′) in the complex of HTLV-1 protease with its substrate. This conclusion is in accord with the experimental NMR data reported by Smith et al. (1996) and Wang et al. (1996) for HIV-1 protease–inhibitor complexes.

To further verify the performance of the AM1 method on the energetics for the proton transfer reaction between the two catalytic Asp residues of HTLV-1 protease, we carried out computations on a small model system including acetic acid, acetate (model compounds of the protonated and unprotonated Asp) and one water molecule using AM1, HF, B3LYP and MP2 methods. The initial structures (Fig. 9
                        ) of the model system representing the reactant state, transition state and product state were taken from the structures of the three pivotal states (reactant, transition state and product) corresponding the black free energy profile in Fig. 6.

The reactant and product structures were first optimized using the AM1 method, they were then optimized with the HF method and 6-311+G(d,p) basis set. The HF optimized structures were subsequently optimized by the B3LYP method and 6-311+G(d,p) basis set. The transition state structure at AM1 level was obtained by optimizing the model structure from the free energy simulation while restraining the reaction coordinate (RC=
                        R
                        OD1–HD1
                        −
                        R
                        HD1–OD1′) at 0.0. In the optimized reactant and product structures at HF and B3LYP levels, the OD1–HD1–OD1′ angle was very close to 180°, so a potential energy surface (PES) scan was performed against the OD1–HD1 distance using the optimized structures. At the HF level, the PES scan from both the reactant and product structures located the potential energy maximum corresponding to two very similar structures, one of which was optimized to a transition state structure with only one imaginary frequency. The optimized transition state structure was also very similar to the structures with the maximum potential energy, hence the energy values were extremely close. At the B3LYP level, only the PES scan from the optimized product structure converged at all the scanned geometries, the structure at the potential energy maximum was then treated as the approximate transition state because further optimization failed to find the true transition state. Single point energies of the reactant, transition state, and product structures optimized by the B3LYP method and 6-311+G(d,p) basis set were later calculated at B3LYP and MP2 level with aug-cc-PVDZ basis set. The AM1 calculations of the small model system were carried out using CHARMM (Brooks et al., 2009), the calculations at HF, B3LYP and MP2 levels were all performed using Gaussian 09 package (Frisch et al., 2010).


                        Table 2
                         summarizes the energy barrier and reaction energy for the proton transfer reaction from acetic acid to acetate in gas phase.

It can be found from Table 2 that the semiempirical AM1 method is consistent with ab initio and density functional theory methods in computing the reaction energy for the proton transfer from acetic acid to acetate in the model system; however, the AM1 method overestimates the energy barrier for the same reaction by 4–6kcal/mol compared with the HF, B3LYP and MP2 calculated values.

In summary, the AM1/MM method performed well in determining the reaction energy for the proton transfer from Asp32 to Asp32′. Combining the results from Sections 3.2 and 3.3, we conclude that the AM1/MM potential performed better in calculating the free energy of activation when the QM region contains only the side chains of the two catalytic Asp residues. Therefore, our further discussions are focused on results corresponding to Fig. 6.


                        Fig. 10
                         shows the superimposition of the reactant state structures for the proton transfer reaction in the apo and substrate-bound HTLV-1 protease. The root-mean-square (rms) deviation for the C
                           α
                         atoms of the two structures is 0.734Å, and significant changes are observed in the loops as well as in the flaps. The secondary structure changes the most on the flaps, on which β-sheets are not formed in the apo HTLV-1 protease, however, these secondary structures are maintained in the HTLV-1 protease –substrate complex to enhance substrate binding, similar to the HTLV-1 protease–inhibitor complexes (Li et al., 2005; Satoh et al., 2010).

The interaction distances between the substrate and the binding pocket residues of HTLV-1 protease have been analyzed for the reactant and product state (Fig. 6, black), the hydrogen bonds formed between the OD1 of Asp32 and Asp32′ and the HN of Gly34 and Gly34′, respectively are included as well. In particular, the reactant state was defined as RC=(−1.07±0.1)Å, and the product state was defined as RC=(1.11±0.1)Å. With these definitions, 319 structures were selected for the reactant state, and 358 structures were selected for the product state. Each interaction distance is an average value over the selected structures of the reactant or the product state. The average interaction distances are summarized in Table 3
                        . It indicates that, in the singly protonated state of the catalytic residues of HTLV-1 protease, the hydrogen bond distances between HTLV-1 protease and the substrate are similar at the reactant state where Asp32 is protonated and the product state where Asp32′ is protonated. In addition, the hydrogen bonds formed between Asp32 and Gly34 of both subunits have been preserved along the reaction path.

To understand why substrate binding favors the protonation of Asp32, we performed an enzyme–substrate interaction energy decomposition analysis. This approach has been used on numerous enzyme systems to analyze the relative energy contributions from each residue toward the stabilization or destabilization of the transition state and product/intermediate state during enzymatic catalysis (Ma et al., 2007; Garcia-Viloca et al., 2003; Cunningham et al., 1997). We used the same number of configurations at the reactant and the product state as in hydrogen bond analysis. Then we applied the same combined AM1/MM method as was used for the free energy simulations to determine the electrostatic interaction energies for each given configuration by sequentially zeroing the atomic charges on the lytic water (wat1) and each residue of the substrate. The difference in the QM/MM electrostatic energy before and after the charge annihilation is defined as the interaction energy of this residue with the QM subsystem (the side chains of the two catalytic Asp residues and their C
                           α
                         atoms). The contribution of wat1 and each residue from the substrate to the total electrostatic interaction energy was defined in the same way. Finally, the interaction energies are averaged over all of the structures in the reactant state or the product state. Figs. 11 and 12
                        
                         illustrate the contributions of the substrate residues and wat1 toward the QM/MM electrostatic interaction energy and the total electrostatic interaction energy, respectively.


                        Fig. 11 indicates that the amino acid residues on the substrate play the same role when stabilizing or destabilizing the reactant and the product states, except Ile6 which lowers the QM/MM electrostatic interaction energy in the reactant state while raising the QM/MM electrostatic interaction energy for the product state. The net effect of the substrate involves lowering the QM/MM electrostatic interaction energies for the reactant (−1.3kcal/mol) and the product state (−0.9kcal/mol), which slightly favors the reactant state (singly protonated catalytic residues with protonated Asp32) over the product state (protonated Asp32′). Likewise, wat1 also lowers the QM/MM electrostatic interaction energy for both reactant (−9.9kcal/mol) and product (−10.2kcal/mol) states. Large contribution to QM/MM electrostatic interaction energy by wat1 is consistent with the strong interactions between wat1 and the catalytic Asp residues. Fig. 12 shows the contribution of the substrate and wat1 toward the total electrostatic interaction energies when all these residues lower the electrostatic interaction energy of the system. Overall, the substrate lowers the total electrostatic energy by 51.6kcal/mol for the reactant state and 45.6kcal/mol for the product state, and wat1 lowers it by 7.4kcal/mol for the reactant state and 5.6kcal/mol for the product state. We conclude that the substrate and wat1 both favor the singly protonated state (protonated Asp32 and unprotonated Asp32′) of the catalytic residues in HTLV-1 protease not only through direct interactions with the catalytic residues but also interactions with the rest of the enzyme to stabilize the active site.

Next, our discussion is focused on the reactant state of the simulation for the HTLV-1 protease–substrate complex system. Fig. 13
                         shows the interaction network between the substrate and the binding pocket of HTLV-1 protease for the reactant state, as well as the hydrogen bond interactions between Asp32 and Gly34 of both subunits. It can be seen that after equilibration, not only the configurations of Asp32 and Asp32′ are very similar to those in the X-ray crystal structure (Fig. 1), the hydrogen bonds between the OD1 of Asp32 and Asp32′ and the N of Gly34 and Gly34′, respectively, are preserved; both hydrogen bonds are well maintained in all the molecular dynamics simulations.

Obviously, Leu57′, Leu57 and Asp36 form strong hydrogen bonds with the substrate, and the crystal water (wat2) bridges the interaction between Ile3 of the substrate and Ala59′, which are similar to those in the HTLV-1 protease-statine inhibitor complex (Satoh et al., 2010). In the HTLV-1 protease–inhibitor complex, Ala59 formed a hydrogen bond with wat2, but in the current HTLV-1 protease–substrate complex, the distance between the HN atom of Ala59 and the OH2 of wat2 is 3.7Å in the reactant state and 3.9Å in the product state (Table 3); both interactions are much weaker than a hydrogen bond.

In addition, Asp36′ interacts with Val2 on the substrate through a water molecule (wat3) in the HTLV-1 protease–substrate complex. In this enzyme–substrate complex structure, the lytic water (wat1) is well positioned at the active site. Wat1 forms strong hydrogen bonds with the backbone N of Leu4 on the substrate as well as with the OD2 atom of Asp32′ and the HD1 of Asp32; it also forms a weak hydrogen bond with the carbonyl oxygen of Leu4. The distance between the OH2 atom of wat1 and the carbonyl C of Leu4 is 3.8Å (last row in Table 3), which is an appropriate distance for nucleophilic addition. These interactions indicate that Asp32′ serves as a general base that accepts a proton from wat1 during catalysis. The protonated Asp32 forms hydrogen bonds with Asp32′ and wat1 but not with the substrate in this state, suggesting that it helps stabilize the transition state/intermediate state during catalysis. This equilibrated HTLV-1 protease–substrate complex structure can serve as the Michaelis complex structure for further mechanistic studies of HTLV-1 protease while providing a receptor structure with the correct protonation state of the active site residues for designing novel inhibitors for the HTLV-1 protease through virtual screening.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

We have performed combined QM/MM molecular dynamics simulations on the different protonation states among the catalytic residues (Asp32 and Asp32′) of HTLV-1 protease. Our results indicated that the structures converge to the protonation at the OD1 atom of Asp32 or Asp32′ after the MD simulations. To determine whether Asp32 or Asp32′ is protonated in the Michaelis state, free energy simulations were carried out for a proton transfer reaction between Asp32 and Asp32′ in the apo and substrate-bound HTLV-1 protease. Our results suggest that in the apo HTLV-1 protease, both Asp32 and Asp32' are unprotonated, and substrate binding prefers a protonated Asp32 over a protonated Asp32′ by 2.8kcal/mol. Therefore, we conclude that in the Michaelis state of HTLV-1 protease, Asp32 is protonated on the OD1 atom, while Asp32′ remains unprotonated. The equilibrated HTLV-1 protease–substrate complex can serve as the Michaelis complex structure for further mechanistic studies of HTLV-1 protease while also providing a receptor structure with the correct protonation state among the active site residues during the design of novel HTLV-1 protease inhibitors through virtual screening.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This work was supported by Towson University Start Up Funds (S. Ma), Ronald and Linda Raspet Summer Research Fellowship (N. Petrillo), and University of Wisconsin – Stevens Point Start Up funds, UPDC – New Faculty grant and UEI grant (S. Ma). We would like to thank the Office of Technology Services (OTS) at Towson University for housing and maintaining the computational server.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

