@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Modeling, docking and dynamics simulations of a non-specific lipid transfer protein from Peganum harmala L.

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           PHL-nsLTP belongs to ns-LTP1 family.


                        
                        
                           
                           PHL-nsLTP could accommodate fatty acids ranging from C10 to C18 in size.


                        
                        
                           
                           The hydrophobic cavity of PHL-nsLTP presents important role in its binding activity.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Non-specific transfer protein

Structure

Docking

Molecular dynamics simulations




                     Peganum harmala L.

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Non-specific lipid transfer proteins (ns-LTPs), ubiquitously found in various types of plants, have been well-known to transfer amphiphilic lipids and promote the lipid exchange between mitochondria and microbody. In this study, an in silico analysis was proposed to study ns-LTP in Peganum harmala L., which may belong to ns-LTP1 family, aiming at constructing its three-dimensional structure. Moreover, we adopted MEGA to analyze ns-LTPs and other species phylogenetically, which brought out an initial sequence alignment of ns-LTPs. In addition, we used molecular docking and molecular dynamics simulations to further investigate the affinities and stabilities of ns-LTP with several ligands complexes. Taken together, our results about ns-LTPs and their ligand-binding activities can provide a better understanding of the lipid–protein interactions, indicating some future applications of ns-LTP-mediated transport.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Plant ns-LTPs were first isolated from spinach leaves over 30 years ago, and they possessed the abilities of transferring amphiphilic lipids (e.g., phospholipids, fatty acids and glycolipids) and promoted the lipid exchange between mitochondria and microbody (Gincel et al., 1994; Kader et al., 1984; Pii et al., 2009). Hitherto, ns-LTPs have been discovered in various types of plants, including castor beans, tangerine, corn, rice, tobacco, peach, coffee (Takishima et al., 1988; García-Olmedo et al., 1995; Gomar et al., 1996; Liu et al., 2002; Da-Silva et al., 2006; Pasquato et al., 2006; Zottich et al., 2011), etc. Plant ns-LTPs can be divided into two subfamilies depending on the different molecular mass, namely ns-LTP1 with 9kDa and ns-LTP2 with 7kDa (Douliez et al., 2000; Kader, 1997). The typically structural characteristic of ns-LTP contains an internal hydrophobic cavity that can be stabilized by 8 Cys residues, and such a cavity is able to run through the whole protein to allow the binding of different lipids and hydrophobic compounds in vitro (Douliez et al., 2000; Pons et al., 2003). Therefore, ns-LTPs might play a pivotal role in the formation of protective hydrophobic layers on the surface of the plant aerial organs possibly stimulating the transfer of hydrophobic compounds to the extracellular environment (Trevino and Oconnell, 1998; Lee et al., 2009). All the relevant evidence provided a potential explanation for the ns-LTPs defense against viral, bacterial and fungal pathogens (Buhot et al., 2001; Salcedo et al., 2007). Furthermore, the transfer activity for drug delivery solves the problems involving lipid membrane permeability of drugs, which would be employed in pharmacology or medicine industries (Pato et al., 2001). Also, it could be recognized as plant pan-allergens present in foods and pollens (Salcedo et al., 2004).

The tertiary structures of ns-LTP from different origins (e.g., wheat, rice, maize and barley seeds), either in free state or in complex with lipids, have recently been determined by X-ray crystallography or NMR method (Gincel et al., 1994; Gomar et al., 1996; Shin et al., 1995; Charvolin et al., 1999; Han et al., 2001; Heinemann et al., 1996; Lerche et al., 1997; Lee et al., 1998), suggesting the three-dimensional structure of ns-LTP consists four α-helices and a long N-terminal signal sequence, with four disulfide bonds interconnecting the secondary structure (Lee et al., 1998). They are also characterized by a tunnel-like hydrophobic cavity into which a long fatty acyl chain could be inserted. A recent study has revealed that ns-LTP of maize can accommodate various types of saturated or unsaturated fatty acids, ranging in size from C10 to C18 (Han et al., 2001). These above-mentioned results would provide us more insightful clues to further understand the structure–function relationships of ns-LTP.


                     Peganum harmala L., distributed in Uyghur nationality in Xinjiang, China since ancient times, has been regarded as a traditional herb for medicinal or psychoactive therapy in water shortage deserts and grasslands (Ma et al., 2000). Moreover, it has been reported to possess a wide spectrum of pharmacological actions in different kinds of applications, including antibacterial, antifungal, antitumor treatments and effectiveness in treatment of dermatosis (Astulla et al., 2008; Song et al., 2004; Herraiz et al., 2010). To date, structure–function relationships of PHL-nsLTP are still under investigation, and therefore, it is of great significance to investigate its structure and ligand–protein interactions.

In the study described here, we reported for the first time that a new lipid transfer protein's nucleotide sequence information which was purified from Peganum harmala L. (PHL-nsLTP) seeds. Meanwhile, Sun and her colleagues demonstrated that this protein exerted lipid binding, antifungal, anticancer and anti-HIV-1 reverse transcriptase activities (Ma et al., 2013). Herein, based upon this nucleotide sequence information, we established an evolutionary relationship between PHL-nsLTP and ns-LTPs in the other species under the guidance of phylogenetic analysis and sequences alignments. Then, we modeled the three-dimensional structure of PHL-nsLTP and assessed its affinities and stabilities in complex with various fatty acids through molecular docking and dynamics simulations, thus concluding that the PHL-nsLTP may belong to ns-LTP1, which could form complex with a wide range of lipid ligands from C10 to C18.

In summary, our results demonstrate that ligand binding activities of ns-LTP can develop a better understanding of the biological functions of PHL-nsLTP, as well as the lipid–protein interactions, and thus might shedding light on future pharmacological or medical industrial implications.

PHL-nsLTP was isolated by cationic exchange chromatography on Resource S column and gel filtration on Sephadex 75 10/300 GL column (Ooi et al., 2008). Moreover, according to N-terminal amino acid sequence analysis results, degenerate primers were designed and the full length cDNA of PHL-nsLTP was acquired by rapid amplification of cDNA end (RACE) (Zhang and Frohman, 1997).

DNAMAN software (http://www.lynnon.com/) was used to translate the nucleotide acid sequences of PHL-nsLTP to the corresponding amino acid sequences. Moreover, PHL-nsLTP amino acid sequence was used to find its homology proteins through BLASTP (protein–protein BLAST) in a non-redundant protein sequences (nr) in the database (Altschul et al., 1990).

Then, integrating all the search results, 101 sequences were achieved followed subsequently by, sequences which were not from the ns-LTP family being deleted. Sequences from the same species, but bearing different amino acids composition, were further screened, and the sequence which possessed highest identity was chosen. Finally, 51 ns-LTP sequences were achieved for further study.

51 ns-LTPs sequences were aligned through the ClustalX (version 2.1) packages (Higgins and Sharp, 1988), and the corresponding phylogenetic tree was constructed by Molecular Evolutionary Genetics Analysis (MEGA5) software (Tamura et al., 2011) with neighbor-joining method with deafult parameters (Saitou and Nei, 1987). The reliability of each branch was evaluated with bootstrap method (1000 times repeat). Finally, the phylogenetic tree was visualized using TreeView program (Page, 1996).

The signal peptide of ns-LTP was predicted by SignalP server (Petersen et al., 2011), while its domain was acquired from Prosite (http://prosite.expasy.org/). Additionally, three-dimensional structure of PHL-nsLTP was constructed using SWISS-MODEL server (http://swissmodel.expasy.org/) with the structure of maize (PDB ID: 1FK5) (Han et al., 2001) as template.

10 ligands that might possess the potentials for binding to our ns-LTP were collected from literature (Han et al., 2001) and Protein Data Bank (http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/home/home.do). Detailed information of the ligands was shown in Table 1
                        . The PHL-nsLTP and its ligands were prepared using UCSF chimera, where protein with negative charges was added, while corresponding ligands were added with negative or positive or even zero charge (Pettersen et al., 2004). To improve the accuracy, the binding site was selected within 10.0Å root mean square deviations (RMSD) of the original ligand. The primary docking was performed with grid score to write out the topmost pose. Amber score was then used for rescoring based on the topmost pose. The flexible ligand docking method was adopted in this work, which allowed the ligand to be flexible when it docked to the binding site of the receptors (Lang et al., 2009). The PDB2PQR server was utilized to assign protonation state of PHL-nsLTP with AMBER forcefield, and PROPKA was applied to maintain protonation state at pH=7.0 (Dolinsky et al., 2004, 2007; Miteva et al., 2005; Shi et al., 2013). Regarding amber scores and binding modes, we eventually selected 6 protein–ligand complexes for further molecular dynamics simulations analysis.

The GROMACS (version 4.5) package (Van Der Spoel et al., 2005; Hess et al., 2008) was employed to perform molecular dynamics simulations analysis of the dynamic behavior of ns-LTP complexed with different ligands, and the protein topology was constructed by pdb2gmx with GROMOS96 43a1 forcefield while the ligand topology was generated using PRODRG2 server (Schuler et al., 2001; Schüttelkopf and van Aalten, 2004). In this study, we used a cubic periodic box setting a minimal distance of 1.0 between the protein and edge of the box, which was then solvated by adding simple point charge (SPC) water molecules (Klionsky et al., 2012). To make the system neutral, we added Na+ and Cl− to simulate a physiological NaCl concentration of 0.15M. Following a steepest descent energy minimization with particle mesh Ewald (PME) at every step (Darden et al., 1993; Essmann et al., 1995), LTP–lipid complexes were equilibrated 100ps under constant volume (NVT) and constant pressure (NPT) condition, respectively, during which position restraints were simultaneously applied to ns-LTP and ligands. In NVT equilibration, the temperature was maintained at 300K by the Berendsen weak coupling method (Berendsen et al., 1984). In addition, under NPT equilibration, the temperature was controlled by the Berendsen weak coupling method (Berendsen et al., 1984) and the pressure was maintained at 1bar by Parrinello–Rahman barostat method (Parrinello and Rahman, 1981; Nosé and Klein, 1983). Upon completion of the two equilibration phases, production MD simulations were conducted for 1ns after taking away the position restraints. In this data collection phase, the temperature and pressure were maintained by the same methods as in NPT phase, and the coordinates were saved every 0.2ps. For all simulations, LINCS algorithm was applied to constrain all bonds (Berk et al., 1997). The resulting trajectory files were viewed and analyzed using UCSF Chimera (Pettersen et al., 2004).

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

The full length cDNA of PHL-nsLTP was shown in Fig. 1
                         and it contains 125 amino acid residues, including a mature protein (91 amino acid residues) and a putative signal peptide (23 amino acid residues) (GenBank accession number: JQ756455). Through DNAMAN software, the molecular mass and pI of PHL-nsLTP were 9.28kDa and 8.79, respectively. To trace the evolutionary relationship of ns-LTPs between Peganum harmala L. and other species, we constructed a phylogenetic tree of 51 species by MEGA5 software with neighbor-joining method as shown in Fig. 2
                        . The phylogenetic tree might serve as a framework to show the genetic diversity and distance in different biological species and other entities. We found that Peganum harmala L. showed a close relation to Dimocarpus longan and their bootstrap value was 29. Meanwhile, Peganum harmala L. was also grouped together with Vitis vinifera, Arabidopsis thaliana, Brassica napus, Brassica oleracea, Citrus jambhiri and Citrus sinensis. Besides, Criticum cyminum and Catharanthus roseus serve as the root of this tree. To further characterize the sequences information in one cluster which included Peganum harmala L., a variety of sequence alignments were utilized as shown in Fig. 3
                        . The amino acid sequences shared significant similarity namely the eight conserved Cys residues and in the absence of Trp residue. Additionally, they also possessed two consensus sequences, T/SXXDR/K and PYXIS, locating around 43–47 and 81–85, respectively. It is reported that ns-LTPs are divided into two subfamilies according to their molecular masses: 9-kDa ns-LTP1 and 7-kDa ns-LTP2 (Douliez et al., 2000; Kader, 1997). Here, our study demonstrated that the molecular mass of PHL-nsLTP was 9.28kDa by using DNAMAN software. Moreover, plant ns-LTP1 family has a high sequence identity and two highly conserved regions (T/SXXDR/K and PYXIS) that significantly contribute to lipid binding (Douliez et al., 2000; Salcedo et al., 2007). Therefore, based upon the aforementioned studies, we considered the PHL-nsLTP may belong to ns-LTP1 family.

Sequence comparison showed that PHL-nsLTP was homologous to maize ns-LTP (PDB Code: 1FK5) whose three-dimensional structure has been determined by X-ray crystallography (Han et al., 2001). Three-dimensional structure of PHL-nsLTP was successfully simulated by homology modeling tool regarding maize ns-LTP as template, showing that PHL-nsLTP shared 65.22% sequence identity with maize ns-LTP. Moreover, the QMEAN score is 0.561 which indicates the quality assessment of our homology modeling is reliable (shown in Fig. S1). The predicted three-dimensional structure model of Peganum harmala L. is presented in Fig. 4
                        , revealing that ns-LTP is consisting of four α-helices packed against a C-terminal region and four disulfide bridges which contribute to stability of overall fold. The successive α-helices α1 (Cys4-Leu18), α2 (Cys29-Ala38), α3 (Thr2-Ser50) and α4 (Glu64-Cys74) fold into a compact domain and form a tunnel-like hydrophobic cavity, which is stabilized by four disulfide bridges. Four α-helices are linked by three loops, and the α2 helix is anchored into the hydrophobic cavity by two disulfide bridges (Cys14-Cys28 and Cys29-Cys74). In addition, α3 helix hitched α1 helix and C-terminal region through Cys4-Cys51 and Cys49-Cys88 disulfide bridges. These four disulfide bonds could improve the stability of protein in response to protease attack and heat denaturation (Wu et al., 2004).

Plant ns-LTPs have a tunnel-like hydrophobic cavity that could accommodate long fatty acyl chain leading to lipid transfer. Previous studies revealed that maize ns-LTP could accommodate diversification of saturated or unsaturated fatty acids, ranging from C10 to C18 in size. To further study the ligand–protein interactions, we collected 10 ligands and docked them to previous homology-modeled ns-LTP. The Amber scores were shown in Table 2
                        . Notably, Amber score attempts to approximate the binding free energy for the ligand to the receptor, a low (negative) energy indicates stable system and thus a likely receptor-ligand binding interaction (Murcko, 1995). Here, the Amber scores of these 10 ligands in complex with ns-LTP range from −3.11476E+11 to −4.514731. The results showed LP3 (26 carbon atoms) and LAP (20 carbon atoms) may not successfully bind to PHL-nsLTP or had no distinct binding effects due to their bad scores. Besides, E2P (20 carbon atoms) and CXS (9 carbon atoms) systems got higher amber scores than the others, suggesting that they may not in a relatively stable state. Therefore, we reasonably speculated that they could not bind to PHL-nsLTP. Subsequently, 6 docking results were chosen for the further molecular dynamics simulations analysis.

To verify whether the binding between ligand and PHL-nsLTP could maintain stable or not, we performed a molecular dynamics simulations via the protocol described above, which indicated the time-evolving structure ensemble, representing the solution conformation of the proteins, exhibited different dynamic processes according to different ligands. Fig. 5
                         shows detailed protein motions at atomic resolution. As time went by, the DKA system could slowly insert into the binding site but MYR system kept moving within the hydrophobic cavity during the whole molecular dynamic simulations. Seen this figure, ligands with different carbon atoms can show different length and shape when accommodating to the hydrophobic cavity of ns-LTP. Moreover, Fig. 5 reveals in detail that two ligands DKA and MYR have contrary binding sites in ns-LTP, running through the cavity. Few amino acids could appear to be flexible in the crystal structure; therefore, the C-terminal region has been estimated to play a crucial role in the binding process (Shin et al., 1995). Additionally, it is apparent that the multiple binding modes serve as a possible means for binding and transporting lipids. Furthermore, interaction energy (the sum of electrostatic and van der Waals interactions) (Songtawee et al., 2013) between the ligands and PHL-nsLTP was subsequently considered (shown in Table 3
                         and Fig. 6
                        ). Seen from Table 3, we can infer that PHL-nsLTP with all the six ligands complexes were in a relatively relaxed state. According to molecular docking and molecular dynamics simulations results, PHL-nsLTP could accommodate lipid ligands ranging in size from DKA (10 carbon atoms) to OLA (18 carbon atoms). This is consistent with the previous findings in maize and peach (Pasquato et al., 2006; Han et al., 2001).

In order to assess the dynamic stability of each in 6 ligands, we used the RMSD of the atomic positions to examine conformational variations of the ns-LTP complexes for 1ns. The overall conformational evolution of the ns-LTP-ligand complexes during the room-temperature simulation was analyzed. From their starting structures, those complexes have a similarly sharp rise during the first 0.05ns (shown in Fig. 7
                        ). Notably, the PAM system could reach its stability after 0.6ns, and the PLM system had the trend of rise within 1ns, while the DAO system exhibited maximum deviation.

A detailed analysis of the root-mean-square fluctuation (RMSF) versus the residue number in the complex is illustrated in Fig. 8
                        . As seen from Fig. 8, the region around Arg-50 shows minimum RMS fluctuation value of about 0.4Å. In addition to the N- and C-terminal residues, the regions around Leu11, Ala22, Arg40, Gly61, Tyr80 and Thr84 show the biggest dynamic fluctuations. In addition, the DAO system has a remarkably higher peak than other systems at the Ala38 residue. Moreover, the secondary structure could also depict the stability of such a system. Fig. 9
                         indicates that the residues 12–14 of OLA system and PAM system change from turn or 3-helix to A-helix, and the residues 12–14 of MYR system vary from turn or 3-helix to mainly A-helix at 0.3ns while the other systems remain relatively stable. The residues 68–70 of DAO system change from coil to A-helix at 0.45ns. However, the binding domains which can form a tunnel-like hydrophobic cavity are relatively stable during MD simulations. No water molecules are observed within the hydrophobic cavity throughout the whole simulations.

Plant ns-LTPs are widely distributed and form a superfamily of related proteins, which is subdivided into two families: ns-LTP1 with 9kDa and ns-LTP2 with 7kDa. However, their functions and regulations have not been fully understood (Wang et al., 2005). Ns-LTP1 has a rather larger hydrophobic cavity than ns-LTP2, suggesting that the former can better accommodate up to two monoacylated lipids in a head-to-tail orientation (Charvolin et al., 1999; Han et al., 2001). Despite of their differences, both of the ns-LTPs are secreted proteins with a hydrophobic N-terminal signal sequence (Hoh et al., 2005). The PHL-nsLTP discussed above may belong to ns-LTP1. It can transfer saturated or unsaturated fatty acids between membranes, with the size ranging from C10 to C18. Generally, the structure-level analysis is a complementary approach to search the biological functions of proteins, by which we elucidate ligand–protein interaction patterns and how the hydrophobic cavity PHL-nsLTP can bind to different hydrophobic ligands non-specifically.

Present data has revealed that plant ns-LTPs, binding various ligands, have potential applications in the field of drug delivery (Pato et al., 2001). In addition, they appeared ideally designed to bind and carry not only lipids but also a variety of organic molecules, suggesting their suitable role for biotechnological applications (Poznanski et al., 1999). Due to previous studies demonstrated that PHL-ns-LTP exerts antifungal, antiproliferation, anticancer and anti-HIV-1 reverse transcriptase activities, these finding would show its biological characteristics, indicating more insightful influence on pharmaceutical exploitation in the future.

In conclusion, this study elaborated the evolutionary relationship of ns-LTPs between Peganum harmala L. and other plants, as well as the potential lipid transfer activity of the PHL-nsLTP. So far, our in silico investigation presents the modeling structure of ns-LTP, as well as the docking patterns and dynamic interactions between ns-LTP and ligands. This special structure–function relationship might lay the foundation for further study.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

We are grateful to Dr. Bo Liu, Chun-yang Li, Xin Wen, Xue-mei He (Sichuan University) and Wenwen-Li (University College London) for their critical reviews on this manuscript. This work was supported in part by National Natural Science Foundation of China (Nos. 30970643, 81173093 and J1103518), QiankeheJziLKS[2012]23hao, Xinjiang Science and Technology Aiding Project of China (No. 2009911219), a project from Science Research Key Project of Xinjiang Education Department (No. XJEDU2008I01) and projects from the open research fund program of Xinjiang Key Laboratory of Biological Resources and Genetic Engineering (Nos. XJDX0201-2009-03 and XJDX0201-2010-06).

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2013.07.001.

The following are the supplementary data to this article:
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

