@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Computer modeling of the dynamic properties of the cAMP-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Protein kinase A catalytic subunit was modeled using molecular dynamics computational methods.


                        
                        
                           
                           Structure of this protein as well as its complexes consisted of a large number of rapidly inter-converting conformations.


                        
                        
                           
                           The most mobile structure segments of the protein were located in the regions of substrate binding sites.


                        
                        
                           
                           The structure dynamics of protein kinase A was most significantly affected by the binding of the ATP and peptide ligand.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Molecular dynamics

cAMP-dependent protein kinase

Clustering of conformations

Ligand binding

Allostery

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The structural dynamics of the cAMP-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit were modeled using molecular dynamics computational methods. It was shown that the structure of this protein as well as its complexes with ATP and peptide ligand PKI(5-24) consisted of a large number of rapidly inter-converting conformations which could be grouped into subsets proceeding from their similarity. This cluster analysis revealed that conformations which correspond to the “opened” and “closed” structures of the protein were already present in the free enzyme, and most surprisingly co-existed in enzyme–ATP and enzyme–PKI(5-24) complexes as well as in the ternary complex, which included both of these ligands. The results also demonstrated that the most mobile structure segments of the protein were located in the regions of substrate binding sites and that their dynamics were most significantly affected by the binding of the ATP and peptide ligand.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Protein kinases play a central role in the regulation of most cellular processes and this explains the importance of understanding the regulation mechanisms of the activity and specificity of these enzymes. For different reasons the catalytic subunit of cAMP-dependent protein kinase, also denoted as protein kinase A (Hanks and Hunter, 1995), was selected as the model enzyme for these studies (Breitenlechner et al., 2004).

Since 1991, when the first X-ray structure of this protein was resolved (Knighton et al., 1991a,b), many papers about the interrelationship between the catalytic properties and structure of this enzyme have been published. At the time of writing of this article the PDB database (Berman et al., 2000) returned 131 entries when searching for “cAMP-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit”. This list includes proteins purified from eight different organisms, and free enzyme structural data can be found for different enzyme–ligand complexes. The general message of all of these publications clearly emphasize that this protein has a highly dynamic structure. Moreover, the high degree of mobility of several parts of the free enzyme has hampered the establishment of the exact positioning of these amino acids, and therefore the structures obtained have been represented by a bunch of multiple peptide chains predominantly presenting the enzyme's core structure. Only co-crystallization of the enzyme with nucleotides and/or peptide ligands has improved the situation and enabled more precise structures to be obtained. Understandably, all of these X-ray structures present the static structure of this protein.

The conclusion regarding the highly dynamic behavior of protein kinase A has also been confirmed using experimental methods which allow investigations into different aspects of the protein structure in solution, including hydrogen/deuterium exchange coupled with mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) (Burns-Hamuro et al., 2005), fluorescence anisotropy (Lew et al., 1997), small-angle X-ray scattering (Olah et al., 1993; Cheng et al., 2009), and circular dichroism (Reed and Kinzel, 1984). However, these studies have provided only a general understanding of the protein's dynamics and its role in the recognition of substrates and inhibitors. More specific conclusions about its structural dynamics can be drawn from NMR experiments, using chemical shifts to characterize changes in the location of particular atoms of amino acids and residue-by-residue conformational dynamics (Masterson et al., 2008; Langer et al., 2004). In the case of PKA this analysis has revealed significant shifts in the characteristic peaks of the free protein molecule in the process of complex formation with specific ligands, resembling the structure of the nucleotide substrate ATP, and peptide substrates and inhibitors (Masterson et al., 2008). Most importantly, these shifts were located in the specific regions of the protein molecule involved in binding these substrates and confirming the presence of highly dynamic areas in the protein structure.

Although these results are rather precise and have been used to generate a picture of the structural changes accompanying different steps of the PKA-catalyzed reaction and molecular recognition of ligands (Engh et al., 1996; Masterson et al., 2010; Taylor et al., 2004), all of these conclusions still cover the behavior of the averaged enzyme structure. However, unlike this average structure the native structure of a protein may consist of a large number of rapidly inter-converting conformations, which may be grouped or clustered into subsets proceeding from the similarity or dissimilarity of their structures, and allowing a more convenient presentation of the structural and functional properties of the enzyme.

The presence of conformational states, which are significantly different and thus can be grouped into appropriate clusters, may affect the observed catalytic behavior of the enzyme, if these structural differences are accompanied with differences in catalytic properties. Moreover, if these structural differences are flattened by an averaged structure of the protein, it may be impossible to understand the details of the catalytic mechanism and specificity, which might be governed by transitions between these clusters and structural dynamics within these clusters.

These conformational clusters can be determined by using calculations of molecular dynamics (MD) which take into consideration the presence of several layers of water around the protein molecule, and thus should provide an adequate picture of the protein's dynamics under the set of given conditions. This understanding has motivated us to apply the MD methods in the computational modeling of a PKA-clustered structure for further analysis of the dynamic properties of this protein and its complexes with specific ligands.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

Simulations of molecular dynamics (MD) were performed proceeding from the ternary ligand–enzyme complex containing the catalytic subunit of the cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA, mus musculus), one molecule of ATP analog AMP–PNP coordinated with two Mn ions, and the enzyme-bound peptide inhibitor known as PKI(5-24) (Zheng et al., 1993). The atomic coordinates of this ternary complex were listed under the codename “1ATP” in the PDB database (www.pdb.org). This entry was selected because the positions of most amino acids are well localized in this structure, except the undefined N-terminal sequence 1–14 (Berman et al., 2000). For our modeling purposes both bound ligands were deleted from this complex to produce an input file describing the non-liganded enzyme. In a similar way the partially non-liganded structures of the PKA–ATP and PKA–PKI(5-24) complexes were obtained. In the former case the AMP–PNP molecule was replaced by ATP. The input file for the ternary complex PKA–ATP–PKI(5-24) was obtained simply by changing AMP–PNP to ATP. Importantly, in these non-liganded structures all Mn ions were replaced by Mg ions. The reasons for this change were connected with the fact that all existing kinetic data have been obtained in the presence of Mg ions, which are physiological co-factors for this enzyme. These ions are important for enzyme–nucleotide complex formation and are important for transfer reaction of phosphoric group. For technical reasons the Mg ions were replaced with Mn-ions for X-ray study, but this replacement cannot be done in the functionally active enzyme. Most importantly, none of these replacement and deletion procedures changed the atomic coordinates of the amino acids, determined in the X-ray analysis of the ternary complex.

The non-liganded protein structure, two binary enzyme–ligand structures and the ternary complex structure derived on the basis of the X-ray analysis and further denoted as protein states were thereafter optimized by means of MD calculations, taking into consideration the influence of a number of shells of surrounding water molecules. This optimization procedure was characterized by time-plots of the root-mean-square distance (RMSD) parameter (Maiorov and Crippen, 1994), which is the measure of the average distance between the protein backbone atoms of two superimposed conformations (Fig. 1
                        ). Here this parameter described the overall mean deviation of the structure of the protein and its complexes in aqueous solution from the initial structure, derived from the X-ray analysis.

It can be seen in Fig. 1 that the system was practically equilibrated over a period of 10ns. However, longer observation of the folding trajectory revealed the presence of further oscillations of rather significant amplitude. These oscillations clearly indicated that all of the protein states should be presented using the superposition of different conformations rather than single (averaged) structures (Papaleo, 2009). Therefore for subsequent analysis and visualization of these MD trajectories the clustering technique was used to group the calculated conformations (Daura et al., 1999).

The extensive sets of molecular configurations obtained from the MD simulations were partitioned into groups sharing conformational similarity. In this analysis RMSD plots with a cut-off radius 2.5Å were used for cluster assignment. This value has often been the resolution limit of X-ray analysis and seems to represent the range of thermal motions of protein chains. Although this analysis revealed more than 200 distinct clusters for each case, there were only ever a few highly populated groups, as shown in Fig. 2
                        ; the number of conformations in remaining clusters was marginal. It can be seen that the general trend of cluster distribution was similar for each of the enzyme states analyzed. However, the protein structures grouped in these clusters revealed significantly different structures, as shown below.

The mean conformations of the four enzyme states, all denoted as clusters #1 in Fig. 2, were presented in Fig. 3
                         in the following order: the free PKA (Panel A); PKA–ATP and PKA–PKI(5-24) complexes (Panels B and C, respectively); and the ternary complex PKA–ATP–PKI(5-24) (Panel D). For simplicity, the bound ligands were not shown in these models, although their presence was taken into account in calculations. Comparison of these models revealed several important structural differences between the protein states, and to illustrate this fact the most significantly changed areas were marked in red in the conventionally presented protein models. Notably, these differences were observed throughout the protein molecule, including the small lobe (mostly responsible for ATP binding) and the large lobe (mostly involved in peptide binding) while only the core structure of the protein seemed to be less affected.

Secondly, several characteristic structural features of PKA, defined on the basis of X-ray analysis, were clearly recognized in these computer models. For example, the protein structure shown in panel A of Fig. 3 clearly corresponded to the “open state” of PKA, while all subsequent complexes (Panels B, C and D) could be classified as “closed states”. For a more detailed comparison of these structures, however, the difference between the positioning of the Cα-atoms of each amino acid in comparable structures was calculated using analogy with RMSD values. This analysis quantified structural changes in different parts of the enzyme molecule, including the nucleotide and peptide binding sites, located in the N-terminal part and C-terminal part of the protein, respectively. The results of this analysis are summarized below (Figs. 4 and 5
                        
                        ).

In Fig. 4A cluster #1 of the free enzyme was compared with the most abundant clusters of the enzyme–ATP complex (red line) and the enzyme–peptide complex (blue line). In Panel B of this figure the same comparison was made for cluster #2 of the same enzyme states. It can be seen that the most significant differences between these structures were observed for amino acids on the N-terminal side up to position 90, while the second area of significant conformational shift started from position 200. These two regions, which were the most significantly affected, belong to the nucleotide and peptide binding sites of PKA, while the region between these sequences represented the core structure of the enzyme. Therefore it was not surprising that ligand binding affected the structure of the protein around these two regions first and foremost. It was also noteworthy that the general picture of conformational changes was similar when data for different clusters were compared.

However, the most striking point of this analysis was related to the fact that the influence of ligand binding was not focused on the protein structure of the particular site, but affected conformations of both sites. It can be seen that nucleotide binding also significantly affected the conformation of the protein around the peptide binding site, and vice versa (Fig. 4). This interrelationship could be taken as the structural basis of the allosteric phenomena observed in the PKA-catalyzed reactions, where the binding effectiveness of the second substrate increased after the first substrate was bound (Masterson et al., 2008; Kuznetsov and Järv, 2009).

The same approach was used for a more explicit comparison of conformations of different clusters of the same enzyme state, and positioning of Cα-atoms of each amino acid in cluster #1 was compared with the same amino acid in clusters #2, #3 and #4, with this analysis being conducted for all four enzyme states. The results are presented in Fig. 5 for the free enzyme (Panel A), the enzyme complex with ATP (Panel B) and peptide (Panel C) and the ternary enzyme–ATP–peptide complex (Panel D).

Firstly, it can be seen from this figure that the conformation of the first cluster of the free enzyme, which represented around 55% of the entire population of structures, was quite different from the other three clusters, which in turn seem to have relatively close structures. The observed differences were most striking for amino acids in positions 45–90, which belong to the small lobe of PKA and have been recognized as residue involved in the transfer of the enzyme from the open state conformation to the closed state conformation. Consequently, both states should already exist in the free enzyme, and therefore nucleotide binding (which has been associated with the formation of the closed state) should only shift this equilibrium. The same conclusion seems to be valid for the peptide binding site, where the co-existence of the open and closed forms occurred.

ATP binding in the active site of PKA is believed to fix the closed structure of the small lobe (Masterson et al., 2010) and this conclusion was confirmed by the protein model depicting the first cluster of this enzyme state in Fig. 3. In agreement with this conclusion, only small differences were observed between the conformations of clusters #1–4 of this enzyme complex in positions 45–90 of the protein sequence, which form the ATP binding site (Panel B). However, clear differences were revealed between cluster #1 and clusters #2–4 in the case of amino acid 230–270, representing the peptide binding region of the large lobe. If cluster #1, which covered approx. 65% of the PKA–ATP complex, represented the open conformation of the peptide binding site, clusters #2–4 should represent the closed conformation of this site, although no peptide was bound. Consequently, the open and closed forms of this binding site should also exist simultaneously.

Unlike the situation above, clusters describing the PKA–PKI(5-24) binary complex demonstrated smooth distribution of differences between the positioning of Cα-atoms in the two structures. Consequently, peptide binding was obviously unable to “freeze” the closed states as effectively as was seen in the case of nucleotide binding. On the other hand, peptide binding still had an influence on the ATP binding site, whose closed state seemed to have shifted from 42% in the free enzyme to approx. 60% in the enzyme–peptide complex.

Finally, formation of the ternary complex was also characterized by four main clusters which had common features with the structural behavior of the binary complexes, but which were not represented by the sum of these effects. Moreover, it seems reasonable to suggest that this complex has somewhat higher flexibility compared to the binary complexes. This also explains the more equal distribution of the main clusters (whose number was nevertheless equal to four).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

The results of the MD simulation of PKA, its binary complexes with ATP or peptide PKI(5-24) and its ternary complex involving both of these ligands demonstrated that each of these states was covered by sets of protein conformations which can carry different functionalities and determine the overall behavior of the protein. These conformations were grouped into clusters based on their structural similarity, and this procedure simplified the analysis of the results of the MD simulation and was found to be an efficient tool for and visualization of the dynamism of the protein. The results demonstrated that the binding of the second ligand to the binary enzyme–ligand complex caused significant changes in the dynamics of the protein molecule, and there was no principal difference whether this ligand was nucleotide or peptide. Most interestingly, this phenomenon was actually observed in the kinetics of the PKA-catalyzed reaction of peptide phosphorylation, where the binding effectiveness of the second substrate was enhanced under conditions where another substrate was bound with the enzyme (Kuznetsov and Järv, 2009).

The initial atomic coordinates for the modeling of the PKA structure were taken from entry 1ATP published for the PKA ternary complex with AMP–PNP and PKI(5-24) in the PDB database, including two Mn ions (Zheng et al., 1993). Write errors in the PDB database for this complex were adjusted using the WHAT_IF software suite (Hooft et al., 1996). For MD modeling the Mn ions were replaced by Mg ions in all calculations. To obtain atomic coordinates for modeling the free enzyme, the nucleotide and peptide atoms were removed from the structure and the set of atomic coordinates was used for structure optimization. Similarly, for the modeling of the enzyme–ATP complex the peptide was removed and AMP–PNP was reconstructed as ATP, while for the modeling of the enzyme–peptide complex the nucleotide analog AMP–PNP was deleted. The atomic coordinates for the ternary complex were obtained after replacement of AMP–PNP with ATP.

The all-atom MD simulations were made using the GROMACS simulation package (Hess et al., 2008), version 4.5.4. The protonation of the protein was handled automatically by the GROMACS pdb2gmx tool, which takes the most common protonation state for an amino acid residue at pH 7. Thus, Lys was protonated, Asp and Glu were unprotonated, and His was kept neutral. The constrained bond lengths and angles, torsion angles, atomic point charges, and van der Waals parameters for the molecules were assigned using the GROMOS53a6 force field parameter set (Oostenbrink et al., 2004). The GROMOS53a6 force field was expanded by two phosphorylated amino acids – phosphorylated serine (SEP) and phosphorylated threonine (TPO) – which was needed to evaluate the presence of these two physiologically important phosphorylated amino acids in the PKA structure. Where ATP was included in the simulations, its atom charges and bond and angle parameters were defined using the PRODRG web service (Schüttelkopf and van Aalten, 2004). For each set-up the protein structure was solvated in a cubic box measuring 7.75nm×7.75nm×7.75nm with the SPC water model for solvent (Berendsen et al., 1987). Na+ and Cl− ions were added for system neutralization.

At first the system was allowed to relax so as to equilibrate. The cell was first stirred in the NVT ensemble and, after that, in the NPT ensemble with constant pressure at 1atm and a temperature of 300K with a time step of 2fs. The temperature was controlled using the modified Berendsen thermostat algorithm (Berendsen et al., 1984) and pressure using the Parrinello–Rahman method (Parrinello and Rahman, 1981). Equilibrated simulations were performed on the systems for 10ns.

Following the set-up of parameters the MD simulations were conducted for each protein state. Newton's equations of motion were integrated with the leap-frog algorithm with a time step of 2fs. For each subgroup (ions, water, protein and ligands) the temperature (300K) and isotropic pressure (1atm) were kept constant using the Berendsen coupling algorithm (Berendsen et al., 1984) with temperature time constants at 0.1ps and pressure time constants at 1ps, respectively. Interactions within the short range cut-off of 1.2nm were evaluated at every time step. Long-range electrostatic interactions were calculated using the particle mesh Ewald (PME) summation method (Darden et al., 1993), with a 6-order interpolation polynomial and a 1.2nm cut-off that were updated every 10 steps together with the pair-list. Bond lengths were constrained using the LINCS algorithm (Hess et al., 1997) for the protein. The set-ups were then simulated for 70ns.

Cluster analysis of MD trajectories was used to avoid distortion of the globule by averaging the structure. Comparison of structures was performed based on criteria of the highest similarity. The root mean square distance based gromos clustering algorithm was used to cluster conformations (Daura et al., 1999).

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This work was financially supported by the Estonian Ministry of Education and Research, Grant SF0180064s08 and by Graduate School “Functional materials and technologies” receiving funding from the European Social Fund under project 1.2.0401.09-0079 in the University of Tartu, Estonia. MD simulations were carried out in the High Performance Computing Center of the University of Tartu.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

