@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Genome-wide analysis and evolutionary study of sucrose non-fermenting 1-related protein kinase 2 (SnRK2) gene family members in Arabidopsis and Oryza
            

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We studied the evolution based on the phylogenetic studies of SnRK2 gene family in different plant lineages.


                        
                        
                           
                           We also analyzed the chromosomal distributions of duplicated SnRK2 members in Arabidopsis and Oryza.


                        
                        
                           
                           We showed that ancestral SnRK2 gene of land plants gradually evolved by duplication and diversification.


                        
                        
                           
                           The SnRK2 gene modified itself through exon–intron loss events to survive under stress conditions.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Abiotic stress

Phylogenetic tree

Promoter element

SNF1-related protein kinase 2

SnRK2

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The over-expression of plant specific SnRK2 gene family members by hyperosmotic stress and some by abscisic acid is well established. In this report, we have analyzed the evolution of SnRK2 gene family in different plant lineages including green algae, moss, lycophyte, dicot and monocot. Our results provide some evidences to indicate that the natural selection pressure had considerable influence on cis-regulatory promoter region and coding region of SnRK2 members in Arabidopsis and Oryza independently through time. Observed degree of sequence/motif conservation amongst SnRK2 homolog in all the analyzed plant lineages strongly supported their inclusion as members of this family. The chromosomal distributions of duplicated SnRK2 members have also been analyzed in Arabidopsis and Oryza. Massively Parallel Signature Sequencing (MPSS) database derived expression data and the presence of abiotic stress related promoter elements within the 1kb upstream promoter region of these SnRK2 family members further strengthen the observations of previous workers. Additionally, the phylogenetic relationships of SnRK2 have been studied in all plant lineages along with their respective exon–intron structural patterns. Our results indicate that the ancestral SnRK2 gene of land plants gradually evolved by duplication and diversification and modified itself through exon–intron loss events to survive under environmental stress conditions.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Plants have acquired several adaptive features to survive against abiotic stresses, such as temperature, UV irradiation, drought, salinity, pH variation, high light intensity and rising atmospheric pollutant levels that have severely affected crop growth and quality (Mattoo et al., 2000; Basra, 2001; Serraj and Sinclair, 2002; Xiong and Zhu, 2002; Long et al., 2006). The adverse effect of most of these stresses lead to the osmotic stress, ionic imbalance, DNA and/or protein damage and many other harmful physiological phenotypes (Serraj and Sinclair, 2002). Plants that perceive these extracellular environmental cues modulate intracellular signaling cascades and facilitate genetic, biochemical and physiological changes to cope up with such myriad stresses (Finkelstein et al., 2002; Zhu, 2002; Chinnusamy et al., 2004; Cao et al., 2007; Gupta et al., 2013). The plants that do not have such protective machinery eventually perish.

The sucrose non-fermenting 1-related protein kinase (SnRK), homologous to yeast SNF1 genes and mammal AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), have been found to be widely distributed in plants and act as key switches in sugar signaling, biotic and abiotic stresses, seed germination and seedling growth (Chevalier and Walker, 2005; Xue-Fei et al., 2012). Plant SNF-1 related protein kinases have been categorized into three sub-families: SnRK1, SnRK2 and SnRK3 (Wang et al., 2010). SnRK1 complex is a heterotrimeric complex composed of α, β and γ-subunits containing N-terminal kinase domain and C-terminal regulatory domain that are involved in global regulation of carbon and nitrogen metabolism (Shukla and Mattoo, 2008; Xue-Fei et al., 2012). SnRK2 subfamily has previously been reported to have kinase domain, ATP binding domain, serine/threonine active site and four N-fourteen sites (Xue-Fei et al., 2012). SnRK3 kinases are rare plant kinases, named as calcineurin B-like calcium sensor-interacting protein kinases (CIPK) that interact with calcium-binding protein salt overly sensitive3 (SOS3), SOS3-like calcium-binding proteins (SCaBPS) and CBL (calcineurin B-like calcium sensor, CBL) (Xue-Fei et al., 2012). The kinase domain of this family was reported to contain a binding site for calcium-binding proteins and calcium-sensitive CBL in the C-terminal region, which combine to activate protein kinase (Guo et al., 2001). SnRK2 and SnRK3 play a key role in stress signaling and a direct relationship has recently been established between abscisic acid (ABA) signal transduction and SnRK2 members (Shukla and Mattoo, 2008). The common feature shared by SnRK1 and SnRK2 family is their catalytic domain with a divergent C-terminal region whereas SnRK3 family is shown to represent unique members (Shukla and Mattoo, 2008). In this report we have focused on SnRK2 family members within different plant lineages.

The first SnRK2 cDNA clone (PKABA1) was identified in ABA-treated wheat embryo cDNA library (Anderberg and Walker-Simmons, 1992). Hyperosmotic stress induces the expression of two homologous SnRK2 genes, SPK1 and SPK2, in soybean (Monks et al., 2001). In maize, a SnRK2 homolog (ZmSPK1) was shown to express in different plant tissues including roots, mature leaves and vessels, most abundantly being in the reproductive organs (Zou et al., 2006). A 42kDa protein kinase (NtOSAK), belonging to SnRK2 family, was found to be activated due to osmotic stress in tobacco (Kelner et al., 2004). Previous investigation identified 10 genes that encoded SnRK2 family members in the Arabidopsis and rice genomes (Mustilli et al., 2002; Kobayashi et al., 2004). In this work, we have performed the promoter analysis with the 1kb upstream region of the Arabidopsis and Oryza SnRK2 kinase genes to gain insight into their regulatory mechanism. Although there are some reports on the expression profile of SnRK2 gene family members in different plants, our in silico investigation elucidates the overall expression pattern of the members of SnRK2 family using the Massively Parallel Signature Sequencing (MPSS) database derived information emphasizing on Arabidopsis and Oryza genome. Moreover, we have made an attempt to identify the evolutionary attributes of the SnRK2 family members among different plant lineages elaborating on their exon–intron structural features and the pattern of conserved motifs.

We have retrieved the coding sequences (CDSs) and protein sequences of 10 SnRK2 family members from Arabidopsis thaliana and Oryza sativa genome database available in TAIR (http://www.arabidopsis.org/) and TIGR Rice Genome Annotation Project (http://rice.plantbiology.msu.edu/analyses_search_locus.shtml) (AtSRK2 and OsSAPK2 members respectively). The nucleotide length, number of exons, predicted amino acid length, chromosomal location and gene annotation of each of the A. thaliana and O. sativa SnRK2 genes are represented in supplementary table S1 and S2 respectively. We searched for the homologous SnRK2 protein kinase members in major plant lineages including green algae (Chlamydomonas reinhardtii), moss (Physcomitrella patens) and lycophyte (Selaginella moellendorffii) by performing homology based ‘BLAST’ search with the query sequences derived from Arabidopsis and rice genome and downloaded those sequences from National Centre for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Genbank/index.html). The GenBank accession numbers and the length of nucleotide and amino acid sequences are given in supplementary table S3. The 1kb upstream promoter sequence of each SnRK2 gene family members of Arabidopsis and rice were downloaded from plant promoter database 2.1 (http://ppdb.agr.gifu-u.ac.jp/ppdb/cgi-bin/index.cgi) using the GeneBank accessions as query.

The 1kb upstream promoter region of each gene sequence was searched for abiotic stress associated promoter element in the Plant Promoter Analysis Navigator (PlantPAN) (Chang et al., 2008). The exon–intron structural diagram of each member of the SnRK2 family was obtained using the online available Gene Structure Display Server (http://gsds.cbi.pku.edu.cn/) with coding sequences (CDS) and genomic sequences.

Multiple sequence alignment of related proteins belonging to SnRK2 family members from five major plant lineages (algae, moss, lycophyte, monocot and dicot) were performed with the mRNA and amino acid sequences, using CLUSTALW software (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/msa/clustalw2/). Program SCANPROSITE was employed to detect conserved domains (http://prosite.expasy.org/scanprosite/).

Phylogenetic analyses of the SnRK2 proteins identified from Physcomitrella patens (moss), Selaginella moellendorffii (lycophyte), Arabidopsis thaliana (dicot) and Oryza sativa (monocot) were conducted based on the CDS and amino acid sequences. The related SnRK2 genes from Chlamydomonas reinhardtii (algae) were used as alternative outgroups to assess the robustness of the phylogenetic results. Neighbor-joining (NJ) and maximum-likelihood (ML) method were implemented through MEGA 5.05 (Molecular Evolutionary Genetics Analysis software) (Tamura et al., 2011) to construct phylogenetic trees as done by Saha et al. (2013a,b). NJ analysis for the nucleotide dataset was performed using p-distances based on nucleotide substitution per site. NJ and ML analyses were implemented using Poisson corrected model (Zuckerkandl and Pauling, 1965), Dayhoff matrix (Schwarz and Dayhoff, 1979) and JTT (Jones et al., 1992) model for the amino acid dataset to examine their effect on the topological stability. The robustness of the tree topology was estimated by bootstrap analysis with 1000 and 100 replicates to construct the NJ tree and ML tree respectively (Felsenstein, 1985). Pair wise sequence divergence was measured for the 1kb upstream promoter region and the coding region of each of the SnRK2 gene from Arabidopsis and rice genomes based on nucleotide substitution per site using p-distance in the MEGA 5.05 (Tamura et al., 2011).

We have searched the MPSS database to gain knowledge about the expression profiles of AtSRK2 members in A. thaliana (http://mpss.udel.edu/at/mpss_index.php) and OsSAPK members in O. sativa (http://mpss.udel.edu/Rice/mpss_index.php) in various tissues and stresses opting for 20-nucleotide signature sequences using the locus IDs given in the TIGR database. The information obtained from the database was analyzed based on stress and tissue specificity.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The results obtained using PlantPAN server revealed the presence of several abiotic stress related cis-regulatory elements within 1kb upstream region of SnRK2 family members of Arabidopsis (Table 1
                        ) and Oryza genomes (Table 2
                        ). These regulatory sequences/elements include ABA-responsive element (ABRE), dehydration-responsive element (DRE/CRT), heat-shock element (HSE), low temperature responsive element (LTRE), sulfur-responsive element (SURE), iron-responsive element (IRO2), and Pro- or hypo-osmolarity-responsive element (PRE). The estimated evolutionary divergence of 1kb upstream promoter and the coding region between the SnRK2 family members of Arabidopsis and Oryza based on transitional and transversional base substitution indicate that the promoter region of these genes probably experienced high rate of substitution (Fig. 1
                        ). Moreover, we have also identified tandem repetitive units and CpG/CpNpG islands within cis-regulatory promoter regions amongst few members of SnRK2 gene family in both dicots and monocots (Tables 3 and 4
                        
                        ).

We have analyzed all the conserved motifs among the family members of SNF1-related protein kinase 2 and also identified the pattern of conservation of amino acid residues in their sub-domains (Fig. 2
                        ). SnRK2 family has two conserved signatures in its kinase domain across the members. The first one is ATP-binding region containing nucleotide binding domain signature I/LG/NXGXFG/AXA/V and a lysine residue serving as binding site for ATP, whereas the second one consists of Serine/Threonine protein kinase active-site signature V/ICHRDLKLENTLL having the aspartic acid residue (active site) with a proton acceptor activity. We have observed that the ATP binding site (lysine residue) and the active site (aspartic acid residue) are conserved throughout all the plant lineages (marked in yellow and green color respectively in Fig. 2).


                        SnRK2 gene family members of Arabidopsis and Oryza were mapped to the chromosomes using the coordinates provided for each locus in MPSS database. In case of Arabidopsis, these genes were found to be distributed on all the chromosomes (Fig. 3
                        A). Chromosomes 1 and 5 contained three genes in each whereas chromosomes 2 and 3 were found to contain one gene each. It was observed that the long arm of the chromosome 4 shared rest of the members (two in number) of SnRK2 gene family. The members of rice SNF1-related protein kinase family 2 (SnRK2) were located on chromosomes 1–4, 7, 10 and 12 (Fig. 3B). Chromosomes 3 and 4 possessed majority of the genes while the other chromosomes shared one gene each.

MPSS is an important bioinformatics tool to carry out the gene expression analysis across several systems (Brenner et al., 2000; Meyers et al., 2004). We have retrieved the information regarding the relative abundance of transcripts of SnRK2 gene family members from the MPSS database (http://mpss.udel.edu/at/mpps_index.php) using 20 nucleotides long signature sequence in tissue-specific and stress-related libraries. In case of Arabidopsis, we have identified dominant expression of AtSRK2I in actively growing callus (CAF), inflorescence (INF), roots (ROF) and leaves (LEF). This gene was observed to be activated in leaves after 4h salicylic acid treatment (SO4) and its expression gradually decreased within 52h (S52) (Fig. 4
                        ). Considering the tissue-specific libraries, maximum numbers of SnRK2 transcripts in rice were found to be expressed in ovary and mature stigma (NOS), crown vegetative meristematic tissue (NME), mature roots (NRA), mature leaves (NLA), 14 days young roots (NYR) and leaves (NYL) (Fig. 5
                        ). Few mRNA transcripts of OsSAPK3 and OsSAPK8 were also observed in mature stem (NST) and immature panicle (NIP). Salinity and drought stress induced elevated level of transcripts per million (TPM) of OsSAPK3, OsSAPK8 and OsSAPK9, whereas cold induced the transcription of OsSAPK6 gene.

We constructed NJ and ML phylogenetic tree to understand the evolutionary relationships of different SnRK2 genes using various models of sequence evolution. Similar tree topologies were obtained from both the NJ and ML methods with minor variation in their within-clade relationships (data not shown). Fig. 6
                         represents the phylogenetic relationships of duplicated SnRK2 family members derived from NJ method with Kimura-2-parameters model (Kimura, 1980) based on CDS and their exon–intron structures for each of the individual gene using green algal homologous genes as outgroup. Incorporation of alternate outgroup is presumed to have negligible effect in tree topologies. Three algal SnRK2 members (CrSTPK9, CrSNRK2.1 and CrSTPK12) possessed 10 introns, with 9 introns in CrSac3. Successive intron loss event is observed in the moss and lycophytic SnRK2 homologs, each containing 8 introns (Fig. 6A and B). Subsequently, in dicot and monocot plant lineages the SnRK2 members seem to have passed through uneven deletion of introns leading to the variation in intron size and numbers (Fig. 6C and D). Most of the members of OsSAPK (OsSAPK1, OsSAPK2, OsSAPK4, OsSAPK6, OsSAPK7, and OsSAPK8) in Oryza sativa have shown intron richness. OsSAPK5 and OsSAPK10 in Oryza and AtSRK2C in Arabidopsis have undergone major intron-loss event representing intron-poor members of the SnRK2 family.


                        Fig. 7
                         exhibits the phylogenetic relationships of all SnRK2 family members from various plants, inferred by NJ method based on amino acid sequences of kinase domain of SnRK2 protein kinases. The topology was similar to that constructed with CDS sequences. The related polypeptide sequence derived from green alga were grouped in clade I with high statistical support while land plants were clustered into clade II that was divided into four subclades (IIa–IId). Clade IIa contained five Arabidopsis and four Oryza genes corresponding to subclass I previously mentioned by Kobayashi et al. (2004). Majority of the lycophytic genes and one member from rice (OsSAPK3) clustered into clade IIb. Genes in clade IIa and IIc were all from seed plants and clade IId possessed all genes from land plants. AtSRK2F from Arabidopsis separated early in the tree due to high sequence divergence from all its homologous members found in other land plant lineages. The SnRK2 family members from algae and moss tended to be clustered within lineage specific clades.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

To withstand unfavorable environmental changes such as drought, high salinity, extreme temperatures and heavy metals, plants have acquired several strategies including various biochemical and physiological changes by regulating the expression of several transcription factors, molecular chaperones, ion channels, and transporters (Mukhopadhyay et al., 2004; Gupta et al., 2013). Kanneganti and Gupta (2008) demonstrated that tolerance to multiple stress conditions can be achieved by over expressing transcription factor(s) that are involved in controlling multiple genes from various pathways or by over expressing genes involved in abiotic stress signal perception and transduction. The SnRK2 protein kinases constitute a small plant-specific protein family that gets activated by osmotic stress (Sandra et al., 2010).

Gene duplication plays a key role facilitating the evolution of organisms by creating the raw genetic material modified by subsequent natural selection pressure (Cronk, 2001). The data obtained from this study indicate that successive rounds of gene duplication occurred in the plant SnRK2 gene family resulting into the rapid expansion of the gene members in land plant genomes that might have contributed greatly to the structural and functional innovations of land plant species with the changing environments caused by abiotic stresses. This interpretation is in agreement with the adaptive radiation model for the origin of new gene functions, suggesting that amplification of an existing gene with some level of pre-adaptation for that function, followed by a period of competitive evolution among the gene copies in response to specific selection pressures accelerate the evolution of novel function performed by the duplicated gene copies (Francino, 2005).

It has previously been reported that gene duplication events were immediately followed by the independent evolution of the protein coding gene and the cis-regulatory regions, resulting into the protein sequence divergence of duplicated genes or protein network divergence and the promoter-proximal regions lead to the gene expression diversification between the duplicated genes respectively (Wagner, 2000; Conrad and Antonarakis, 2007). Pairwise sequence divergence for the protein coding region and the 1kb upstream promoter region of SnRK2 family genes in Arabidopsis and rice is thus assumed to be congruent with above fact exhibiting independent rate of evolution shortly after the gene duplication process thereby probably leading to adaptation of functional specification of the respective gene members during evolution. The only exception is that the promoter regions of AtSRK2C and AtSRK2E have shown no sequence divergence and remained conserved through the evolutionary process probably due to the functional constraints applied on them. Previous work indicated that the promoter containing Up1 (GGCCCAWW) or Up2 (AAACCCTA) repeats up-regulates gene expression while CpG/CpNpG islands represented as important sites for DNA methylation accelerating gene silencing (Cao and Jacobsen, 2002; Rasmussen and Donaldson, 2006; Zemach and Grafi, 2007). Two members in Arabidopsis (AtSRK2J, AtSRK2H) and three members in rice (OsSAPK7, OsSAPK8 and OsSAPK9) have been identified to possess tandem repetitive sequences within their cis-regulatory promoter regions. Our work revealed that all the rice SnRK2 family members (except OsSAPK5 and OsSAPK6) contain DNA methylation sites (CpG/CpNpG islands) distributed within the 1kb upstream promoter element. Interestingly, we can propose that the earlier discussed features of the promoter region might have played a crucial role in regulating the target gene expression.

There are two hypotheses explaining the origin of spliceosomal introns: “intron-early” and “intron-late”. According to “intron-early” hypothesis the introns appear early in the evolution and gradually have been removed from the prokaryotic genome in most cases. (Gilbert et al., 1997) and in case of “intron-late” hypothesis, the introns have been incorporated into eukaryotic genes later in evolution (Palmer and Logsdon, 1991). Besides these two hypotheses, there is a mixed model of intron evolution: a synthetic theory of intron-early and intron-late postulates that in due course of eukaryotic diversification, their genomes have experienced extensive gain and loss of introns leading to the structural and functional divergence of duplicated genes (Knowles and McLysaght, 2006). The gene structure analysis carried out in this present study revealed that green algal SnRK2 kinase genes became enriched in intron size and numbers after the speciation events whereas the higher plant lineages probably, have gone through the gradual intron-loss process during evolution. Xie et al. (2008) has previously reported the intron richness in algae, based on CAAT binding protein coding genes (HAP) that is in congruence with our findings of algal SnRK2 gene structure. These two scenario is consistent with the “intron-early” model of intron evolution although the intron richness in algae need further validation.

The SnRK2 protein kinases possess N-terminal highly conserved kinase domain and the divergent C-terminal domain with a short “patch” rich in acidic amino acids. It is further divided into two subgroups based on the composition of C-terminal domain: SnRK2a (rich in glutamic acid) and SnRK2b (rich in aspartic acid) (Shukla and Mattoo, 2008). In our study, the serine/threonine protein kinase active-site signature has not been identified in green algal member (Chlamydomonas reinhardtii) based on SCANPROSITE search thereby suggesting the origin of this conserved motif prior to the emergence of land plant lineages. Surprisingly, the green algal SnRK2 homologous members and Arabidopsis SRK2F have shown mixed population of glutamic acid and aspartic acid residues within the C-terminal region of the proteins (see supplementary Fig. S1) and diverged earlier in the phylogenetic tree. Based on this result, we can hypothesize that separate functional constraints have been imposed on the ancestor gene of SnRK2 gene family which have passed through positive natural selection generating two subgroups, poly-Glu rich (SnRK2a) and poly-Asp rich (SnRK2b) protein kinases. The absence of SnRK2a subgroup in moss and lycophytic plant lineages indicates that the establishment of two distinct subgroups has arisen after the divergence of non-seed plants. Previous study demonstrated that six members of SnRK2 family in rice (OsSAPK1, 2, 3, 8, 9 and 10) belong to SnRK2b subgroup, out of which OsSAPK8, 9 and 10 were the only members activated by ABA while all were activated by NaCl treatment (Kobayashi et al., 2004). They have also shown that the C-terminal domains of these kinases are responsible for ABA signal perception. These three members of SnRK2 protein kinases (OsSAPK8, OsSAPK9 and OsSAPK10) in rice were found to be activated by distinct upstream kinases which are regulated by both hyperosmotic and ABA signals whereas the other members belonging to this SnRK2 family were thought to use the upstream kinases regulated only by hyperosmotic signal. Based on these observations, it appears that the entire gene family became naturally selected as a part of the signal transduction machinery for hyperosmotic stress response while the common ancestor of OsSAPK8, OsSAPK9 and OsSAPK10 has acquired additional function of ABA response during evolution (Kobayashi et al., 2004). Gupta et al. (2012b) reported the selective phosphorylation of rice SnRK2 42kDa protein by exogenous application of spermidine, NaCl and ABA in rice plant that conferred resistance against the salinity stress. This 42kDa protein coding gene was identified as SNF1-type serine/threonine protein kinase OsSAPK4 homolog in indica rice under the salt stress which was reported to phosphorylate the downstream target gene OSBZ8, an ABRE-binding transcription factor (Gupta et al., 2012a). Interestingly, many ABA responsive transcription factor binding sites have been found in rice SAPK4 upstream promoter region that might have an effect on its regulation during salt stress. This fact is incongruent with the previously proposed view of Kobayashi et al. (2004) suggesting that only OsSAPK8, OsSAPK9 and OsSAPK10 can perceive ABA signal though it needs further validation in vivo. Moreover, our MPSS database derived expression data has shown the activation of OsSAPK4 in 14 days young rice roots exposed to 250mM NaCl for 24h which contribute additional support to our previous reports (Gupta et al., 2012a,b). Five ABA responsive AtSnRK2s and three rice SAPKs were shown to phosphorylate ABA responsive transcription factors AREB1b and TRAB1 respectively (Furihata et al., 2006; Kobayashi et al., 2005). Rice SAPK4 was proved to be a key enzyme regulating the ionic homeostasis and photosynthetic activity that imparts salt resistance to the plants by maintaining its growth and development in the presence of increased salinity (Diédhiou et al., 2008). Naturally occurring intracellular polyamine, such as spermine, spermidine, and putrescine are known to play key roles in relation to the mechanism and adaptation to combat abiotic stress in plants (Gupta et al., 2013). Previous report demonstrated that Arabidopsis SRK2E/open stomata 1/SnRK2.6/OST1 was induced in drought stress and required for the regulation of stomatal aperture by ABA (Mustilli et al., 2002; Yoshida et al., 2002). Direct interaction of ABI1 (PP2C) with OST1/SRK2E/SnRK2.6 inactivated the latter gene resulting in negative regulation of ABA response (Mustilli et al., 2002; Yoshida et al., 2006). Boudsocq et al. (2004) investigated the expression level of SnRK2 family members in Arabidopsis treated with mannitol and NaCl that resulted in the up-regulation of nine members belonging to this SNF-1 related protein kinase whereas ABA activated the expression of SnRK2D/2.2, SnRK2I/2.3, SnRK2.6/OST1/SRK2E, SnRK2F/2.7 and SnRK2.8/SnRK2C. In another study, it has been found that the Arabidopsis SnRK2I/2.3 protein kinase, similar to the sulfur-regulatory gene SAC3 of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii regulated sulfur-responsive gene expression and induced the accumulation of O-acetyl-l-serine under scarcity of sulfur availability (Kimura et al., 2006). Many stress responsive genes, namely, RD29A, COR15A and DREB1A/CB3 were observed to be upregulated by SRK2C (Umezawa et al., 2004). Drought resistance of Arabidopsis plants were influenced by SnRK2C that was activated under osmotic stress has its orthologs in rice (SAPK1 and SAPK2) within clade IIc (Umezawa et al., 2004) indicating the common ancestral origin with a high bootstrap support of 85%. In our study clade IId included the ABA-activated SnRK2 members; rice SAPK8 through SAPK10 and Arabidopsis OST1/SRK2E, SRK2D and SRK2I that found their sister phylogenetic relationships with the Selaginella OST2-1 and OST2-2, four SnRK2 family members in Physcomitrella patens which could have the likely function as activated by ABA (clade IId). The clustering of all the related ABA-activated members within the same clade seems to be congruent with the work done by Kobayashi et al. (2004). Our study deviates from the above work in only one aspect. The incorporation of Selaginella SnRK2 family member in the phylogenetic analyses place the rice SAPK3 more close to the Selaginella OST1-1, OST1-2, OST3-1 and OST3-2 (clade IIb) instead of being grouped with OsSAP1 and OsSAP2 (clade IIc). Normally the dehydration-induced rice SnRK2 transcripts were undetectable in vegetative tissues but were expressed dominantly under hyperosmotic stress and ABA treatment (Chae et al., 2007). In this analysis, we have made an attempt to evaluate the organ-specific expression level of different SnRK2 members in Arabidopsis and rice along with their abiotic stress response that would provide a better understanding of its function.

The increasing number of sequenced genomes offers a wide area of research for studying evolutionary novelty of duplicated genes. We have identified the earliest SnRK2 genes from the genome sequence of C. reinhardtii (Green algae) indicating that the origin of SnRK2 genes was predated by the divergence of the green algae and the ancestor of land plants. An in-depth in silico analyses of SnRK2 family protein kinases in plants indicate that plant SnRK2 genes duplicated and evolved in different patterns associated with the origin and further diversification of land plants. The promoter analysis provides hints regarding the transcription factors which are probably involved in the gene regulation under various abiotic stress conditions. The MPSS derived expression analyses give insight into the overall patterns of gene expression of SnRK2 members in Arabidopsis and Oryza during their growth, development and to combat against environmental abiotic stress conditions. All the accumulative data obtained in this study will serve the purpose of elucidating the structural features and functional characterization in addition to the evolutionary history of still poorly characterized SnRK2 protein kinases within wide range of plant groups.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The authors acknowledge the support of technical facilities available at Presidency University, Kolkata (DBT-Center for Bioinformatics). Financial assistance from DBT (RGYI) (Govt. of India) and W.B. State DST (Govt. of West Bengal) to BG and KG and DST-SERB (Govt. of India) to KG are also gratefully acknowledged. The authors also acknowledge the constructive criticism and suggestions from Editorial Board and Reviewers.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2013.09.005.

The following are the supplementary data to this article:
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

