@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Study of early stages of amyloid Aβ13-23 formation using molecular dynamics simulation in implicit environments

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Early stages of amyloid Aβ13-23 formation were studied using MD simulation.


                        
                        
                           
                           Initial α-helical conformations of peptides were changing into coil and β-sheets.


                        
                        
                           
                           A knowledge about Aβ13-23 aggregation might be useful for design of novel drugs.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

β-Amyloid

Aggregation

Alzheimer’s disease

MD simulation

Implicit environment

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  β-amyloid aggregation and formation of senile plaques is one of the hallmarks of Alzheimer’s disease (AD). It leads to degeneration of neurons and decline of cognitive functions. The most aggregative and toxic form of β-amyloid is Aβ1-42 but in experiments, the shorter forms able to form aggregates are also used. The early stages of amyloid formation are of special interest due to the influence of this peptide on progression of AD. Here, we employed nine helices of undecapeptide Aβ13-23 and studied progress of amyloid formation using 500ns molecular dynamics simulation and implicit membrane environment. The small β-sheets emerged very early during simulation as separated two-strand structures and a presence of the membrane facilitated this process. Later, the larger β-sheets were formed. However, the ninth helix which did not form paired structure stayed unchanged till the end of MD simulation. Paired helix–helix interactions seemed to be a driving force of β-sheet formation at early stages of amyloid formation. Contrary, the specific interactions between α-helix and β-sheet can be very stable and be stabilized by the membrane.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Extracellular senile plaques and intracellular neurofibrillary tangles are the main hallmarks of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) (Gandy and DeKosky, 2013; Guo and Lee, 2011). They disturb proper functioning of neurons, leading to neuronal loss and neurodegeneration (Musiek and Holtzman, 2012). The plaques are composed of fibrils, containing β-amyloid (Aβ) peptides of different length. A single Aβ chain usually contains from 38 to 43 residues and is prone to aggregation in aqueous environment (Dubnovitsky et al., 2013; Cohen et al., 2013). Two forms of β-amyloid such as Aβ1-42 and Aβ1-40 are dominant, but the longer one shows higher tendency towards aggregation and greater toxicity (Gu and Guo, 2013). It was revealed that propensity for creating aggregates mainly depended on KLVFF motif from the middle part of the sequence and hydrophobic C-terminal region (Gazit, 2002, 2005). β-Amyloid is produced from amyloid precursor protein (APP) as a result of sequential cleavage by β- and γ-secretase (Tan and Evin, 2012; Sathya et al., 2012; Panza et al., 2011). APP is a 695-770 amino acid glycoprotein, built of three domains: the extracellular N-terminal region, a single transmembrane domain and the intracellular C-terminal region (Chasseigneaux and Allinquant, 2012; O’Brien and Wong, 2011). Due to the large influence of β-amyloid on development of Alzheimer’s disease, many efforts have been undertaken to fully understand the aggregation process and thus, a lot of experimental and computational studies have been reported (Tycko, 2011; Lu et al., 2013; Crescenzi et al., 2002; Luhrs et al., 2005; Shea and Urbanc, 2012; Lee and Ham, 2011; Hochdorffer et al., 2011; Minicozzi et al., 2014). It was shown that the conformation of β-amyloid strongly depended on the experimental conditions (Crescenzi et al., 2002). Some analyses were performed in different environments that could mimic the interface between polar and hydrophobic phases (e.g., micelles (Shao et al., 1999)) or in solvents which provided non-polar microenvironment (e.g., mixtures of trifluoroethanol or hexafluoroisopropanol (HFIP) with water (Crescenzi et al., 2002)). HFIP was able to dissolve Aβ1-42 and promote transition into helical form and thus, it was noted that aggregation process was reversible. α-Helical form dominates in apolar environment while β-sheet conformation appears in aqueous solutions. The structure of helical Aβ1-42 (α-helix-kink-α-helix), obtained by NMR spectroscopy, was deposited in Protein Data Bank (PDB, code: 1IYT) (Protein Data Bank, 2012). It has been recently reported that the fibrillogenesis involves an oligomeric α-helical intermediate (Kirkitadze et al., 2001). Moreover, the 3D structure of the fibrils was determined by NMR spectroscopy (Luhrs et al., 2005). The N-terminal residues 1–17 were unorganized while residues 18–42 created β-strand-turn-β-strand motif. This structured fragment was deposited in PDB (code: 2BEG) as a pentamer. Each monomer occurs in β-hairpin conformation, with residues 18–26 and 31–42 creating β-sheet parts (β1 and β2, respectively). A whole structure is stabilized by intermolecular backbone hydrogen bonds in β-sheets and intermolecular interactions between side chains: salt bridge D23-K28, π–π stacking F19–F19 or F20–F20, as well as intermolecular knob–hole contacts in pairs F19–G38 and A21–V36. Some recent studies showed also that metal ions, especially Zn2+ and Cu2+ could bind with β-amyloid, forming complexes with histidine residues (Stellato et al., 2006; Silva and Saxena, 2013). This can lead to increased toxicity due to engagement of metal cations in production of reactive oxygen species and oxidative stress.

Apart from the laboratory experiments, a couple of computational studies have been performed (Shea and Urbanc, 2012; Cecchini et al., 2006; Zheng et al., 2007; Urbanc et al., 2006). They included mainly MD simulations of many amyloid structures of different lengths (Cecchini et al., 2006; Zheng et al., 2007; Naldi et al., 2012) and different initial conformation in various environments, including aqueous solutions, micelles and water/organic solvent mixtures (Lee and Ham, 2011; Zhao et al., 2011). The influence of different membranes on aggregation process was also studied (Davis and Berkowitz, 2009a,b; Lemkul and Bevan, 2013). Such analyses showed important factors, responsible for aggregation of β-amyloids. Davis et al. (2009a) revealed that during umbrella sampling MD simulations the Aβ1-42 was attracted by the surface of DPPC and DOPS lipids, and the binding energy to the membrane depended on charges of the peptide and the lipid bilayer. His further studies did not show any significant formation of β-structure for 42-residue Aβ peptide except of a small hairpin (Davis and Berkowitz, 2009b) during 80ns replica exchange MD simulation using explicit membrane and all atom representation for lipids and peptides. Lemkul and Bevan (2013) tested by MD whether an aggregation could proceed in different environments, including aqueous solutions and membranes, and it was shown that aggregates were formed and stayed close to the membrane of each kind. Nikolic et al. (2011) studied β-sheet self-organization at water-hydrophobic interfaces. The used octapeptides (Gly-Ala)4 and (Gly-Val)4 spontaneously formed β-structures at the octane–water interface, and the progress of changes was dependent on hydrophobicity of the peptide. Wang et al. (2010) analyzed Aβ17-42 adsorption on the self-assembled monolayers (SAM), terminated with hydrophobic (CH3) or hydrophilic (OH) groups. The results showed that CH3-SAM stronger bound β-amyloid. This observation highlighted the role of hydrophobicity in an aggregation. On the other hand, Yu et al. (2012) revealed in the course of MD simulation that due to hydrophobic nature of graphite, it could be treated as surface with properties facilitating the Aβ fibril formation. Recent works (Ono et al., 2009; Bernstein et al., 2009) have demonstrated the fundamental role of the Aβ dimer as a unit in Aβ aggregation process. Giannozzi et al. (2012) showed that the presence of zinc ions led to the formation of complexes with three or four histidine residues and in consequence the peculiar structural pattern of β-amyloid. On the other hand, Miller et al. (2010) analyzed by MD interactions of Zn2+ cations with oligomers of Aβ17-42 and found out that except histidines, aspartate and glutamate residues could form complexes with the ions. Zinc ions could simultaneously coordinate inter- and intramolecularly and bridge two peptides.

In our previous experimental studies, we used short, 11-amino acid fragment of β-amyloid to test whether the newly synthesized chemical compounds were able to inhibit the aggregation process (Ignasik et al., 2012). Although the Aβ13-23 was proved to form fibrils and could be used in such kind of experiments the mechanism of aggregation was still not known (Alptuzun et al., 2010). To elucidate details of a transformation of α-helices into β-strands and β-sheets, we applied united atom molecular dynamics simulations in implicit membrane–water environments to accelerate structural changes. We employed Aβ13-23 fragments containing the amyloid-prone motif KLVFF. The peptides were initially in α-helix conformation forming a square of nine parallel helical structures. During the simulation we also observed influence of the membrane on the amyloid formation.

@&#METHODS@&#

The system was built of nine identical α-helices of Aβ13-23 fragment. A single monomer was prepared on a basis of full sequence Aβ1-42 structure from Protein Data Bank (PDB code: 1IYT) (Protein Data Bank, 2012) using PyMOL (DeLano Scientific LLC, 2006) and VMD (University of Illinois, 2011) software. The residues 13–23 were cut out and multiplicated to form a square of 3×3 arrangement, with each helix in parallel orientation in a distance of 20Å from one another. The initial distance between C-termini of peptides in nonamer and the implicit membrane was set to 37Å. The regular geometry of system was selected arbitrarily. Charmm GUI was utilized to prepare initial input files for the system (Charmm GUI, 2012). The charged termini were assigned for both sides on each monomer. Histidine residues (H13 and H14) in every chain were set as HSE, i.e., they were protonated at Nϵ atoms. All simulations were run employing Charmm ver. c34b2 with EEF1/IMM1 method (Lazaridis, 2003, 2005) and Charmm19 united atom force field (HARvard Macromolecular Mechanics, 2015). The EEF1 method enabled implicit solvent modeling while the IMM1 is an extension of the EEF1 method and was used for modeling of implicit membrane. United atoms involved single carbon atoms with bonded hydrogens. All polar hydrogen in peptides were kept. The width of hydrophobic core of implicit membrane was equal to 23.1Å, nsmth parameter (the membrane/water interface) 10 (Fig. 1
                     ). The cyclohexane was used to model the non-polar core of the membrane. No charge was imposed on the membrane. Two short minimizations, 50 steps each, were performed using steepest descent and adopted basis Newton–Raphson methods. Then, 500ns Langevin dynamics was run at temperature 300K with a timestep of 2fs. No periodic box was used as water and membrane present continuous character in the EEF1/IMM1 methods. To use an increased timestep all bonds were constrained using SHAKE algorithm. The friction coefficient (fbeta) was equal to 0.50ps−1. The trajectory file was analyzed in VMD program. Hydrogen bonds were defined as the interactions with maximal donor–acceptor distance 3.5Å and angle 180°±40°. For the comparison the simulation with EEF1 method (60ns) was performed, using the same system.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

Due to the costliness of 40 and 42 residue β-amyloids, the research group of Holzgrabe developed a smaller peptide which contained 11 amino acids and possessed the same features in respect of fibril formation (Alptuzun et al., 2010; Karlsson et al., 2012; Prinz et al., 2013). The Aβ13-23 (HHQKLVFFAED) was synthesized and used in the thioflavin T test. This peptide contained, the most important for the aggregation, five residues of central core such as KLVFF (Gazit, 2005). Validation of the assay confirmed its usefulness and enabled to determine almost identical IC50 values for the reference inhibitors of aggregation in comparison with full length peptide assay (Alptuzun et al., 2010). Later, this test was applied to determine the activity of our newly synthesized compounds which displayed satisfying inhibitory potency (Ignasik et al., 2012).

Although, the assay enabled to determine the activity of novel compounds it was not known how Aβ13-23 aggregated and which early structures were formed. Therefore, we performed MD simulations of β-amyloid nonamer to answer those questions.

According to hypothesis that an α-to-β transition precedes Aβ aggregation (Tomaselli et al., 2006), the initial structure of nonamer Aβ13-23 was helical. It was placed over the implicit membrane as it was proved that the surface could fasten conformational changes (Williams and Serpell, 2011), leading to aggregation (Fig. 2
                     ). The membrane surface in the simulation played a similar role as the surface from in vitro studies. At the beginning studies were performed with both EEF1 and IMM1 method, but the initial results showed that changes in simulation with EEF1 were much slower, and the first parallel β-sheet appeared after about 50ns. Therefore, we decided to continue only the calculations with IMM1 method. During the simulation, the nonamer was moving closer to the membrane and gradually losing its α-helical conformation (Figs. 2 and 3
                     ). Two monomers definitely lost α-helical structure after less than 20ns, and the same happened to other six peptides upon approximately 100ns. Only one chain retained helical form until the end of simulation, from time to time changing into more or less twisted helices, 310 and π, respectively. Almost at the beginning, the whole nonamer became compacted forming a hydrophobic core, and later the percentage of β-sheets was increasing but not gradually. The changes of secondary structures started from emergence of 310- and π-helical fragments. The first two β-strands were formed at about 3ns of the simulation from two adjacent helices (Fig. 2). A structural motif, HQKL, was involved in creation of this first β-sheet which was also stabilized by a salt bridge E22-K16. A distance between oligomer and the membrane/water interface at that time was equal to 4.5Å, starting initially from 37Å, and since this moment the nonamer was stably located near the membrane and immersing some residues from time to time into the water–membrane interface. After 26ns the N-termini of two other helices also formed parallel β-strands and at about 36ns, yet two other helices turned into antiparallel β-strands involving N-terminus of one chain and C-terminus of the other forming the third β-sheet (Fig. 2). Importantly, all initially created β-sheets were separated. During the next steps of MD simulation the fourth β-sheet was formed at about 38ns, but it was dissolving at about 68ns. It corresponds to the first peak and then a small decline on the intermolecular backbone hydrogen bond plot (Fig. 4
                     ). That time the whole oligomer was slightly immersed in the membrane and its structure was being reorganized. This stage preceded the formation of the longer β-sheets and, after 90ns, some well-organized β-motifs were observed. The next large peak on the H-bond plot (at 131ns) corresponded to the structure of the oligomer with one remaining helix and many interacting β-strands. Further steps led to the elongation of those β-fragments but transiently a triple strand β-sheet was created at about 150ns. At 210ns the secondary structure was strongly changed and the percentage of β-sheets decreased. It corresponded a large valley at about 200ns in the HBimbb plot (Fig. 4). During this change a β-sheet containing two strands spanning the whole peptide chains was dissolved. Probably, it was not stabilized by shorter, siding β-strands. The structure of nonamer was further reorganized a few times, including creation and elimination of some parallel and antiparallel β-sheet fragments, especially at 275ns (Fig. 2 and maximal peak at Fig. 4), where eight peptides participated in one large and irregular β-sheet, leading to much more regular and flat oligomeric structure upon 500ns (Fig. 5
                     ). The final system seems to be still under an evolution and, at this stage, a single β-sheet is present involving four of nine peptides, (Fig. 5, middle panel) This β-sheet contains the longest antiparallel β-strands in the middle consisting of 6 residues, L17-E22. In the final oligomer (Fig. 5) the shorter β-sheet chains, containing 2–4 amino acids, were also observed, however, not all secondary structures were β-strands or coil. A single peptide in oligomer preserved its original helical structure apart from strong interaction with many β-strands. This helix interacted with the inner hydrophobic region of oligomer via F19-F20 sequence and, additionally, its N- and C-terminal regions provided extra interactions such as salt bridge and hydrogen bonds. There were numerous hydrogen bonds involving side chain–main chain interactions between α-helix and β-sheet. Contrary, there were no side chain-side chain hydrogen bond interactions between them which may be a basis for the extraordinary stability of this helix. The MD simulation results enabled us to identify some interactions important for the aggregation process. It was observed that the obtained aggregates had been stabilized by backbone hydrogen bonds, π–π stacking of phenylalanine residues (F19 and F20 in both parallel and antiparallel orientations of β-strands) as well as the salt bridges between K16 and D23 or rarely, between K16 and E22 (Fig. 5). Based on a tendency to increase the number of intermolecular hydrogen bonds (Fig. 4) it was deducted that a formation of the parallel and antiparallel β-sheets, containing the whole H13–D23 chains, required much longer simulation time. It was also observed that novel β-sheet fragments usually were formed at the side of the nonamer, nearer to the membrane. It showed the importance of membrane surface for acceleration of aggregation process.

Simulations on such β-amyloid fragments, and using IMM1 method have not been performed so far. Only some other amyloids of different length were tested both in experimental and in silico methods (Kirkitadze et al., 2001; Cecchini et al., 2006; Zheng et al., 2007; Urbanc et al., 2006; Naldi et al., 2012). Our results stayed in accordance with present literature data (Shea and Urbanc, 2012) and confirmed an important role of hydrophobic interactions and salt bridges in the formation of β-amyloid oligomers. It was also shown that membrane could accelerate the aggregation process. The novelty of our research includes the observation of the helix–helix interaction as driving force for aggregation and description of the details of conformational changes. Moreover, our results can be a good starting point for further simulations. Minicozzi et al. (2014) tried to explain the mechanism of action for β-sheet breakers using MD simulations. He tested four systems containing Aβ1-40 and one of four breakers and analyzed the interactions between amyloid and ligand. We believe that the simulations with EEF1/IMM1 methods could also be useful in such experiments and provide a few interesting conclusions. The advantage of the implicit methods in the presented case is increased speed of conformational changes and decreased time of calculations.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

A 500ns molecular dynamics simulation was performed for the system consisting of nine helices of Aβ13-23. The initial α-helical conformations of the peptides were changing into coil and β-sheets and, upon 100ns, about 90% of peptides lost their starting conformation. During the simulation both parallel and antiparallel β-sheets were creating. At the beginning of simulation the four independent small β-sheets were created involving eight peptides, suggesting important role of helix–helix pair interactions in β-sheet formation. The final structure of the largest and the most regular β-sheet was stabilized by hydrophobic interactions and π–π stacking in the middle of β-sheet flanking by salt bridges. A single peptide preserved its helical conformation till the end of MD simulation, apart from the extensive contacts with multiple β-strands. A knowledge about interactions between peptides during formation of oligomeric form might be useful for design of novel ligands which possess the ability to stop aggregation by disturbing the early amyloid intermolecular interactions.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The studies were financially supported by Polish National Science Center, Postdoctoral Research Grant No. DEC-2012/04/S/NZ2/00116.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

