@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Genomic studies on nitrogen metabolism in Halomonas boliviensis: Metabolic pathway, biochemistry and evolution

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Putative enzymes obtained from the genome of H. boliviensis should permit a complete glutamate metabolism. A similar metabolism should be followed by other halomonads.


                        
                        
                           
                           Some phenotypic differences between halomonads, such as the ability to assimilate ammonia, might be a consequence of horizontal gene transfer.


                        
                        
                           
                           Each enzyme that forms part of the glutamate metabolism in prokaryotes evolved following a different pattern and some genes that express the enzymes were transferred among microorganisms.


                        
                        
                           
                           Yet, most enzymes of halomonads diverged in phylogenetic clusters composed of Proteobacteria, as might be expected.


                        
                        
                           
                           Glutamate synthase α-subunits of halomonads evolved very differently from enzymes of other prokaryotes, and may be included a novel group of enzymes.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#




                     Halomonas boliviensis




                  




                     Halomonadaceae




                  

Glutamate metabolism

Halophilic bacteria

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  
                     Halomonas boliviensis LC1T
                     =DSM 15516T is a halophilic bacterium that copiously produces osmolytes and polyesters. The growth of H. boliviensis is restricted when glutamate or glutamine is not included in its culture medium. The concentration of glutamate in the medium can regulate the production of either osmolytes or polyesters. However, genomic studies on the nitrogen assimilation have not been performed on H. boliviensis and other members of the family Halomonadaceae. Glutamate metabolism in H. boliviensis was discerned based on genome sequence analysis. The genome sequences of other Halomonadaceae members revealed similar enzymes to those found in H. boliviensis. H. boliviensis and H. elongata DSM 2581T acquired distinct glutamate dehydrogenase genes through horizontal gene transfer from a different bacterium. Two alleles of glutamine synthetase could be found in H. boliviensis, one of which was obtained from a thermophilic archaeon via horizontal gene transfer. Two subunits of glutamate synthase were also present in H. boliviensis. The small β-subunit had a molecular weight of 52kDa and was phylogenetically closely affiliated to proteins of other halomonads and Gammaproteobacteria. The large (161kDa) α-subunit of the halomonads gathered in a separate phylogenetic group, hence glutamate synthase α-subunits of halomonads may be included a novel group of enzymes. Furthermore, putative enzymes obtained from the genome of H. boliviensis should permit complete glutamate metabolism. A similar metabolism should be followed by other halomonads. However, some phenotypic differences between halomonads, such as the ability to assimilate ammonia, resulted as a consequence of horizontal gene transfer. Each enzyme that forms part of the glutamate metabolism in prokaryotes evolved following a different pattern. Yet, most enzymes of halomonads diverged in phylogenetic clusters composed of Proteobacteria, as might be expected.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Nitrogen is an essential component in cells. Ammonia is the most common inorganic nitrogen source assimilated by cells (Reitzer, 2003). The assimilation of ammonia into amino acids is initiated by three biochemical reactions that form part of glutamate metabolism (Forchhammer, 2007).
                        
                           (1)
                           2-Ketoglutarate+NH3
                              +NAD(P)H↔glutamate+NAD(P)+
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           (2)
                           Glutamate+NH3
                              +ATP→glutamine+ADP+Pi
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           (3)
                           Glutamine+2-ketoglutarate+NAD(P)H→2 glutamate+NAD(P)+
                           
                        
                     
                  

The first reaction is reversible and is catalyzed by glutamate dehydrogenases (GDHs), which can be divided in four classes with distinctive molecular weights (Harper et al., 2010). GDH-1 and GDH-2 are small hexameric enzymes (MW about 50kDa) that utilize either NAD+ (EC 1.4.1.2) or NADP+ (EC 1.4.1.4) as a coenzyme, respectively (Antonopoulos et al., 2003; Consalvi et al., 1991). Larger tetrameric enzymes (115kDa) were classified as GDH-3, and are dual coenzyme specific NAD(P)+ (Veronese et al., 1974). Finally, enzymes of a fourth class (GDH-4) are approximately 180kDa in size, hexameric and are NAD+ specific (Miñambres et al., 2000). On the other hand, the sequential irreversible reactions (2) and (3) are catalyzed by glutamine synthetase (GS) and glutamate synthase (GOGAT), respectively (Forchhammer, 2007). The net result of reactions (2) and (3) is in essence the same as that of reaction (1); both routes produce one molecule of glutamate (Forchhammer, 2007). The difference is that the hydrolysis of ATP is required for the glutamine synthetase/glutamate synthase route. In organisms that are able to accomplish the three reactions, ammonia will generally be assimilated via the GDH reaction when its extracellular concentration is high, and via the GS/GOGAT route when it is scant (Forchhammer, 2007).

Genes encoding GDHs are ubiquitous in nature and have been subject of extensive horizontal gene transfer (HGT) (Andersson and Roger, 2003). These genes have been transferred among prokaryotes and from prokaryotes to eukaryotes (Andersson and Roger, 2003). Nevertheless, it has been recognized that most bacteria harbor genes that express GDH-1, whereas most archaea include GDH-2. GDH-3 enzymes are mainly found in eukaryotes and higher organisms, although these dehydrogenases are present in some bacteria as well (Andersson and Roger, 2003; Forchhammer, 2007; Miñambres et al., 2000). GDH-4 enzymes were more recently discovered in bacteria (Miñambres et al., 2000). On the other hand, glutamate synthases are found in three distinct forms: NADPH–GOGAT (EC 1.4.1.13) that is usually found in prokaryotes (Jongsareejit et al., 1997; Oliver et al., 1987), ferredoxin–GOGAT (EC 1.4.7.1) and NADH–GOGAT (EC 1.4.1.14) that are generally obtained from higher organisms (Forchhammer, 2007; Suzuki and Knaff, 2005). However, NADH–GOGATs are also found in cyanobacteria, yeasts and algae (Muro-Pastor et al., 2005). NADPH–GOGATs purified from Escherichia coli and Azospirillum brasilense are composed of two subunits of approximately 135kDa (large α-subunit) and 53kDa (small β-subunit) (Oliver et al., 1987). The phylogenetic delineation of the different type of GOGATs among organisms seems to reflect a lesser influence of HGT on genome evolution than that observed for GDHs. On the whole, evolution has retained the synthesis of glutamate and glutamine in all living organisms so that they have became the major donors of nitrogen for all other components in a cell (Andersson and Roger, 2003; Forchhammer, 2007). Glutamine is the biosynthetic precursor of purines, pyrimidines, a number of amino acids, glucosamine and ρ-benzoate, whilst glutamate provides nitrogen for most transaminases and participates in the formation of about 85% of the nitrogenous compounds in a cell (Fisher, 1999).


                     Halomonas boliviensis is a halophilic (salt loving) bacterium and is able to accumulate polyesters when a nitrogen source restricts cell growth and when a carbohydrate is in excess in a culture medium (Quillaguamán et al., 2004, 2008). This bacterium is included in the family Halomonadaceae that forms part of the Gammaproteobacteria. All members of the family Halomonadaceae, herein referred as halomonads, are halophilic or halotolerant microorganisms (Oren, 2008). H. boliviensis is also able to produce ectoines that are used as intracellular osmolytes that help to maintain cell turgor pressure, cell volume, and concentration of electrolytes in the cell when the salt (NaCl) concentration in the culture medium is high (Van-Thuoc et al., 2010). However, the synthesis of ectoines requires the presence of nitrogen in the culture medium to attain high yields (Van-Thuoc et al., 2010). Bioprocesses that led to high yields and volumetric productivities of ectoines, polyesters, and the combination to these products were designed based on the nitrogen source availability for the cells (Guzmán et al., 2009; Van-Thuoc et al., 2010). The culture medium used for optimization of the production processes was based on a defined medium used for Halomonas elongata; the medium contains NH4Cl as the sole nitrogen source (Sauer and Galinski, 1998). However, unlike H. elongata, cell growth of H. boliviensis in such a medium is limited (Quillaguamán et al., 2008). In this respect, amino acids soluble in water were included in the medium composition for H. boliviensis. Only three amino acids (aspartic acid, glycine, and glutamine) were found to improve the growth of H. boliviensis (Quillaguamán et al., 2008). Glutamine is an amino acid that favors the growth of H. boliviensis. Replacement of glutamine by sodium glutamate does not affect the cell concentration attained by H. boliviensis (Quillaguamán et al., 2008). Microbial polyesters and osmolytes are used in biotechnological applications in medicine, pharmacy, and food technology (Philip et al., 2007). Biopolyesters can be used, for instance, as biodegradable tissue and bone implants, whereas osmolytes such as ectoines are employed as enzyme, DNA, and whole cell protectants against freezing, heating, and drying (Pastor et al., 2010).

The genome sequence of H. boliviensis was recently obtained (Guzmán et al., 2012). Evolutionary studies on several genes of H. boliviensis revealed that various genes involved in carbohydrate transport and metabolism have been acquired by HGT (Guzmán et al., 2012). Gene transfer from other bacterium had a profound effect on H. boliviensis – 45% of the genes related to carbohydrate uptake and their metabolic assimilation were obtained from other bacteria (Guzmán et al., 2012). Moreover, genes attainment from thermophilic and halophilic archaea was also discovered, although in a lesser extent (Guzmán et al., 2012). Enzyme polymorphism was also found in the pathways of glycolysis and gluconeogenesis of H. boliviensis (Guzmán et al., 2012). However, glutamate metabolism in H. boliviensis and its link to these catabolic routes have not been studied.

This research work presents the evolution of the glutamate metabolism in H. boliviensis based on analysis of supernetworks that were built from cluster of orthologous proteins (COGs). The COGs were obtained from the genome sequences of 90 microorganisms and H. boliviensis. Similarities between the protein evolution of H. boliviensis and other halomonads were also determined. Moreover, this report depicts the phylogeny of enzymes that catalyze reactions (1)–(3), describes and models the primary, secondary and tertiary structures of GDHs and GOGATs in H. boliviensis.

@&#METHODS@&#

Four genome sequences corresponding to strains of the family Halomonadaceae were selected for our studies. The strains were H. boliviensis LC1T
                        =DSM 15516T (Guzmán et al., 2012), H. elongata DSM 2581T (Schvibbert et al., 2010), Halomonas sp. TD01 (Cai et al., 2011), and Chromohalobacter salexigens DSM 3043T (Oren et al., 2005).


                        Halomonas boliviensis was taken as the reference strain for the determination of biochemical pathways. The functional annotation of enzymes involved in the glutamate pathway was accomplished by analysis of protein sequences. Genes of H. boliviensis were aligned to others in databases to attain its corresponding functional annotation. To ensure the biological meaning, only high-quality information was chosen for the annotation of the genes from the many results available. BLAST was used to accomplish functional annotation combined with different databases. BLAST version: blastall 2.2.21 software (provided by the National Center for Biotechnology Information) was used for these studies. Alignment results were obtained using the KEGG, COG, SwissProt, TrEMBL, and NR databases. A BLAST search was also used to find enzymes in H. elongata, C. salexigens, and Halomonas sp. TD01 that share high identities with those annotated for H. boliviensis.
                     

A total of 6901 alignments of clusters of orthologous proteins (COGs) of 90 microorgansims, as classified in COGs (Tatusov et al., 2003) and EggNOG (Jensen et al., 2008) databases, were obtained from that described by Puigbò et al. (2009). The protein sequences of these 90 microorganisms were used as reference for the evolutionary analysis. Protein sequences of strains of the family Halomonadaceae were included in the alignments with the references for each corresponding COG using the Muscle program (Edgar, 2004) included in the MEGA 5 software package (Tamura et al., 2011) with default parameters. Unrooted maximum likelihood phylogenetic trees for each COG were constructed using MEGA 5 under a WAG with frequencies (+F) model, with uniform mutation rates among amino acid sites and complete deletion of gaps and missing data. Swiss Model Workspace was used to determine the three-dimensional model, structure, and highest identities of proteins selected from strains of the family Halomonadaceae (Arnold et al., 2006). The QMEAN4 score was used to estimate reliability of the model and the protein structure in a range of 0–1 (Benkert et al., 2001).

Supernetworks and phylogenetic trees obtained from the supernetworks were constructed by combining the maximum likelihood phylogenetic trees of proteins present in the genomes of the strains of the family Halomonadaceae and the 90 reference strains using the SplitsTree4 program (Huson and Bryant, 2006; Huson et al., 2004) with default parameters. Evolutionary analyses were performed on a supernetwork obtained after combining phylogenetic trees of COGs involved in glutamate metabolism (Table 1
                        ). Supernetworks were analyzed according to a previously described method (Huson and Bryant, 2006).

@&#RESULTS@&#

The biochemical routes for the metabolism of glutamate in H. boliviensis were obtained by matching the highest identities of enzymes of this microorganism with those available in public databases. Fig. 1
                         shows that H. boliviensis should be able to express enzymes that form part of the synthesis of glutamate and l-glutamine. Two GDHs (EC 1.4.1.2 and EC 1.4.1.4) should allow the transformation of 2-ketoglutarate to glutamate, whereas a GS (EC 6.3.1.2) should direct the assimilation of ammonia to glutamine from glutamate or be active in conjunction with a GOGAT (EC 1.2.1.13) toward the formation of two molecules of glutamate (Fig. 1). l-Glutamine may be deaminated by the action of a glutaminase (EC 3.5.1.2), or may be the precursor of d-glucosamine-6P, purines and pyrimidines (Fig. 1). Glutamate should also interact with the citric acid cycle of H. boliviensis and participate as a precursor of many cell components (Fig. 1).


                        Table 1 shows the enzymes and the allelic variants that form part of the glutamate metabolism in H. boliviensis. The presence and absence of phylogenetically close related enzymes in other members of the family Halomonadeceae are also included in Table 1. H. boliviensis was found to share many common enzymes with Halomonas sp. TD01. Fewer similar enzymes were found among the enzymes present in the metabolic pathways of H. boliviensis and H. elongata and C. salexigens. A glutamine synthetase allelic variant present in H. boliviensis had no phylogenetically related enzymes with counterparts in other members of the family Halomonadaceae (Table 1).

A supernetwork was also generated with orthologous proteins (Fig. 2
                        ). We could not obtain a phylogenetic tree from the supernetwork that represents the evolution of the entire metabolism. The intricate net-like relationship suggested that HGT had a strong influence on the evolution of glutamate metabolism among prokaryotes. However, hyperthermophiles, thermophiles, halophilic archaea and Proteobacteria formed separate clusters (Fig. 2). Members of the family Halomonadaceae were placed within the Gammaproteobacteria.

Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2013.08.002.


                        
                           
                              Table S1
                              
                                 List of species and abbreviations of the 90 microorganisms used as reference. Abbreviations are named as described by Puigbò et al. (2009).
                              
                              
                           
                        
                     

The evolution of the two alleles of GS of H. boliviensis is shown in Fig. 3
                        . The first allele (H. boliviensis A1) was closely related to enzymes of other halomonads and Gammaproteobacteria; all enzymes belonging to Proteobacteria clustered in this phylum. However, the second allele (H. boliviensis A2) shared the same cluster with hyperthermophilic archaea (Fig. 3). Two subunits of GOGAT were present in H. boliviensis (Figs. 4 and 5
                        
                        ). The small β-subunit had a molecular weight of 52kDa and was phylogenetically closely affiliated to proteins of other halomonads and Gammaproteobacteria (Fig. 4). The large α-subunit of the halomonads gathered in a separate phylogenetic group; the α-subunit of halomonads had a molecular weight of about 161kDa (Fig. 5).

Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2013.08.002.


                        
                           
                              Table S1
                              
                                 List of GenBank accession numbers for the microorganisms shown in the phylogenetic trees in Figs. 3–7.
                              
                              
                           
                        
                     

The evolution of two types of GDHs, EC 1.4.1.4 and EC 1.4.1.2, found in H. boliviensis was also analyzed (Figs. 6 and 7
                        
                        ). Fig. 6 shows that the enzymes (corresponding to EC 1.4.1.4) of four Halomonas species had NADP–GDHs that shared the same phylogenetic group with Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. The GDH of H. elongata, however, clustered with a distinct group of bacteria (Fig. 6). Moreover, the enzymes of microorganisms belonging to different taxonomic groups were also joined in the same evolutionary branch (Fig. 6). The predicted tertiary structure of the NADP–GDH was hexameric (QMEAN4 score of 0.651) (Additional file, Fig. S1) and had a molecular weight of 50kDa. H. boliviensis also possessed a NAD–GDH whose phylogeny with other orthologous proteins is shown in Fig. 7. NAD–GDHs of halomonads were closely related to each other and to other Gammproteobacteria. The predicted tertiary structure of the NADH–GDH was hexameric (QMEAN4 score of 0.263) (Additional file, Fig. S2) and had a molecular weight of 182kDa. The low QMEAN4 score due to the closest identity of the NAD–GDH of H. boliviensis was shared with an enzyme whose crystal structure was obtained from the thermophilic microorganism, Thermus thermophilus.

Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2013.08.002.


                        
                           
                              Supplementary Fig. S1
                              
                                 Protein structure of a glutamate dehydrogenase (EC 1.4.1.4) obtained from the genome sequence of H. boliviensis. The structure was determined by residues modeling using Swiss Model Workspace. Estimated per-residue inaccuracy is visualized using a color gradient, that is, from blue (more reliable regions) to red (potentially unreliable regions).
                              
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              Supplementary Fig. S2
                              
                                 Protein structure of a glutamate dehydrogenase (EC 1.4.1.2) obtained from the genome sequence of H. boliviensis. The structure was determined by residues modeling using Swiss Model Workspace. Estimated per-residue inaccuracy is visualized using a color gradient, that is, from blue (more reliable regions) to red (potentially unreliable regions).
                              
                              
                           
                        
                     


                        Fig. 8
                         shows the alignment of NADP–GDH protein sequences with a close phylogenetic affiliation to that found in H. boliviensis (Fig. 6). Fig. 8 also highlights residues that are conserved in GDHs belonging to Group I, and are related to the catalytic mechanism of these GDHs (Baker et al., 1992; Knapp et al., 1997; Miñambres et al., 2000). The segments A, B, C, D, E, and J shown in Fig. 8 are involved in the glutamate binding on the enzyme (Miñambres et al., 2000). The residues that belong to segments F, G, H, and I are associated with contacting the dinucleotide (NADP+) (Fig. 8) (Miñambres et al., 2000). Lys-90, Asn-352, and Gly-355 in H. boliviensis are residues that contact both glutamate and dinucleotide (Fig. 8). In addition of contacting the dinucleotide, residues from segment G form a classical βαβ fold (known as the Rossmann fold) (Miñambres et al., 2000); the motif GXGXX(GAS) for the dinucleotide helix turn is GXGXXA for these sequences (Baker et al., 1992; Knapp et al., 1997; Miñambres et al., 2000). One residue from this fold showed a mutation in the enzymes of members of the family Halomonadaceae; Ser-214 (E. coli) is replaced by Ala-214 (H. boliviensis) in the rest of the halomonads (Fig. 8).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Glutamate metabolism plays a key role in nitrogen assimilation by several microorganisms (Reitzer, 2003). The growth of H. boliviensis is, for instance, notoriously restricted when glutamine or glutamate are not included in the culture medium (Quillaguamán et al., 2008). In this regard, the amount of glutamate in the medium of H. boliviensis can be used to induce the production of polyesters or osmolytes – growth-limiting concentrations of glutamate initiates the synthesis of polyesters, while high glutamate and sodium chloride concentrations favor the production of osmolytes (Quillaguamán et al., 2008; Van-Thuoc et al., 2010). H. boliviensis was found to possess putative enzymes that should permit a complete glutamate metabolism (Fig. 1). Furthermore, other members of the family Halomonadaceae have similar enzymes (Table 1) and, therefore, might possess a comparable metabolism. A few putative enzymes found in H. boliviensis, nonetheless, did not diverged like the enzymes of other halomonads (Table 1). The evolution of the metabolism of some groups of prokaryotes could be differentiated in phylogenetic clusters (Fig. 2), although a phylogenetic tree that represents the evolution of the whole metabolism could not be attained using a supernetwork. The effect of HGT (e.g., Fig. 6) on the evolution of some enzymes and the different phylogenies found for every enzyme in the metabolism (e.g., Figs. 3–7) most likely prevented the formation of a common phylogeny for the enzymes included in glutamate metabolism.

Previous reports showed that H. boliviensis can assimilate ammonia and glutamate from a culture medium at the same time until these compounds are depleted (Quillaguamán et al., 2008). These results imply that H. boliviensis has active enzymes that allow the assimilation of NH3, even at low concentrations. Biochemical reactions (2) and (3), catalyzed by GS and GOGAT, respectively, are usually active at low ammonia concentrations (Forchhammer, 2007). Two GS alleles were presently found in H. boliviensis; one of them was closely related to enzymes of halomonads and Proteobacteria, as should be expected (Fig. 3). Nevertheless, the second evolved among enzymes of hyperthermophiles, suggesting that this allele was obtained by H. boliviensis through HGT, which is a trait that differentiates H. boliviensis from the other halomonads included in this study as reference strains (Table 1). Moreover, H. boliviensis harbors NADPH–GOGAT in two subunits. The small β-subunit is similar in size to those reported in Proteobacteria (Oliver et al., 1987) and evolved among enzymes of other Proteobacteria as well (Fig. 4). However, the large α-subunit of halomonads differed significantly in size and in evolution compared to other prokaryotes (Fig. 5). The molecular weight of α-subunits present in halomonads is larger (161kDa) than that reported for other Gammaproteobacteria (135kDa) (Oliver et al., 1987). The α-subunit discerned from the genomes of halomonads appears to represent a novel type of GOGAT.


                     H. boliviensis does not grow well in the absence of glutamate or glutamine (Quillaguamán et al., 2008), probably since reaction (1) is not catalyzed. GDHs in H. boliviensis were consequently studied in more detail. H. boliviensis had two types of GDHs; the first had a size (50kDa) and a tertiary structure (Fig. S3) that corresponded to a NADP–GDH (EC 1.4.1.4) or GDH-1 (Consalvi et al., 1991). This enzyme formed a phylogenetic group with enzymes of Halomonas sp. TD01, C. salexigens, and other taxonomically unrelated bacteria (Fig. 6), which suggests gene transfer among bacteria. HGT has a strong effect on the evolution of GDHs among microorganisms (Andersson and Roger, 2003). Moreover, H. elongata seems to have acquired its NADP–GDH from other group of bacteria, which are phylogenetically distant from H. boliviensis (Fig. 6). Such an evolutionary feature may give H. elongata the ability to grow in a minimal medium and without the requirement for glutamine or glutamate. The second type of GDH found in H. boliviensis had a molecular weight of 182kDa and a hexameric structure that correlates well with those found in the recently discovered class GDH-4 or NAD–GDH (EC 1.4.1.2) expressed by Gammaproteobacteria and actinobacteria (Fig. 7) (Lu and Abdelal, 2001; Miñambres et al., 2000). However, further analyses on the tertiary structure of the NAD–GDH in H. boliviensis will be required, since the crystal structures of enzymes corresponding to class GDH-4 have not yet been obtained.

Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2013.08.002.


                     
                        
                           Supplementary Fig. S3
                           
                              Multiple alignment of GDH proteins belonging to the phylogenetic cluster of H. elongata. The sequences presented above belong to the GDHs that clustered within the same phylogenetic branch as H. elongata (Fig. 6). The motifs highlighted in gray color are in contact with the dinucleotide and form part of the Rossmann fold. The residue in red color shows the position where a mutation was observed in some members of the family Halomonadaceae, i.e. a Ser-214 (Escherichia coli) is replaced by Ala-214 (Fig. 8). In the case of H. elongata, Ser-214 (E. coli) was replaced by Val-178.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  

The sequences of the NADP–GDHs (EC 1.4.1.4) obtained from the genomes of H. boliviensis and other halomonads were compared to those present in the same phylogenetic cluster (Fig. 6). H. boliviensis and the rest of the halomonads possess all the conserved residues related to the binding of the substrate and dinucleotide (Fig. 8). However, one mutation present in the Rossman fold was characteristic of the family Halomonadaceae. This mutation may influence the assimilation of nitrogen at some level, since H. elongata, whose enzyme possess a different mutation (Additional file, Fig. S3), is able to grow in a minimum medium without the addition of glutamine or glutamate (Sauer and Galinski, 1998). Nevertheless, further biochemical studies on the NADP–GDHs are required to assess whether the mutation is the reason of the scarce growth of H. boliviensis in a defined medium.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

Putative enzymes obtained from the genome of H. boliviensis should permit a complete glutamate metabolism. A similar metabolism should be followed by other halomonads. Some phenotypic differences between halomonads, such as the ability to assimilate ammonia, might be a consequence of HGT. We found, for instance, that H. boliviensis and H. elongata differed in this trait because each strain acquired a distinct glutamate dehydrogenase from a different type of bacterium.

Each enzyme that forms part of the glutamate metabolism in prokaryotes evolved following a different pattern and some genes that express the enzymes were transferred among microorganisms. Yet, most enzymes of halomonads diverged in phylogenetic clusters composed of Proteobacteria, as might be expected. Furthermore, GOGAT α-subunits of halomonads evolved very differently from enzymes of other prokaryotes, and may be included a novel group of enzymes.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The authors would like to thank the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (Sida) for supporting our research work.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

