@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
               In silico identification of novel IL-1β inhibitors to target protein–protein interfaces

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           The study encompasses QSAR modeling, pharmacophore modeling and docking simulation.


                        
                        
                           
                           QSAR and pharmacophore modeling was performed for IL-1β inhibitors.


                        
                        
                           
                           The activity of 7 million compounds from ZINC database was predicted by QSAR model.


                        
                        
                           
                           The best predicted compounds were subjected to molecular docking by MOE and FRED.


                        
                        
                           
                           Docking results showed 7 compounds as potential IL-1β inhibitors.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

IL-1β

Virtual screening

QSAR

Pharmacophore modeling

Molecular docking

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Interleukin-1β is a drug target in rheumatoid arthritis and several auto-immune disorders. In this study, a set of 48 compounds with the determined IC50 values were used for QSAR analysis by MOE. The QSAR model was developed by using training set of 41 compounds, based on 12 unique descriptors. Model was validated by predicting the IC50 values for a test set of 7 compounds. A correlation analysis was carried out comparing the statistics of the measured IC50 values with predicted ones. Subsequently, model was used for the screening of a large data set of 7,397,957 compounds obtained from “Drugs Now” category of ZINC database. The activities of those compounds were predicted by developed model. 708,960 compounds that showed best predicted activities were chosen for further studies. Additionally this set of 708,960 compounds was screened by pharmacophore modeling that led to the retrieval of 1809 molecules. Finally docking of 1809 molecules was conducted at the IL-1β receptor binding site using MOE and FRED docking program. Several new compounds were predicted as IL-1β inhibitors in silico. This study provides valuable insight for designing more potent and selective inhibitors for the treatment of inflammatory diseases.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The cytokine interleukin-1 (IL-1) has a predominant role in inducing IL-2 release, B-cell maturation and proliferation, and fibroblast growth factor activity that stimulates thymocyte proliferation. IL-1 gene family is involved in inflammatory response. They are identified as endogenous pyrogens and play role in the release of collagenase and prostaglandin from synovial cells. IL-1 has two subtypes IL-1α, and IL-1β. IL-1α and β are pro-inflammatory cytokines that put forth pleiotropic effects on various cells and play crucial role in severe inflammatory and autoimmune disorders. IL-1β has a size of 17.3kDa, mainly produced by macrophages cells and stimulates osteoclastogensis. The inflammatory response induced by IL-1β involves the association of TRAF6 with IRAK1 (Dinarello, 1997a,b; Braddock and Quinn, 2004).

There are two receptors for IL-1, IL-1 type 1 receptor (IL-1RI) and IL-1 type 2 receptor (IL-1RII). IL-1α and IL-1β signal via IL-1RI. IL-1RII is known as decoy receptor, as binding to this receptor does not excites cell signaling. The binding of IL-1 to IL-1RI in the presence of IL1 receptor accessory protein (IL-1RAcP) produces a high-affinity-binding-receptor-complex responsible for intracellular signaling. Another IL-1 family member known as IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1ra) binds to IL-1 receptors and avoids the interaction of IL-1 with the receptors, therefore, acts as a natural IL-1 inhibitor (Dinarello, 1997a,b; Braddock and Quinn, 2004).

Pain and inflammatory process involves a cytokine cascade, which is complex as it involves glial, immune and neural cell interactions. Pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-1, produced under immunological and psychological response, exerts neuro-endocrine and stress responses. IL-1 is primarily involved in stress-induced activation of the hypothalamus–pituitary–adrenal axis and secretion of glucocorticoids leading to effects of stress on memory functioning and neural plasticity. Thus, IL-1 signaling and in result production of glucocorticoid secretion intercede the development of gloomy symptoms, that is why the blockage of IL-1 signaling will prove as preventive and therapeutic mechanism for curing stressed associated neuropathology and psychology (Goshen and Yirmiya, 2009).

IL-1β is known to influence memory consolidation during sickness. It helps in impairing the memories that are dependent on hippocampal-formation (Rachal et al., 2001). IL-1β has vital homeostatic roles in the normal organism, such as regulation of feeding, sleep, and temperature (Dinarello, 1997a,b). However, overproduction of IL-1β is connected with the patho-physiological vicissitudes that occur during different disease situations, such as rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease, osteoarthritis, vascular disease, multiple sclerosis, neuropathic pain, and Alzheimer’s disease (Dinarello, 1997b, 2002; Braddock and Quinn, 2004). IL-1β can be released from keratinocytes, fibroblasts, synoviocytes, endothelial, neuronal, immune cells such as macrophages and mast cells, and glial cells such as Schwann cells, microglia and astrocytes (Watkins et al., 1995; Copray et al., 2003; Shamash et al., 2002; Sommer and Kress, 2004; Perrin et al., 2005; Clark et al., 2006; Guo et al., 2007). The processing of IL-1β by caspase-1 via the inflammasome is one of research area that has shed new light into IL-1β’s role in inflammation and pain during disease state.

Hence, IL-1β holds substantial potential as a therapeutic target for the treatment of autoimmune diseases. For the development of new immune-modulators, current therapies target IL-1β production or the IL-1β signaling pathway. The use of monoclonal antibodies as therapeutics has a promising solution for diluting the effect of IL-1β (Cignarella, 2011). However, therapeutic antibodies have several disadvantages including high cost and nonexistence of oral bioavailability. A small molecule inhibitor of the IL-1β/IL-1R1 interaction could offer a significant development in immunosuppressive therapy. Until now, small molecule inhibitors of IL-1β have been difficult to identify (Wu et al., 2009). In contrast, computational drug design tactics can be effectively carried out resulting in lower cost and less screening time (Dasgupta et al., 2009).

The use of computational practices in drug discovery and development has become routine in the pharmaceutical industry, and recently gained momentum in academia with the availability of compound libraries. To-date computer aided drug design (CADD) is based on the knowledge of the structure, either of the receptor, or that of the ligand. The former is described as structure-based design, while the latter as ligand-based drug design (Halim et al., 2013; Khan et al., 2014; Haq et al., 2015).

In order to search novel chemical space as putative IL-1β inhibitors, three computational strategies were adopted to screen the ZINC database: (i) 2D-QSAR modeling, (ii) pharmacophore modeling and (iii) molecular docking simulations. For QSAR modeling a dataset of 48 compounds were retrieved from literature (Matsuda et al., 2001a,b). The best QSAR model with q
                     2 value of >0.5 was used to predict the activity of molecules taken from ZINC database comprising 7.5 million compounds. This approach screened the molecules and squeezed the database size from 7.5 million to 0.7 million. Furthermore, pharmacophore models were established to reduce the size of library containing 0.7 million compounds. Subsequently 1809 molecules were filtered according to pharmacophore query. Hence the dataset of 1809 molecules were subjected to structure based virtual screening protocol in order to find molecules that specifically binds at the interface of IL-1β/IL-1RI.

The structure based virtual screening was performed using two docking protocols i.e., MOE and FRED to identify new ligands for IL-1β. A set of 1809 drug-like compounds obtained from previous two strategies served as screening library. After docking, 500 top ranked docked compounds were selected and their binding modes were visually analyzed. The ranking analysis revealed 284 compounds that were common in both MOE and FRED docking results. Out of 284 compounds, 7 compounds showed the maximum common interaction at the surface of IL-1β/IL-1RI interface, suggested to be the putative IL-1β inhibitors. The whole computational strategy is shown in Fig. S1 in Supporting information.

@&#MATERIAL AND METHODS@&#

Data for this QSAR studies were retrieved from literature reported by Matsuda et al. (2001a,b). 2D-QSAR analysis was performed on a structurally diverse set of 48 (1–48, Table 1
                        ) compounds covering a good range of IL-1β production inhibitory activity. Matsuda et al. (2001a,b) reported a series of fifty five novel pyradizine derivatives that inhibits the production of IL-1β. Out of 55 compounds, 28 compounds are the analogues of 3,4-bis(4-methoxyphenyl)-pyr-idazine and 27 compounds are 5,6-bis(4-methoxyphenyl)-2H-pyr-idazin-3-one analogues. Only compounds that possess defined IC50 (i.e., IC50
                        ≤1 00 uM) was considered in this study. Kennard Stone (Kennard and Stone, 1969), a statistical method for data distribution, was used for initial data distribution into training and test sets. By using this application approximate 80% data set was distributed as training and rest as test set. Hence 48 compounds were segregated in training and test set comprising 41 and 7 molecules, respectively. The compounds in the test set evenly spanned the biological activity range and the chemical diversity of the database. The IC50 values were transformed into negative logarithmic scale (pIC50
                        =−log IC50) which cover an interval of 4 log units. The biological activity and chemical structures of compounds are shown in Table 1.

The 2D coordinates of molecules was sketched on ChemDraw software version 8.0.3 (http://dtclab.webs.com/software-tools) and saved in mol2. The structures of all the compounds were imported into MOE database file using MOE-DB option. The coordinates of all the compounds were converted into 3D-structures by MOE wash module (MOE, 2013.08). The ring nitrogens of the nitrogen bearing compounds were deprotonated according to their physiological pH. Using MOE wash command partial charges were applied on the compounds and their energy was minimized using MMFF94 force field (Darian and Gannett, 2005). Relative pIC50 value of each compound was entered in database manually opposite to molecules.

This study presents a descriptor based QSAR analysis. MOE offers several 2D, and 3D molecular descriptors to calculate molecular properties of compounds. Initially all 2D descriptor (total 192) present in MOE was calculated for all the compounds (both training and test set). Subsequently “QuaSAR-Contingency”, a statistical application in MOE was used for the selection of appropriate descriptors for QSAR modeling. The contingency analysis suggested 12 2D (Table S1) descriptors for further experimentation. These descriptors are of two type belonging to the same category SlogP_VSA and SMR_VSA. These VSA descriptors have wide applicability to both biological activity and ADME property prediction (MOE, 2013.08). Usually QSAR models developed by using these descriptors are able to screen only ADMET fit molecules.

QSAR model was constructed choosing the IL-1β inhibitory activities (as dependent variable) and the descriptors as model fields. Regression analysis was performed for the training data set and root mean square error (RMSE) and q
                        2 values of the fit were reported. This fit model was saved as the QSAR model and used for the prediction of activities of compounds of test data set.

The above QSAR fit was used for both model validation and cross-validation. This validation procedure will evaluate the predictive activities and the residual for the training set molecules. The predicted, residual, and Z-score values were calculated for both model and cross-validations.

The predictive ability of the model was assessed using correlation plot by plotting the predicted ($PRED) values (X-axis) versus the predicted IC50 activities (Y-axis). This correlation plot was used to identify outliers that have a Z-score beyond the range of 2.

The QSAR model fit obtained above was used to evaluate the predicted (PRED Activity) values of 7 test set compounds. Coefficient of determination (r
                        2) was determined for the test data set.

Main purpose of this study was to discover inhibitors of IL-1β via virtual screening that inhibits the interaction of IL-1β with its receptor IL-1R, in order to interrupt the contact between these protein–protein interfaces. For VS, ZINC database (Irwin and Shoichet, 2005) was used. ZINC database contains over 35 million purchasable compounds that are categorized in different categories including lead like, drug like, fragment like etc. For this study, compounds were retrieved from “Drugs Now” category of ZINC database, containing 7,397,957 compounds in stock. All the compounds were imported into MOE database for further analysis. Hydrogen atoms and partial charges were assigned, and compounds were minimized using MOE-wash module. These compounds were served as an external test set 2. The QSAR model fit obtained above was used to evaluate the predicted (PRED activity) values of all the compounds. The compounds with predicted pIC50 value ≥7.00 were chosen for further analysis. Hence 708,960 compounds were selected for further studies.

A pharmacophore defines both feature and location of important binding interactions between a ligand and its receptor. MOE provides a facility for generating 3D pharmacophore query. The pharmacophore model was constructed by using 10 compounds (compounds 1, 5b, 5q, 5w, 5x, 15h, 15i, 15j, 15k, 15l). The unified scheme within MOE was used to define the features thought to be important for ligand binding. The molecules were aligned using the alignment function of MOE. All ten molecules perfectly aligned each other except at one point as shown in Fig. S2. Three aromatic and two acceptor/donor features were constructed on the core site of the molecule. F1, F2, F3, and F4 centers have a radius of 1Å and F5 center has a radius of 1.4Å. The compounds retrieved from QSAR analysis of external test set 2 compounds (708,960 compounds), served as a search library for pharmacophore based screening. Drug-like filter was used during pharmacophore searching which led to the retrieval of 1809 molecules subsequently.

Docking experiments were carried out using the docking algorithms employed in MOE, 2013.08, and fast rigid body docking program FRED 2.2.3 (McGann et al., 2003). MOE with alpha triangle matcher and FRED with exhaustive searching were used to dock the ligands in the binding site of IL-1β. The docking simulations were performed on Xeon 3.0GHz Linux work station running under Rock cluster (centos) and CPU times were recorded. Docking speed is a critical issue in screening large libraries of organic compound and may be important even in a careful study of a small set of ligands. The time to dock one ligand was approximately less than 1min for FRED and 2–3min for MOE.

Three dimensional coordinates of human IL-1β in complex with its receptor 1L-1R (PDB code: 1ITB) was retrieved from RCSB protein data bank. The protein file was checked for missing atoms and bonds. Hydrogen and partial charges were added on protein and the file was saved for docking. After the careful visual analysis of protein structures and literature survey, we concluded that no water molecule is involved in protein ligand binding hence water molecules were removed from protein and docking was conducted without water.

The IL-1R binding site of IL-1β is dissected into two sub-sites. Vigers et al. (1997, 2000) reported two binding sites on IL-1B, site A and site B. Both sites interact with different domains of receptor IL-1R through fifteen important residues (Table S2). These interactions are involved in receptor binding as well as in signal induction. Thus these may prove as targeted sites for ligand binding. Atoms of these residues were selected for site specific docking.

For the docking, the protein was minimized using the MMFF94 force field (MOE, 2013.08), keeping all the heavy atoms fixed until a RMSD gradient of 0.05kcalmol−1
                           Å−1 was reached. The active site was generated using MOE residue selector prompt and the defined (15) residues were selected. The database of 1809 compounds was used as ligand repository for docking. The docking simulations were performed using triangle matcher algorithm in combination London dG as rescoring 1 and GBVI/WSA dG as rescoring 2 methods (MOE, 2013.08). The post docking refinement was performed using force field based scoring function. Twenty top ranked docked poses were saved for further study.

In FRED (McGann et al., 2003) the first stage in docking is a shape fitting process, which takes a set of ligand conformers as input and tests them against a “bumpmap” (a Boolean grid with true values where ligand atoms can potentially be placed). Orientations that clash with the protein or are distant from the active site are rejected. The crude docking solutions are further tested against a pharmacophore feature if specified, and any poses that do not satisfy the pharmacophore are rejected. Poses surviving the shape fitting routine can then be passed to three scoring function filters in the screening process. Various options are available for optimization with respect to the built-in scoring functions: optimization of hydroxyl group rotamers, rigid body optimization, torsion optimization, and reduction of the number of poses that are passed on to the next scoring function. Qualitatively, the Gaussian scoring function has favorable values when the ligand and protein has a high surface contact and little volume overlap.

For docking, multi-conformer libraries of the input ligand database (database of 1809 compounds) were generated by OMEGA (OpenEye Scientific Software) (Hawkins et al., 2010) with the default settings. By using VIDA, grid was generated on selected residues and the receptor file was created for docking. The receptor file was docked with multiple conformer libraries for each protein-ligand complex using Chemgauss4 scoring function. Twenty top ranked docking poses were saved and analyzed.

The result of the docking was analyzed in terms of binding interactions. The docking interactions were analyzed using PLIF command of MOE, and Chimera (Pettersen et al., 2004). Initially we checked the number of clusters on each site of protein in order to gain insights of most potential interacting site of the protein.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

A properly made QSAR model should have the ability to predict the activities of those compounds present other than training set (Thai et al., 2012). Assessment of model is done by noting q
                        2 value in order to avoid the over-estimation and over-fitting (Cherkassky and Ma, 2009; Gramatica, 2007). Only q
                        2 value is not enough to declare the model best, r
                        2 value of the model and the test set is also compulsory (Tong et al., 1998).

QSAR model preparation in MOE is quite different than other software. MOE involves the descriptor based methodology. MOE gives two type of values, predicted pIC50 and the residual value. Thangapandian et al. (2013) tested the effects of number of descriptors used in QSAR modeling and their abilities to predict the activity of new molecules, however, they concluded that the model established with less number of descriptors showed better prediction of the activities of new molecules. We also observed that contingency analysis that recommended 12 best descriptors out of 192. Initially we used 50 compounds from the report of Matsuda et al. (2001a,b). The dataset was segregated in 43 and 7 compounds in training and test set, respectively. After calculating 12 descriptors for 43 molecules in the training dataset, QSAR model was calculated by PLS method. During this analysis, compounds 2 and 15t showed high deviation in their residual values and created negative influence on the predictive ability of the model, hence shuffling experiments were performed to test the influence of compounds 2 and 15t. Three different models were generated; however, the q
                        2 and r
                        2 values were not predictable. The analysis suggested that the compounds 2 and 15t are outliers. Hence, these two compounds were removed from the dataset and subsequently 48 compounds were used in QSAR modeling. After the removal of 2 compounds, model 4 showed good q
                        2 and r
                        2 values (q
                        2
                        =0.5107, r
                        2
                        =0.749), thus model 4 was used for the validation of test set (Tables S3 and S4). The model 4 predicted the activity of test set compounds with r
                        2
                        =0.74. A graphical representation of training and test sets is shown in Fig. 1
                        .

ZINC provides chemical molecules repositories that contain million of diverse compounds. QSAR model was used for initial screening of “Drug Now” category of ZINC database, containing 7,397,957 compounds. QSAR screening resulted in a wide range of predicted pIC50 value from 3 to 14. The most active compound (15h) reported by Matsuda et al. (2001b) has the pIC50 value >7 thus molecules with predicted pIC50 value ≥7.00 were selected for further studies. Hence 708,960 compounds were selected. We believe that the compounds screened through this model have good ADMET properties because the descriptors used to filter those compounds predict the activity of compounds based on their ADMET properties.

In order to further screen the library of 708,960 compounds (retrieved from QSAR prediction of ZINC library), pharmacophore modelling was employed. The pharmacophore model was constructed by overlapping top 10 compounds with highest binding affinities (compounds 1, 5b, 5q, 5w, 5x, 15h, 15i, 15j, 15k, 15l). Three aromatic and two acceptor/donor features were observed. Drug-like filter was used during pharmacophore searching which led to the retrieval of 1809 molecules subsequently.

These molecules were ideally best based on their chemical structures, physico-chemical properties and biological activity. The data set of 1809 molecules was subjected to structure based drug design protocol. Hence these molecules were docked at the IL-1R binding site of IL-1β by two docking programs including FRED and MOE (Table 2
                        ).

In order to block the interaction of IL-1β with IL-1R, we docked the library of 1809 compounds at IL-1β-IL-1R interface. The analysis of the interface of IL-1β and IL-1R complex showed two possible interaction sites i.e., sites A and B. These two flat sites of IL-1β interact with different domains of IL-1R. The site A consist of residue 11, 13–15, 20–22, 27, 29–36, 38, 126–131, 147, and 149. The critical binding residues are Arg11 and Gln15. The surface of receptor at this binding site (site A) has a number of pockets to accept side chains of IL-1β. Thus a significant component of binding energy at this site probably comes from van der Waals contact between IL-1β and IL-1R. The second binding site (site B) is formed by residue 1–4, 6, 46, 48, 51, 53–54, 56, 92–94, 103, 105, 106, 108, 109, 150 and 152. Both the hydrophilic residues (Arg 4, Gln 48, Glu51, Asn 53, Lys 93, Glu 105, and Asn 108) and the hydrophobic residues (Leu 6, Phe 46, Ile 56, and Phe 150) interact with IL-1R surface, hence the binding energy of site B appears to be more dependent upon hydrophobic and the hydrophilic interactions than in site A.

The solvent accessible area of IL-1β on binding IL-1R, 1087Å are buried in site A over 25 residues, and 1001Å in site B over 21 residues, for a total of 2088Å overall. Both sites also make extensive use of salt bridges and hydrogen bonds. Sites A and B have 10 and 13 salt bridges, respectively.

In this study both of the sides were targeted during docking. Docking was performed with MOE and FRED docking programs. Out of 1809 compounds, top 500 compounds based on their docking scores, were selected for visual inspection of their binding interactions. Among the docking 500 selected hits, 7 molecules were found to be common in both MOE and FRED scoring list. The molecular binding patterns of these 7 hits suggested that these molecules can be putative inhibitors of IL-1β. The IL-1RI binding site on the IL-1β surface is depicted in Fig. 2
                        .

The best docked conformation of the compound 1 revealed that the oxygen adjacent to biphenyl moiety of compound 1 interacts with the side chain amino group of Lys109 (1.912Å). The bi-phenyl moiety is stabilized by the hydrophobic interactions provided by the surrounding residues. However, the chloro-quinazoline 4-one moiety remains surface exposes and does not contribute in protein binding. The best docked orientation of compounds is shown in Fig. 3
                           (a).

The docking solution of compound 2 is displayed in Fig. 3(b). The amide carbonyl between the oxazine and the morpholine moieties of compound 2 mediates H-bond interaction with the side chain amino group of Lys109 (2.132Å). The anisolic-oxygen accepts H-bond from the side chain amino group of Asn108 (2.742Å). Phe150 provides π–π contacts to the benzene moieties of the compound. Furthermore, anisole moiety is stabilized by hydrophobic interactions provided by the side chains of surrounding residues.

The docked orientation of the compound 3 reveals that the carbonyl and the methoxy-oxygen mediates bi-dentate interaction with the side chain amino group of Lys109 at a distance of 1.683Å and 1.786Å, respectively. However the benzo-nitrile and the amino substituted diphenyl moieties remain surface exposed. Moreover, Gln15 provides hydrophobic contacts to the benzo-nitrile group. The best docked conformation of the compound 3 is shown in Fig. 3(c).

As shown in Fig. 3(d), the nitro group of the ligand interacts with the side chain amino group of the Lys109 (1.973Å). The carbonyl moiety of the ligand forms bi-dentate contact with the side chain amino group of the Gln149 at a distance of 2.575Å and 2.849Å.

The docked orientation of compound 5 suggests that the anilinic amino group of the compound forms a bi-dentate interaction with the side chain carboxylic moiety of Glu105 at a distance of 1.831Å and 2.356Å, respectively. The benzyl moiety forms π–π interaction with the side chain of Phe150. Fig. 3(e) shows the best binding mode of compound 5 at the IL-1β-IL-1RI interface.

The binding mode of the compound 6 is shown in Fig. 3(f). The binding mode shows that the amide carbonyl mediate H-bond with the Lys109 (2.235Å). The amino group forms H-bond with the side chain carbonyl of Asn108 (2.740Å). Furthermore, furan moiety is stabilized by the π–π interaction provide by Phe150. However, the toluene moiety is interacted with the surrounding residues by hydrophobic interactions.

The binding pattern of compound 7 is shown in Fig. 3(g) that shows that the amino group at the furan moiety of imidazole ring mediates bi-dentate interaction with the side chain carboxylic moiety of Glu105 at a distance of 2.732Å and 2.079Å, respectively. The other amino group interacts with the side chain amino nitrogen of Asn108 (2.533Å). The fluorine accepts proton from the main chain amino group of Phe150 (2.983Å), the flouro-benzene moiety also forms π–π interaction with the side chain of Phe150.

The chemical structures of all seven compounds are shown in Fig. S4 in Supporting information.. All the 7 compounds were superimposed on the pharmacophore query. The superimposed view of all these compounds (1–7) on the pharmacophore model is displayed in Fig. S3 that suggested that these compounds fulfill the requirement of pharmacophore model accurately.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

IL-1β is suggested to be a marker of several immunological disorders including rheumatoid arthritis, gout, pain and inflammation. Hence a three level of in silico approach was used to discover the inhibitors of IL-1β. Initially QSAR modeling was performed by using a set of 48 compounds. The QSAR model showed significant prediction ability with q
                     2
                     =0.5107. The predicted activities of test set compounds were accurate with r
                     2
                     =0.7489. The best model was also used for the validation of external data set. For this purpose a library of 7 million compounds were retrieved from ZINC database. Initially this set of compounds was filtered by pharmacophore modeling. The compounds that fulfilled the requirement of pharmacophore model were subjected to molecular docking simulation. A set of 1809 compounds were selected that best fit the pharmacophore query. Hence 1809 compounds were docked at the surface of IL-1β-IL-1RI interface by MOE and FRED docking programs. Afterwards, based on MOE and FRED docking scores, top 500 compounds were selected for further analysis. There after we applied consensus strategy to select the best compounds out of 500 compounds. Seven (7) compounds were found common in the top 500 ranked library. These compounds binds at IL-1β-IL-1RI interface, hence they are suggested to be the best binders of IL-β, and can be used to inhibit the interaction of IL-1β with its receptor, as a result block the activity of IL-1β.

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENT@&#

The authors would like to thank OpenEye Scientific Software for providing us the academic license free of cost for six months for this study.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2015.06.004.

The following are Supplementary data to this article:
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

