@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Collective variable driven molecular dynamics to improve protein–protein docking scoring

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Protein–protein interactions are fundamental in most cellular processes.


                        
                        
                           
                           Hydrogen bond networks play a key role in molecular recognition.


                        
                        
                           
                           MD is the tool by excellence to explore the protein potential energy landscape.


                        
                        
                           
                           Collective variable driven MD have been able to accelerate rare events.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Protein–protein

Docking

Scoring

Collective variable

Molecular dynamics

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  In biophysics, the structural prediction of protein–protein complexes starting from the unbound form of the two interacting monomers is a major difficulty. Although current computational docking protocols are able to generate near-native solutions in a reasonable time, the problem of identifying near-native conformations from a pool of solutions remains very challenging. In this study, we use molecular dynamics simulations driven by a collective reaction coordinate to optimize full hydrogen bond networks in a set of protein–protein docking solutions. The collective coordinate biases the system to maximize the formation of hydrogen bonds at the protein–protein interface as well as all over the structure. The reaction coordinate is therefore a measure for docking poses affinity and hence is used as scoring function to identify near-native conformations.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

As most biological processes involve macromolecular complexes, identifying and characterizing protein interactions as well as the network they create, is critical for understanding the molecular mechanisms within the cell. Protein–protein interactions are fundamental in most cellular processes as for example DNA replication or signal transduction. Knowledge of the structure and properties of protein–protein complexes is essential to understand how proteins function within the cell, in order to identify new targets for therapeutic applications and develop new approaches for drug discovery. Hence, solving the structure of protein–protein complexes might provide the basis for understanding how a biological signal is transmitted or how a biological function is performed (Smith and Sternberg, 2002).

Many docking algorithms rely on the divide-and-conquer strategy (Luo et al., 2010): first, an initial sampling of the configurational space of the interacting proteins is performed by an efficient algorithm specialized on generating docking candidates (or solutions), typically rigid-body or coarse-grained, based and optimized through Fast Fourier Transform (FFT). Second, a scoring step is performed to rank the candidates according to scoring functions that can offer different levels of complexity (Halperin et al., 2002). However, the arduousness of sampling and scoring is not equal, while modern supercomputers allow for very good sampling of the configurational space between two proteins, there are no efficient and accurate methods for refinement and scoring yet. Consequently, even though near-native poses could be generated, it is still extremely difficult to distinguish them from a pool of solutions, making docking protocols to produce significant amounts of false positives (Gabb et al., 1997; Chen et al., 2003). Therefore, efficient computational docking highly depends on the accuracy of the energy functions used to evaluate the strength of binding candidates.

Unfortunately, because of bad protein modeling (missing ions, heteroatoms or unrealistic inter-protein contacts generated by rigid-body docking) scoring is currently a serious issue. The energy function used for scoring analyzes the conformation of both proteins in complex molecule and outputs a value representing a total energy. This number is meaningless alone, but when used in a relative way to compare the evolution of the total energy along the conformational changes that the proteins suffered, it gives an idea of how stable the different docking conformations are. Then, computational studies of protein associations from an energetic point of view, are also important to comprehend their essential principles and thus to improve protein interaction modeling. Energetic landscapes represent at different smoothness the natural behavior of protein–protein interactions. Their knowledge allow to predict stable configurational and conformational spaces, such as the binding funnel. Unfortunately for mathematical simplifications, protein binding energy landscapes are extremely rugged surfaces (Camacho and Vajda, 2001; Hagler et al., 1974a; Hagler and Lifson, 1974b). Since interacting forces upon protein binding act at different length-scales, the spatial frequency spectrum shows rapid variations and though generates many wells of local minima. For this reason, many times search algorithms are confined to a small portion of the sampling space (Phillips et al., 2001), since characterizing every minima of the potential energy landscape of a geometry is a problem with tens to thousands of degrees of freedom (Crescenzi et al., 1998; Atkins and Hart, 1999; Calland, 2003). However, the energy funnel shape is generally observed in the vicinities of the bound form of protein–protein complexes, once optimal interface residue conformations have been reached (Camacho and Vajda, 2001). In general, to test the performance of force-fields in docking applications, the native complex and the lowest energy near-native solution generated by a docking approach are compared energetically (Dixon, 1997; Totrov and Abagyan, 1997). However, this procedure is artificial and may lead to incorrect conclusions (Verkhivker et al., 2000). In a complete docking protocol the possibility to correctly identify near-native conformations as the lowest energy ones stands on the ability of the sampling process to generate them (Diller and Verlinde, 1999). The gradually narrowing of the energetic landscape has a physical meaning in protein–protein docking: there are large amounts of unfavorable high energy poses while only a small part of the configurational space is energetically stable.

Among macromolecular biological interactions hydrogen bond networks are specially interesting due to their key role in protein 3D structure, and as a consequence, in molecular recognition specificity and protein function (Morozov et al., 2004). Thus the appropriate description of their energetics is of great interest in the fields of protein–protein docking and protein folding. In computer simulations the challenging problem emerging from using crystallographic protein structure from the PDB (www.pdb.org) is to position every hydrogen atom. Indeed, the optimization of full hydrogen bond networks requires force-fields to properly describe every possible hydrogen configurations and their interaction energies (Masone et al., 2013). But as observed in previous studies, molecular mechanics force fields show poor accuracy in describing hydrogen bond physics (Fabiola et al., 2002; Hu et al., 2003; Lii and Allinger, 1994, 1998; Morozov et al., 2004; Masone et al., 2012).

Molecular dynamics is the tool by excellence to exhaustively explore the protein potential energy landscape while simulating its flexibility. Fully flexible relaxation tends to increase the amount of recovered native contacts among sets of docking poses (Król et al., 2007a, 2007b). However, it is impossible to assure that extensive molecular dynamics simulations will result in good conformers suitable for docking. Moreover, determining the most important motions for binding purposes and then performing docking experiments may result in equivalent solutions as flexible docking (Cozzini et al., 2008). As pointed out by Alonso and collaborators (Alonso et al., 2006) molecular dynamics have shown to accurately, although expensively, refine a few selected candidates from a previous fast docking stage used to sample large configurational spaces. The full atomistic description in long, and though useful, time scales are still beyond classical molecular dynamics simulations for most biological systems due to the small femtosecond time steps needed for energy conservation. Moreover, crystallographic monomers of a protein–protein complex cannot provide enough information on how interface rearrangements will occur. Hence, in these cases classical molecular dynamics can achieve only a limited phase-space exploration (Tiwary and van de Walle, 2013).

Remarkably, collective variable driven molecular dynamics have shown to adequately reproduce complex conformational changes in biomolecules by accelerating rare events (Fiorin et al., 2013). When biasing the system with a previously chosen collective reaction coordinate, molecular dynamics simulations may surpass intrinsic limitations of the physical model and a more efficient statistical sampling can be performed. However, it is usually difficult to select the proper collective variable that adequately describes the macroscopic phenomena (Fiorin et al., 2013; Laio and Parrinello, 2002; Laio and Gervasio, 2008; Kumar et al., 1996).

The purpose of this work is to propose a collective coordinate to optimize hydrogen bond networks in protein–protein systems by driving molecular dynamics simulations. The collective coordinate is then a measure of the hydrogen bond formation in each docking solution and though is used as a scoring function.

We used the DockGround (Liu et al., 2008) set of protein–protein solutions generated by Vakser and collaborators, freely available on-line (http://dockground.bioinformatics.ku.edu/) that provides 100 non-native and at least one near-native (ligand RMSD<5Å) solution generated by GRAMM-X (Tovchigrechko and Vakser, 2006) docking scan per complex for a total of 61 complexes. To select our complexes we chose three (1xd3, 1ugh, 3sic) that were not included in a previous study in hydrogen bond network optimizations (Masone et al., 2012) using the software PELE (Borrelli et al., 2005), but still containing 10 near-native solutions in the DockGround decoy. Other two complexes that did were studied before (1bvn, 1tmq) were also selected for validation purposes (see Table 1
                     ). In all of them the condition that the ligand RMSD to the crystal reference is 5Å or less for at least one of the poses in the decoy was fulfilled. Previous studies in protein–protein (Masone et al., 2012) and protein–ligand interactions (Borrelli et al., 2010) show that refinement techniques can only return near-native top scores if at least one of the poses in the decoy is close enough to the crystallographic reference. Fig. 1
                      shows the configurational space explored by the docking scan for the 1bvn protein–protein system.

We performed molecular dynamics in GROMACS 4.5.5 (Hess et al., 2008) patched with PLUMED 1.3 (Bonomi et al., 2009) to use a collective reaction coordinate in order to drive the system into the formation of hydrogen bonds. The PLUMED code provides a variety of different collective variables to performed free-energy calculations. The collective variable we used, available in PLUMED 1.3, counts the number of intra-molecular hydrogen bonds between a group donors and acceptors and it is defined as follows:
                        
                           (1)
                           
                              
                                 s
                                 =
                                 
                                    ∑
                                    
                                       i
                                       j
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          1
                                          −
                                          
                                             
                                                (
                                                
                                                   d
                                                   
                                                      i
                                                      j
                                                   
                                                
                                                /
                                                
                                                   r
                                                   0
                                                
                                                )
                                             
                                             n
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                          1
                                          −
                                          
                                             
                                                (
                                                
                                                   d
                                                   
                                                      i
                                                      j
                                                   
                                                
                                                /
                                                
                                                   r
                                                   0
                                                
                                                )
                                             
                                             m
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     where i counts over the group of donors and j over the group of acceptors. For d
                     
                        ij
                      distance calculations all donor–acceptor pairs were included and the user defined values where set to r
                     0
                     =2.5, n
                     =6 and m
                     =12. As a general rule, the two monomers of a protein–protein docking solution were defined as donor/acceptor groups so that all hydrogen bonds (not only the ones located at the protein–protein interface) are included in the collective variable.

All protein–protein docking poses were solvated in explicit SPC water, minimized and equilibrated. All bond-lengths were constrained using the sixth-order LINCS (Hess et al., 1997) algorithm, for an integration time step of 2fs. Simulations were performed in the NVT ensemble using Berendsens’ temperature coupling scheme (Berendsen et al., 1984). Molecular dynamics runs including the collective variable for hydrogen bond optimizations were performed for the 100 poses for each protein–protein complex. Simulation time varied according to the reaction coordinate convergence, but was in all cases around 1ns (an overnight simulation time in a current eight-core processor workstation). Protein figures were generated with VMD (Humphrey et al., 1996).

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

The major limitation of collective variable based dynamics is the small amount of collective coordinates that can be used to avoid prohibitive computational times. On top of this, the a priori intuitive choice of the reaction coordinate may introduce unrealistic biases on how events of interest occur (Abrams and Vanden-Eijnden, 2010), thus choosing a correct set of collective variables remains an unsolved problem. In this work, we propose and describe a collective coordinate based on hydrogen bond optimizations to score protein–protein docking poses. By using molecular dynamics driven by this collective variable, we are able to optimize full hydrogen bond networks in energetic terms and to identify near-native poses. We tested the method in a group of decoys of unbound structures from a standard benchmark containing at least one near native solution. After the molecular dynamics based H-bond optimization we could score near-native solutions among the first poses, Table 1 lists the studied protein–protein complexes and its last column indicates the H-bond reaction coordinate performance in terms of near-native ranking positions.

Additionally, Table 2
                      shows the ranking positions of the first 10 near-native solutions for all complexes. The method directly allows for additional restraints that might be included in more complex reaction coordinates in order to improve biasing and to sample more efficiently, (i.e., low-frequency normal modes). The method can be as well applied to protein–ligand systems.


                     Table 3
                      addresses a comparison between ZDOCK+ZRANK (Hwang et al., 2010a) and FTDOCK (Gabb et al., 1997)+pyDOCK (Cheng et al., 2007), two docking+scoring methods that have shown excellent results in the CAPRI competition, a blind test of protein docking algorithms that predicts the complex structure from the crystal structures of two interacting proteins. Complexes 3sic and 1ugh are not included in benchmark 4.0 (Hwang et al., 2010b) and hence were not studied by most docking and scoring protocols.

Due to the conformational space complexity in protein–protein interfaces, collective variable driven molecular dynamics offers a unique alternative to accelerate molecular dynamics simulations and to sample rare events occurring at long timescales in the all-atom space with explicit solvent. The application of this technique to score docking solutions is a novel approach that relies on the definition of proper collective coordinates. For the 1bvn complex the near-native conformation is ranked as the highest value of the H-bond collective variable, though being identified as top1 (Fig. 2
                     , top left corner). According to the definition of the collective reaction coordinate (see Eq. (1)) most favorable poses get highest ranks.

Although exceptional, this may indicate the ability of the collective coordinate to distinguish between conformations as an initial scoring step to select best candidates and to get rid of incorrect ones, showing a remarkable correlation between the interaction energy (score) and the RMSD to the reference crystal. As demonstrated in a previous work (Masone et al., 2012) the optimization cannot involve only the protein–protein interface region, but needs to include the entire system as the optimization of the interface alone would maximize the interaction energy and not the total energy, introducing false positives. Fig. 3
                      depicts the other four protein–protein complexes where near native conformations are included between the first ranked solutions.

For all the complexes studied there were no significant changes in the reaction coordinate after 0.8ns (see Fig. 4
                     ). However, it is interesting to analyze how each one of the complexes behaves differently under the collective variable restrain in terms of the observed oscillations. In particular, complexes with a higher steady state value of the reaction coordinate (1ugh, 1xd3 and 3sic) show an underdumped oscillation, while the ones with lower steady state value of the reaction coordinate (1bvn and 1tmq) describe an overdumped oscillation. The reason for this is that complexes 1ugh, 1xd3 and 3sic are capable to form more H-bonds and then to reach their steady state reaction coordinate value in less time (rise times are considerably shorter). On the contrary, complexes 1bvn and 1tmq require more sampling and though higher conformational changes to reach a stationary sate with comparatively less amounts of H-bonds present in the structures.

As pointed out recently (Lindert et al., 2013) the Rosetta Protein Structure Refinement Protocol can distinguish native-like from non-native-like conformations in many cases but it is limited by conformational sampling for larger proteins. This highlights the complexity of protein structural refinement during molecular dynamics runs, which has a practical value separate from protein–protein docking and scoring. In this sense, Fig. 5
                      shows the protein–protein interface in one of ours 1tmq's docking solutions before and after simulations, where histidine residue HIS14 rotates during interface rearrangements.

We have presented here a scoring protocol to identify near-native poses in protein–protein interactions. The method involves no hierarchical steps but molecular dynamics simulations driven by a properly chosen collective variable. Our results show that hydrogen bonds can be used as a reliable collective variable for scoring purposes in protein–protein docking. Moreover, hydrogen bonds are an interesting characteristic to distinguish near-native poses although more general collective reaction coordinates could result in even better scoring. For very large protein–protein systems a variable resolution procedure could be designed to alternate with coarse-grained schemes to reduce computational expenses (Samiotakis et al., 2010).

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This work was supported by the Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET). The authors would like to thank the Instituto de Ciencias Básicas (ICB) – Universidad Nacional de Cuyo (UNCuyo) and Universidad Nacional de Córdoba (UNC) for supercomputing time.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

