@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
               In silico investigation of new binding pocket for mitogen activated kinase kinase (MEK): Development of new promising inhibitors

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           A comprehensive in silico screening was done on MEK1/2 inhibitors.


                        
                        
                           
                           A training dataset was provided to be used for further related investigations.


                        
                        
                           
                           Trametinib was determined as the best provided inhibitor, so far.


                        
                        
                           
                           A set of 15 novel MEK1/2 inhibitors were designed in this study.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

3D-QSAR

ADMET properties

AutoDock

Mitogen activated protein kinase kinase

Vina

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  It has been previously shown that the inhibition of mitogen activated protein kinase kinase (MEK) contributes to apoptosis and suppression of different cancer cells. Correspondingly, a number of MEK1/2 inhibitors have been designed and evaluated since 2001. However, they did not satisfy essential pharmacokinetic (PK) and pharmacodynamic (PD) properties thus, almost most of them were terminated in pre-clinical or clinical studies. This study aims to design new specific MEK1/2 inhibitors with improved PK/PD profiles to be used as alternative cancer medications. In first part of this study, a comprehensive screening, for the first time, was done on well-known MEK1/2 inhibitors using a number of computational programs such as AutoDock Tools 4.2 (ADT) and AutoDock Vina. Therefore a valuable training dataset as well as a reliable pharmacophore model were provided which were then used to design new inhibitors. According to the results of training dataset, Trametinib was determined as the best inhibitor provided, so far. So, Trametinib was used as the lead structure to design new inhibitors in this study. In second part of this investigation, a set of new allosteric MEK1/2 inhibitors were designed significantly improving the binding energy as well as the ADMET properties, suggesting more specific and stable ligand-receptor complexes. Consequently, the structures 14 and 15 of our inhibitors, as the most potent structures, are great substituents for Trametinib to be used and evaluated in clinical trials as alternative cancer drugs.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK pathway is one of the most important pathways of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade. MAPK pathways control cellular processes including proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis (Wallace et al., 2010; Cargnello and Roux, 2011) and also their aberrant activation is frequently observed in tumor cells specifically those of K-Ras and B-Raf mutations (Davies et al., 2002; Cohen et al., 2003). Mitogen activated protein kinase kinase (MEK), also known as MKK, MAPKK and MAP kinase kinase (EC=2.7.12.2), is activated being phosphorylated by Raf enzyme and has two known substrates; ERK1 and ERK2 (Isshiki et al., 2011). Although seven different MEK enzymes have been identified in Homo sapiens, a similar structure can be seen in all of them which includes a catalytic domain (also kinase domain), an N-terminal domain and a C-terminal domain. Of seven MEK enzymes, MEK1 (393 a.a.) and MEK2 (400 a.a.), as the key mediators of the Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK cascade, have similar structures and functions which include a docking site for ERK substrate placed in the N-terminal sequence (Anderson et al., 1990), an allosteric inhibitory fragment and also a unique nuclear export sequence (Meier et al., 2012). Moreover, the N-terminal domain embraces the main catalytic site located in a highly conserved kinase domain as well as the ATP binding site located adjacent to the allosteric inhibitory fragment (Anderson et al., 1990; Meier et al., 2012). However, there are some differences which distinguish each individual MEK enzyme, these various features can be found in the terminal sequences (Fischmann et al., 2009). Overexpression and uncontrolled activation of MEK/ERK pathway is shown to be associated with different types of human cancer (Fujii et al., 2011; Steelman et al., 2011; Luca et al., 2012). Therefore, the inhibition of MEK has the potential to suppress various cancer cells.

As the first MEK inhibitor tested clinically, CI-1040 (PD-184352) entered phase I clinical study but the development of this inhibitor was terminated because of low efficacy and poor pharmacokinetic profile. The main problems of CI-1040 were low water solubility, metabolic instability (Allen et al., 2003; Lorusso et al., 2005a) diarrhea, fatigue, nausea and skin rash (Ramnath and Adjei, 2007). As the second MEK inhibitor, PD0325901 was developed and tested in human clinical trials, and although some properties such as water solubility and stability were improved in comparison with CI-1040, sufficient efficacy was not exhibited. Besides, several side effects such as visual disturbance, syncope and negative effect on CNS caused this compound to fail in phase I clinical study (Lorusso et al., 2005b; Haura et al., 2010). Selumetinib (AZD6244, ARRY142886) was designed and used in phase I and II clinical studies in 2008 (Adjei et al., 2008) and had some progresses in comparison with previous MEK inhibitors such as having effect on various types of cancers (Jain et al., 2014). In 2010, (Kim et al. (2010) reported a novel MEK inhibitor, AS703026. Investigations on this inhibitor showed that it has good potency only in human multiple myeloma (MM), but other cancer types cannot be successfully treated by AS703026. Later in 2011, Dong et al., (2011) set out a new MEK inhibitor called TAK-733 which showed potent anticancer activities against melanoma, colorectal, non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), pancreatic and breast cancer. As these mentioned MEK inhibitors showed little benefits for cancer patients (Gilmartin et al., 2011), scientists came up with another MEK inhibitor namely Trametinib (also known as GSK1120212 and JTP-74057) in order to avoid previous MEK inhibitors' problems such as negative side effects, poor solubility, insufficient efficacy, low selectivity and etc. (Gilmartin et al., 2011). Trametinib was considered as a potent MEK inhibitor having long half-life, good selectivity and broad effect on various cancers. However, another study illustrated that there are still some adverse events in patients treated by Trametinib such as rash or dermatitis acneiform (82%) and diarrhoea (45%), most of which were grade II or lower, and also Trametinib had time-limited effect on patients in that investigation (Jeffrey et al., 2013). Trametinib was shown to have insufficient antitumor activity considering different cancers, and is advised to be used in combination with other drugs (Walters et al., 2013). Therefore, there is still a critical need for new MEK inhibitors which can effectively target MEK1 and MEK2 enzymes with high binding energy, low acute oral toxicity, reliable solubility and high intestinal absorption which may guaranty specific selectivity, less side effects and long term tumor suppression.

Computational studies have had great impacts on designing and producing new drugs during last decade and there is an upwards trend on using computational methods to predict the 3D structures and conformational factors of drugs as well as to calculate the ligand-receptor binding parameters (Asthagiri and Lauffenburger, 2001; Orton et al., 2005; Legewie et al., 2007) in order to prevent time- and money-consuming laboratory efforts. Lead structures are very helpful to develop new datasets and eventually new drugs, moreover, it is essential to predict the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynmic properties of these lead structures as well as newly designed drugs prior to experimental procedures (Winkler, 2002). 3D-quantitative structure activity relationship (QSAR) is one of the most used regression models which uses force field calculations and requires 3D-structures. 3D-QSAR has been used frequently in order to design and analyze different inhibitors of Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK pathway (Thaimattam et al., 2004; Kim et al., 2011; Yang et al., 2012; Larifa et al., 2014).

In this study, we have done a comprehensive computational investigation on previously reported MEK1/2 inhibitors and classified them based on their pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties in order to determine the best designed inhibitors, and subsequently to use them as the lead structures to design new MEK1/2 inhibitors. Based on the results, Trametinib is the best inhibitor designed, so far, due to the highest binding energy and lowest inhibition constant (Ki
                     ) among others (Table 2). However, Trametinib did not show satisfactory results in clinical trials, as mentioned above. Therefore, we set out to design novel MEK allosteric site inhibitors using computational methods. Based on the results of the 3D-QSAR analysis in this research, new inhibitors were designed to complementary fit the inner unoccupied space of MEK enzyme. Two potential pockets were considered within the inner empty space of this enzyme by accurate analysis of the active and binding sites. Therefore, we have designed a set of novel MEK1/2 inhibitors with improved binding energy, Human Intestinal Absorption (HIA), blood brain barrier (BBB) penetration, solubility (log
                     S), acute oral toxicity (AOT), Ames toxicity, rat acute toxicity (LD50), and Ki
                      in comparison with Trametinib. Consequently, we provided a set of 15 compounds which can be used as potent, novel, selective and ATP-noncompetitive MEK1/2 allosteric site inhibitors.

In order to fully understand the binding and inhibitory mechanism of the MEK1/2 inhibitors, several structural and functional properties of the MEK active site have been investigated by molecular graphic software such as Swiss PDB Viewer (spdbv) 4.1 (Johansson et al., 2012) and Pymol 1.7 (Seeliger and Groot, 2010). To achieve the 3D-QSAR parameters of the MEK enzyme that is essentially important for novel inhibitor design, 43 MEK1/2 inhibitors which were previously reported and clinically tested, have been used in the current study. This helps us to obtain reliable pharmacophore models that could properly navigate our designing strategies and validate further results. Accordingly, we used the best inhibitor obtained in this screening as the lead structure to design a set of new MEK1/2 inhibitors.

The PDB file of MEK1 enzyme (3PP1) was obtained from Protein Data Bank (www.rcsb.org) and the structures of 43 inhibitors were obtained from drug data bank (www.drugbank.ca) and literatures (the SMILE formats of all 43 studied inhibitors are listed in Appendix A). HyperChem Pro 8.0.6 was used in this study to design a dataset of chemical compounds which were subsequently converted into optimized structures using model build option, followed by energy minimization through Geometry Optimization command (Froimowitz, 1993).

Docking input files have been prepared by AutoDockTools (ADT) 1.5.6 (Morris et al., 1996). Polar hydrogens were added to the enzyme, and also Kollman charges were applied to prepare the macromolecule needed for docking purposes. The 43 compounds are listed in Tables 1 and 2
                        
                         according to their original names provided in literatures, and also the new inhibitors designed in this study are listed in Table 3
                         and specified under the term of Struc. The partial charge for every compound was added according to Gasteiger calculation by ADT (please refer Supplementary 1 for partial charge calculation of Struc 1-15).

Molecular docking was done by ADT 4.2 which uses a flexible docking technique based on Monte Carlo simulated annealing search to figure the best ligand pose (optimal conformation) out in a receptor. Both downloaded and designed inhibitors were docked setting up a docking box of 20×25×27Å (grid-point spacing of 1Å), and the Lamarckian Genetic Algorithm was used as the search engine. Additionally, AutoDock Vina which is more accurate than AutoDock 4.2 (Trottand and Olson, 2010; Mirzaie et al., 2013) was used to docking all of the input ligands (with the same grid boxes of ADT 4.2) in order to validate our results. Binding energy, electrostatic energy, the number of possible conformation(s) of the ligand–receptor complex and also predicted polar bonds were obtained from ADT 4.2 and Vina. Also Pymol 1.7 was used to visualize the results of Vina. Inhibition constant (Ki
                        ) was measure using the following formula (Morris et al., 2009):
                           
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       K
                                       i
                                    
                                    =
                                    
                                       e
                                       
                                          [
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   Δ
                                                   G
                                                   ×
                                                   1000
                                                
                                                
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         R
                                                      
                                                      cal
                                                   
                                                   ×
                                                   T
                                                   K
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                          ]
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        where ΔG is binding energy of the ligand and receptor, R
                        cal which stands for regression calibration equals 1.987 and TK (Temperature Kelvin) is 298.15.

Solubility (log
                        S) was calculated via ChemDB Portal software (Chen et al., 2007) for both training dataset and our designed inhibitors. Furthermore, the admetSAR, which is a structure-activity based server and calculates the Absorption, Distribution, Metabolism, Excretion and Toxicity (ADMET) properties of drug candidates (Tetko et al., 2005; Cheng et al., 2012; Xu et al., 2012), was employed to measure the blood–brain barrier (BBB) penetration, human intestinal absorption (HIA) (Shen et al., 2010) and toxicity values including acute oral toxicity, Ames toxicity (Hansen et al., 2009) and rat acute toxicity (LD50) (Zhu et al., 2009).

Analysis of the inhibitor interactions has been done by Pymol and SPDBV. The MEK-Inhibitor interaction maps were generated and deeply analyzed by LigPlot+ 1.4.5;1; (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/thornton-srv/software/LIGPLOT/). MEK-inhibitor binding maps were elucidated based on binding site residues. Structural alignments of bonded and non-bonded interactions were shown to compare interaction network by superposition of drugs (Wallace et al., 2010; Laskowski and Swindells, 2011).

@&#RESULTS@&#

In order to having an authentic training dataset, a number of MEK1/2 inhibitors which were previously designed and evaluated clinically were selected to be screened computationally. Thus, a reliable pharmaophore model was obtained for the first time in this study which is indeed a valuable trend model for such investigations on MEK1/2 inhibitors. According to our results shown in Table 2, binding energy values calculated by ADT 4.2 were ranged between −5.8 and −9.31 and also Vina computed binding energies from −6.5 to −11.5. Correspondingly, ADT 4.2 and Vina conformed Com.6 (Isshiki et al., 2011) to be the weakest inhibitor provided so far, while Trametinib was found to be the most potent MEK1/2 inhibitor considering obtained binding energies from both ADT 4.2 and Vina. Since Ki
                         value directly depends on binding energy value based on the formula provided in the materials and methods section, the minimum and maximum Ki
                         values which were ranged from 18,347 to 4nmol were recorded also for Com.6 (Isshiki et al., 2011) (highest binding energy) and Trametinib (lowest binding energy), respectively. Moreover, CI-1040 had the lowest log
                        S (−5.44) that is in accordance with previous reports on its low solubility (Lorusso et al., 2005a,b) and also the best log
                        S (−2.58) belongs to Com.7a (Wallace et al., 2010) designed in 2010. As one of the most important pharmacodynamic properties of drugs, the toxicity of all selected inhibitors was examined using three different values LD50, acute oral toxicity and Ames toxicity. AS703026 and Com.16 (Dong et al., 2011) showed the lowest LD50 values while GDC0973 illustrated the highest. Regarding acute oral toxicity, Com.10 (Dong et al., 2011) and Com.7a (Wallace et al., 2010) were shown to have the highest and lowest toxicity properties, respectively. Also, the maximum and minimum Ames toxicities were recorded for Com.18 (Wallace et al., 2010) and Com.26 (Isshiki et al., 2011), respectively.

Based on the above pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic concepts which were obtained from dock screening, Trametinib was considered as the best MEK1/2 inhibitor since it showed the best potency and Ki
                         values. Besides, Trametinib was shown to satisfactorily penetrate through BBB (0.821) and have decent intestinal absorption (0.973). Therefore, we used Trametinib as a lead structure to devise a set of potent, novel, selective and ATP-noncompetitive MEK1/2 allosteric site inhibitors that would satisfy certain functional and structural needs.

Various molecular graphic software such as ADT, PyMol 1.7 and Swiss PDB Viewer (spdbv) 4.1 were used to visualize and evaluate active and binding sites of MEK. LigPlot was used to depict 2D-maps of the network interactions. Several functional features of MEK enzyme, which should be considered prior to inhibitor design, were assessed. For instance, the main catalytic site possessing Asp 190, as the active site and located in a highly conserved kinase domain (in N-terminal domain), was profoundly analyzed. Moreover, ATP binding site was determined to be placed adjacent to the allosteric inhibitory fragment. More importantly, this allosteric inhibitory fragment which is extended from active site to the ATP-binding site, was determined to be a unique and tunnel-like inner space in MEK enzyme (please refer to Appendix B). Thus, the ATP-binding site can be effectively used to design ATP-noncompetitive inhibitors. Additionally, based on our 3D-QSAR analysis, there are two potential pockets that would seem to be highly contributing to inhibitory mechanisms. One of them previously reported (Wallace et al., 2010; Dong et al., 2011) is a lipophilic pocket formed by Leu 118, Val 127, Phe 129, Ile141, Met 143, and Phe 209. We found this lipophilic pocket to be highly matched to an aromatic ring (Fig. 1
                         and Fig. 4). The second pocket, to best of our knowledge, was used for the first time in this investigation formed by Phe 223, Val 224, Thr 226, Arg 227, Ser 228, Tyr 229 and Met 230, and is also highly complementary fit to an aromatic ring (Figs. 1 and 2
                        ).

The great potential of Trametinib to be considered as a lead structure for further inhibitor design was also confirmed by structure-based drug design strategies. The terminal methyl side chain of Trametinib is, somehow, extended into the second pocket (Fig. 2A). Furthermore, there is a terminal iodine side chain in Trametinib that protrudes into the lipophilic pocket (Fig. 4A). However, these side chains do not fittingly cover the mentioned pockets and this fact was considered as port of our strategies to design new inhibitors with reorganized terminal side chains.

Comparative 2D-map interaction networks were produced to clearly show the possible interactions between MEK and selected inhibitor (Trametinib and Struc. 15). Position of each side chain in the relevant pocket and those amino acids included in non-bonded (physical) interactions are illustrating (Fig. 5).

Dock screening revealed that there are some important amino acids involved in most of the polar bonds of the receptor-ligand complexes, and should be considered as the functional amino acids prior to inhibitor design. Of these contributing amino acids, Lys 97 was involved in 40.6% of all polar bonds and referred to as the most active amino acid in the screened receptor-ligand complexes. Also, Val 211, Phe 209 and Ser 212 were seen to be involved in 9.82, 9.37 and 8.48% of all polar bonds, respectively. Interestingly in some cases (5.35%), polar bonds were determined between inhibitor and ATP (please refer to Appendix C for more detail on contributing amino acids and polar bonds). Based on our results, more polar bonds did not ensure more stable receptor-ligand complexes (Table 2), thus there is no correlation between the potency of inhibitors and the number of polar bonds.

Using 3D-QSAR features, three alternative side chains were considered in the core structure of Trametinib, and subsequently numerous allosteric ligands were designed and docked into MEK enzyme in order to find the best inhibitors. Of more than one hundred designed molecules, fifteen best inhibitors were chosen to be present in this paper. Detailed information on newly identified MEK1/2 inhibitors is available in Table 3.

As a strategy, we attempted to cover the first (lipophilic) pocket by substituting the side-chain R3 with iodine atom as well as with different carbon groups such as cyclopropane. Cyclopropane showed the best SAR in comparison with iodine atom and other carbon groups used in this study (Fig. 4B). Simultaneously, the side-chain R1 was triggered to properly cover the second pocket to achieve the most potent inhibitors as well as to achieve the best SAR characteristics. In the case of R1, a number of different carbon groups were used and evaluated, and finally 2, 3-difluorophenol was determined as the best match for this novel pocket (Fig. 2B). Although the side-chain R2 does not protrude in any pocket (Fig. 3
                        
                         
                        ), its role was shown to be significantly important as is discussed later in this article.

The solubility of the designed molecules did not show significant differences and ranged between −4.26 and −4.89 for Struc.10 and Struc.6, respectively. Moreover, Blood Brain Barrier penetration and Human Intestinal Absorption were ranged from 0.511 (Struc.1) to 0.907 (Struc.4) and from 0.973 (Struc.3) to 0.990 (Struc.9), respectively. We further assessed more pharmacodynamic properties such as three different toxicity values (LD50, AOT and Ames toxicity) to see if these new molecules can be used as MEK1/2 inhibitors in vivo. LD50 was rationally ranged between 2.257 and 2.391, Furthermore, the maximum and minimum AOT values were recorded as 0.684 (Struc.7 and Struc.8) and 0.615 (Struc.2), respectively. Regarding Ames toxicity, the ratio was between 0.648 (Struc.3) and 0.510 (Struc.1).

@&#DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION@&#

It is generally accepted that the results of computational studies are not directly comparable to those of experimental procedures (Talbot et al., 2008; Wong, 2008), therefore trends of computational studies are essentially needed in order to compare the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties of new inhibitors with previous ones. In this study for the first time, a trend model on MEK1/2 inhibitors has been provided which not only can be used to evaluate previous inhibitors and compare them together but can be effectively triggered to design novel inhibitors. Such kind of trend models can also be used as a pharmacophore model as well as a training dataset of chemical inhibitors to determine that which particular structure is more suitable and which one is not. To address this issue, a number of different structures were compared together and listed in Table 3. Considering Struc.1 and 5, it can be seen that when 2, 3-difluorophenol is assigned for R1, the binding energy changes from −11.8 to −13.6 and also the number of possible conformations (PC) decreases from 8 to 1, respectively, due to being complementary placed in the relevant pocket resulting in physical interactions with active amino acids of the pocket (Fig. 6
                     ).

In order to design the best representative structure of the side-chain R2, Struc.7 and 8 were designed having the same R1 and R3. It was revealed that 2-fluorophenol is the best choice since the binding energy surprisingly decreases from -9.3 to -14.8 and the numbers of possible conformations fall from 9 to 2, respectively. To prove this fact, Struc.11, 12, 13 and 15, which all have the same R1 and R3, were also analyzed and once again, 2-fluorophenol was determined as the best choice considering both binding energy and the number of possible conformations. We speculate that the reason for competency of 2-fluorophenol in the position of the side-chain R2 lies on the physical (non-bonded) interactions. A number of non-bonded interactions were detected between 2-fluorophenol (R2) and, Gly 80 and Lys 97 (Fig. 7
                     , A). The Cation–p interaction is known as a major force in molecular recognition, DNA and protein structures, protein–protein and drug–receptor interactions in aqueous media (Dougherty, 2013). Cation–π is a strong interaction enhancing binding energies by 2-5kcal/mol and, in some circumstances, is comparable to hydrogen bonds (Jennifer and Dougherty, 1997; Dougherty, 2013). In several studies Arg, Lys, Phe, Trp and Tyr have been demonstrated to be involved in Cation–π interactions and play important roles in a range of biological processes. In this study, two cation–π interactions were detected between the aromatic ring of R2 and nitrogen atom of Lys 97 (Fig. 7, A). Since the cation–π interaction is not establishable in cyclopropane, it was not detected in the Struc.1, 2, 5 and Trametinib. To have a visual concept on the great effect of the cation-π, Struc.5 (R2: cyclopropane) and Struc.6 (R2: benzene ring) were designed having the same R1 and R3. Expectedly, the binding energy decreased from −11.8 for Struc.5 to −14.0 for Struc.6 caused, at least partially, by cation−π (Fig. 7, B and C). This important interaction was not identified in Trametinib. Therefore, high binding efficiency and specificity resulted by benzene ring and 2-fluorophenol (whenever R1 and R3 are fixed in our designed structures) are due to the mentioned non-bonded interactions.

In the case of side-chain R3, Struc.8, 9, 10 and 15 were designed (containing fixed R1 and R2) and assessed, and cyclopropane was identified as the best representative of R3 (Fig. 8
                     ) as the binding energy decreased to -16.1 for Struc.15 (Table 3). Interestingly, when R1 and R2 were fixed in these four structures, the number of possible conformations reached the same value (2), this fact proves that these side chains have been properly designed to fit the inner space of the MEK and ensures more specific interactions.

It is consensus that less number of possible conformations, as far as a sufficient flexibility exists, would satisfy more specific receptor–ligand complexes (Fung et al., 2005; Fung and Hruby, 2005; Lang et al., 2006). According to our results, more potent inhibitors with less number of possible conformations were obtained whenever two mentioned pockets of the MEK were properly covered by related side chains. This hypothesis was also assessed by considering different conformations of the inhibitors. Based on the Fig. 9
                     , more deviation of the inhibitors from the second pocket resulted in worse binding energy and therefore less specificity. For all of the inhibitors, both previously provided and newly designed structures, the best results were obtained for those conformations which had the least deviations from these 2 pockets (Fig. 9). Correspondingly, Struc.7 was found to have the most deviation from the pockets, so it non-specifically binds to MEK and therefore, has the lowest binding energy (−9.3 based on Vina).

Moreover, it is greatly important to provide ATP-noncompetitive inhibitors to ensure receptor-ligand complexes in vivo, since ATP is naturally, highly specified to ATP-binding site. Correspondingly, we provided some allosteric ATP-noncompetitive inhibitors in this study. Additionally, identified active amino acids were considered in this study, therefore, Ser 212, Val 211, Arg 234 and Lys 97 contributed in 18.75, 17.5, 16.25 and 15% of all polar bonds, respectively, and were considered as the most active amino acids in our ligand-receptor complexes. Comparative interaction networks of Strcu.14 and 15 with MEK also verified common amino acids which are contributing to the binding (please refer to Appendix C for more information on polar bonds and also Appendix D for interaction network).

Regarding ADMET properties, it has been suggested previously that insufficient solubility properties may be the cause of many side effects, and this fact was considered as one of the weaknesses of CI-1040 (13). So in this investigation we provided some inhibitors with improved log
                     S in comparison with Trametinib (Table 4
                     ). In addition, a satisfactory Blood Brain Barrier penetration may provide that possibility for drug to be considered as an alternative medication for brain tumors. More importantly, the Human Intestinal Absorption is fundamentally important since these drugs are orally administered and a sufficient HIA property can guaranty the availability of the drug into the bloodstream circulation of the patients, and also lower doses of the drug are needed. Lower doses of a drug, in turn, decrease the probable side effects in patients, and basically, higher HIA along with higher potency provide cost effective drugs. Therefore, we provided a set of orally available MEK1/2 inhibitors that improve the blood–brain barrier penetration as well as HIA properties of Trametinib. As another interesting property of inhibitors provided in this study, the toxicity values (LD50, AOT and Ames values) are reliable enough and in some cases even better than Trametinib (Table 4). AOT value is also crucially important because all of the drugs in this class are orally administered. Thus, Struc.14 and 15 with Ki
                      values of 0.0015 and 0.0018 nmol, respectively, and also each with 2 possible conformations are the great substituents for Trametinib with Ki
                      value of 4nmol and 9 possible conformations.

According to the above, the role of 3D-QSAR evaluations was shown to be essentially important for designing novel allosteric ligands in this study. Taking these concepts together, Trametinib, the best available oral MEK1/2 inhibitor, was significantly improved and subsequently a set of oral MEK1/2 inhibitors with great potency and reliable pharmacokinetic and pharmakodynamic properties (specifically Struc.14 and 15) were successfully presented in this study to be used in clinical trials as alternative cancer medications.

All of the compounds designed in this study belong to the authors and must not be used for commercial purposes, unless they have a direct permission from the authors.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENT@&#

We acknowledge Vice Chancellor for Research and Technology of the University of Isfahan for their financial support.

See Table A1
                     
                  

See Fig. B1
                     
                  

See Tables C1, C2
                     
                     
                  


                     Fig. D1
                     
                  

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2015.09.013.

The following are Supplementary data to this article:
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

