@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Determinism and randomness in the evolution of introns and sine inserts in mouse and human mitochondrial solute carrier and cytokine receptor genes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Comparing the introns in mouse and human orthologous genes.


                        
                        
                           
                           Differences and similarities in the distribution of Alu (human) and B1 SINEs (mouse).


                        
                        
                           
                           Stochastic and deterministic components in intronic evolution in mammals.


                        
                        
                           
                           Intron conservation is negatively correlated with the SINE occupancy.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Human

Mouse

Introns

SINEs

Mitochondrial solute carrier genes

Cytokine receptor genes

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  In the homologous genes studied, the exons and introns alternated in the same order in mouse and human. We studied, in both species: corresponding short segments of introns, whole corresponding introns and complete homologous genes. We considered the total number of nucleotides and the number and orientation of the SINE inserts. Comparisons of mouse and human data series showed that at the level of individual relatively short segments of intronic sequences the stochastic variability prevails in the local structuring, but at higher levels of organization a deterministic component emerges, conserved in mouse and human during the divergent evolution, despite the ample re-editing of the intronic sequences and the fact that processes such as SINE spread had taken place in an independent way in the two species. Intron conservation is negatively correlated with the SINE occupancy, suggesting that virus inserts interfere with the conservation of the sequences inherited from the common ancestor.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

This paper deals with some aspects of the structure of the introns of mouse and human mitochondrial solute carrier and cytokine receptor genes. The focus is a comparative study of the length and structure of introns and especially the integration of SINE sequences. Other aspects, such as the intronic splicing signals, will not be considered herein.

The origin of viruses, whether independent or dependent on the onset of cellular life, has been the subject of different speculative hypotheses and according to a recent model a primordial pool of primitive genetic elements may have been the common ancestor of both cellular and viral genes (Koonin et al., 2006). However, considering the replication cycles, the present-day cells and viruses may be assigned to two different “empires”, as cells uniformly rely on cell division after the replication of their dsDNA while viruses (and related selfish agents) make use of several different genetic mechanisms and can only replicate inside a host living cell, relying on the biological machineries of the latter. As a consequence, viruses and their host cellular organisms were bound to co-evolve in a continued “arms race” between cells evolving immunological mechanisms to oppose the viral invasion and the viruses evolving responses that could subvert the cellular defenses (Koonin and Wolf, 2012). For example, the genes of some present-day dsDNA viruses, such as Herpes-, Pox-, and Irido-viruses, harbor coding cytokine-like and cytokine receptor-like sequences which, according to the current view, have been hijacked from mammalian hosts and contribute to increase the viruses potential to escape the host’s immune surveillance (Haig, 2001; Alcami, 2003; Liston and McColl, 2003; Holst and Rosenkilde, 2003; Panaro et al., 2006, 2010; Sharp et al., 2007; Beisser et al., 2008; Ouyang et al., 2013).

Unlike dsDNA viruses, the genome of retroviruses is comprised of single-stranded RNA; following the penetration of a retrovirus in a host cell, its RNA is reverse-transcribed into DNA which is often integrated (through integrase) as dsDNA into introns of the nuclear genes of the cell. When germline cells are affected, the viral inserts are thereafter transmitted to the offspring in a Mendelian manner; furthermore, at least some segments of the virus-derived DNA behave as transposable elements (jumping genes) and become inserted in further germline cell genes, forming a pool of stable “endogenous retroviruses (ERVs)”, remnants of ancient infections by exogenous retroviruses. The retroviral origin of such sequences is established on the basis of the structural similarities with the present-day exogenous retroviruses (Khodosevich et al., 2002; Nelson et al., 2003; Subramanian et al., 2011). However, the viral inserts in the host genome are often incomplete and over the long ages since integration, a period possibly varying from 100 to 25 MYA (million years ago), have been riddled with mutations disrupting the basic constitutive elements of the retroviral genome, namely the two long terminal repeats (LTRs) and the gag, pol, and env genes (Medstrand et al., 1997; Khodosevich et al., 2002; Nelson et al., 2003). Thus, most ERVs are thought to be biologically inactive (junk DNA, decayed relics, fossil viruses) (Khodosevich et al., 2002; Nelson et al., 2003). However, it has been hypothesized that some ERVs could perform useful regulatory functions in the transcription of the neighboring host genes, through enhancers, promoters, hormone responsive elements, and polyadenylation signals; indeed, some ERVs still contain fully coding env genes and these are transcribed in several healthy tissues, including the placenta (Khodosevich et al., 2002; Koonin and Wolf, 2012). Other observations confirm the potential biological activity of the ERVs, as their insertion at specific sites may disturb the expression of other genes located even 100Kbp apart. For example, the insertion of the Avian Leukosis virus at a specific intronic situation determines the recessive white mutation in chickens (Chang et al., 2006, 2007). Intronic integration of Murine leukemia virus or human immunodeficiency virus type-1 has also been reported to bring about dysregulation in the expression of the genes involved or of other neighboring genes (Mack et al., 2003; Tsukahara et al., 2006; Panaro et al., 2009). The therapeutic insertion of coding genes carried by retroviral vectors (gene therapy) may result in some cases in a severe dysregulation of other genes neighboring the insertion site (Hacein-Bey-Abina et al., 2003; Themis et al., 2003; Takakuwa et al., 2004; Kustikova et al., 2005; Nienhuis, 2006). Furthermore, due to their residual pathogenicity, or their potential to dysregulate the expression of neighboring genes, some human ERVs of the K superfamily have been implicated in certain cancers and autoimmune diseases and even schizophrenia (Andersson et al., 1998; Subramanian et al., 2011). Finally, it has been suspected that ERV might re-activate from time to time, thus explaining the long periods of clinical latency of certain viral infections (Ikeda et al., 2007). In short, whatever the biological activity of present-day ERVs, it is likely that during evolution a strong pressure was exerted by viruses on positively selecting cells with the most efficient immune systems and by cells on positively selecting those viruses which had evolved more efficient strategies to escape the immune surveillance (Van Blerkom, 2003; Fosterer and Prangishvili, 2009; Stern and Sorek, 2011; Koonin and Wolf, 2012; Ouyang et al., 2013).

Most introns and UTRs of human and mouse genes harbor SINE (Short INterspersed Element) sequences, preeminently the human (and primate) SINE Alu and the murine (and rodents) B1, both originally derived from the 7SL RNA and transcribed by RNA polymerase III (Deininger and Batzer, 2002; Jurka et al., 2007; Kriegs et al., 2007). The human SINE Alu (more than 106 copies, i.e., about 10% of the genome) (Abdurashitov et al., 2008) is ∼300bp long and is fundamentally composed of two tandemly repeated 7SL-derived units joined by a short intermediate segment and followed by another terminal short sequence with a poly-A tail; the mouse SINE B1 (∼145bp long; about 7% of the genome) is composed of only one 7SL-derived unit followed by a terminal sequence similar to the SINE Alu terminal sequence (http//sines.eimb.ru/) (Tsirigos and Rigoutsos, 2009; Vassetzky and Kramerov, 2013). The general structure of mouse and human SINEs, including the positions of the CG dinucleotides, is shown in a diagram by Ichiyanagi (Ichiyanagi, 2013; Fig. 2).

SINEs are unable to retropose autonomously (non-autonomous transposons) and are thought to borrow the enzymatic machinery required for their amplification (reverse transcriptase and endonuclease) from their “partner” autonomous retroposon LINE (Long INterspersed Element) L1 (Salem et al., 2005; Kramerov and Vassetzky, 2005; Ichiyanagi, 2013). Due to certain structural characteristics L1 has also been suggested to share a common origin with retroviruses (Krebs et al., 2014) and indeed, SINE Alu sequences often flank human endogenous retroviruses (HERVs) of different classes, e.g., H HERV-H/env60 (AJ289710), XA34 (U29659), XA38 (U37066), and HERV-K (Y17832).

Despite their simple structure SINEs are now thought to be, at least potentially, active in modulating, through their content of transcription factor binding sites, the expression of genes involved in some cellular functions, such as DNA repair, RNA splicing, and chromatin remodeling (Tsirigos and Rigoutsos, 2009; Polak and Domany, 2006; Häsler and Strub, 2006; Deininger, 2011; Ichiyanagi, 2013).

Although similar in origin, SINE Alu and SINE B1 are believed to have been introduced independently in the ancestors of human and mouse after the divergence of primates and rodents, i.e., 100–65 MYA according to different estimates (Nei et al., 2001). Despite this, some general analyses have suggested that both viral inserts occur more frequently at corresponding groups of genes in mouse and human (Waterston et al., 2002; Polak and Domany, 2006; Tsirigos and Rigoutsos, 2009).

In this paper, by studying in more detail the mouse/human correlations at different levels of structural organization, from segments of introns to whole introns and complete genes, we will endeavor to discriminate between the stochastic and the conserved deterministic components during the process of mouse and human speciation.

@&#METHODS@&#

In all, we used 72 mouse and human genomic sequences of mitochondrial solute carrier and cytokine receptor genes (Table 1
                     ). Mitochondrial solute carriers are nuclear-coded, membrane-embedded proteins that transport a variety of metabolites, nucleotides and coenzymes into and out of mitochondria, and are, therefore, essential for many metabolic pathways localized in the mitochondrial matrix and other cell compartments (Palmieri and Pierri, 2010; Palmieri, 2013). So far, 53 different SLC25 genes and proteins have been identified, characterized and classified as SLC25A1 to SLC25A53 (Palmieri, 2014). Membrane receptors for cytokines are of paramount importance for the immune responses; these receptors may be classified in 6 different groups as detailed in Table 1 (Coico and Sunshine, 2008). In this study we analyzed receptors representing all these groups.

Genomic and coding sequences were derived from NCBI GenBank (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov). Individual exons and introns were then singled out in the two species. All the genes considered are orthologous in mouse and human, but some exhibit several transcript variants. Among the different variants, we selected those in which the orderly correspondence of the exons and introns in mouse and human had been preserved.

To study the intronic mouse/human conservation, the corresponding introns were aligned with the NCBI BLAST tool (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov./Blast/cgi), settings: “nucleotide blast”, “align two or more sequences” and “somewhat similar sequences (blastn)” (Altschul et al., 1990). The acceptance conditions for mouse/human conservation were as follows: the maximum expect value allowed was 9e–10; low complexity regions were filtered out; only plus/plus alignments were considered; the aligning segments had to be ranged in the same order in the introns of the two species.

The presence of significant SINE inserts in human and mouse was searched for with the CENSOR software (Jurka et al., 2005; Kohany et al., 2006) (http://www.girinst.org/censor/). A multialignment of the different human SINE Alu sequences (not shown) demonstrated that some small nucleotide sequences (7–9nt) are present only in some of the SINE sequences and are possibly later insertions. We, thus, derived a more “generalized” 304-nt SINE Alu constructed with the relatively constant nucleotides only. Here we call this sequence the “standard SINE Alu” (Table 2
                     , top). In the bottom part of Table 2 the two sections (underlined) of the SINE Alu which are very similar to each other are highlighted (expect=6e–12), both being derived from the 7SL sequence (X01037; expect=3e–14). The complete standard SINE Alu sequence was used in all alignments with the human introns. Only alignments with expect values lower than 9e–10 were considered. The mouse SINE B1 sequence was derived from Veniaminova et al. (2007) (Table 2, top). This sequence is less variable than the human SINEs Alu. The B1 segment in capital underlined type is derived from the 7SL sequence and is, thus, similar to the first (capital underlined) segment of the human SINE Alu (87% identities; expect=9e–19). The SINE Alu and SINE B1 segments in lower case underlined type are also similar to each other. In the intermediate sections it is remarkable that the SINE Alu 9-nt sequence CTGAGGTCA (boxed in Table 2, top) is usually (but not always) lacking in B1 (boxed asterisks).

A more exact characterization of the SINE Alu family members (into subfamilies J, S, or Y) and the type of B1 was made with CENSOR software (Jurka et al., 2005; Kohany et al., 2006) (http://www.girinst.org/censor/). Other, less represented, mouse and human repeated inserts were not considered in this study.

Predictions of pre-mRNA folding into secondary structures were accomplished with the CentroidFold software (Hamada et al., 2009) (http://www.ncrna.org/centroidfold).

We studied some correlations between mouse and human in homologous intronic sequences (the whole gene and the individual introns), and in specific “corresponding” segments which occupy the same position in the introns of the two species. These specific segments were individualized as segments which are not conserved (or contain short conserved segments only) but are bounded upstream and downstream by mouse/human segments which align with an expect lower than 9e–40 (see: Section 3.1). In some introns up to eight “corresponding” segments could be individuated.

The main statistical tools used were the correlation coefficient (r) and the related (often more informative) coefficients of determination (r
                     2) and nondetermination (usually indicated as k
                     2
                     =1−
                     r
                     2), and the binomial distribution (Ewens and Grant, 2005).

@&#RESULTS@&#

The percentages of mouse/human conservation in the introns of the homologous genes of the two species are shown in Table 1, column 4, and Fig. 1
                        A. The percentages were calculated over the total number of nucleotides in the human introns, excluding in both species the SINE inserts. The mouse/human conservation rates, which reflect the conservation in the two species of the intronic sequences of the common ancestor, are very variable, ranging from 0% (in 4 genes) to 65%, but in about 50% of genes the conservation ranges from 0% to 8% only. A general average is about 15%.

Correlation between the intronic sequences of whole homologous mouse/human genes (SINE sequences excluded): r
                        =0.995; r
                        2
                        =0.99; k
                        2
                        =0.01.

Correlation between the individual homologous mouse/human introns (SINE sequences excluded): r
                        =0.98; r
                        2
                        =0.96; k
                        2
                        =0.04 (Fig. 1B).

Correlation between corresponding sections of mouse/human introns (see: Section 2; SINE sequences excluded): r
                        =0.89; r
                        2
                        =0.79; k
                        2
                        =0.21.

The percentages of SINE B1 nucleotides over the total number of nucleotides in the mouse introns ranged from 0% (in 14/72 genes; 19%) to 17% (Table 1, column 2), with a general average of 3.34%.

The frequency distribution of genes according to their per cent content of SINEs B1 is shown in Fig. 2
                        A. This distribution exhibits an exponential decay. The theoretical frequencies of genes according to their SINE content (Fig. 2B; tracing with filled circles) has been calculated according to the best-fitting formula Y
                        =0.79
                           X
                        
                        ×21 (Y
                        =percent of occurrence; X
                        =percent frequency of SINEs B1; 21 is the scaling factor to normalize the total of frequencies to 100).

The length of the viral inserts is also variable and the average length is about 120nt, i.e., about 80% of the length of B1. Although many viral inserts do not cover the total length of the B1 sequence, virtually all the sections of the latter are equally represented in the actual inserts.

The percentages of SINE Alu nucleotides over the total number of nucleotides in the human introns are very variable in the different genes, ranging from 0% (in 8/72 genes; 11%) to over 50% (Table 1, column 3), with a general average of about 16%.

The frequency distribution of genes according to their per cent content of SINEs Alu is shown in Fig. 3
                        A. This distribution exhibits an exponential decay. The theoretical frequencies of genes according to their SINE content (Fig. 2B; tracing with open circles) has been calculated according to the best-fitting formula Y
                        =0.92X
                        ×8.00 (Y
                        =percent of occurrence; X
                        =per cent frequency of SINEs Alu; 8.00 is the scaling factor to normalize the total of frequencies to 100).

Although the actual viral inserts in human cover an average of 250 nucleotides only, i.e., about 8% of the Standard SINE Alu sequence, all the sections of the latter appear to be equally represented.

The definite integrals (from 0 to 50) of the functions Y
                        =0.79
                           X
                         (mouse) and Y
                        =0.92
                           X
                         (human) are 4.24 and 11.81, respectively. Thus, the total probability of a SINE insert is about 2.8 times (11.81/4.24) higher in human than in mouse. Considering the different lengths of the actual SINE Alu and SINE B1 inserts (250 and 120nt), the theoretical viral occupancy is about 5.8 times higher in human than in mouse.

In a small random sample (n
                        =100) the subfamily of the SINE Alu elements was determined. Seven of these belonged to the J subfamily, 55 to the S subfamily, 35 to the Y subfamily, while 3 fell in less characterized groups.

The two parameters (columns 2 and 4 of Table 1) are negatively correlated (r
                        =−0.16; p
                        <0.01) (Fig. 3B). In genes with no viral insert the mouse/human intronic conservation averages 21.7% (while the general average is 15%) and in the genes with a very low conservation (<1%) the viral inserts cover an average 3.6% of the sequence (general average 15%).

The two parameters (columns 3 and 4 of Table 1) are negatively correlated (r
                        =−0.28; p
                        <0.01) (Fig. 4
                        A). In genes with no viral insert the mouse/human intronic conservation averages 30% (general average 15%) and in the genes with a very low conservation (<1%) the viral inserts cover an average 22% of the sequence (general average 15%).

Correlation between the intronic sequences of whole homologous mouse/human genes: r
                        =0.86; r
                        2
                        =0.74; k
                        2
                        =0.26 (Fig. 4B).

Correlation between the individual homologous mouse/human introns: r
                        =0.75; r
                        2
                        =0.56; k
                        2
                        =0.44.

Correlation between corresponding sections of mouse/human introns (see: Section 2): r
                        =0.38; r
                        2
                        =0.14; k
                        2
                        =0.86.

The average number of SINEs per gene is 6.7 in mouse and 17.4 in human. Thus, human has a number of SINEs that is about 2.6 times richer (Fig. 4B) since the average length of the expressed SINEs is 250nt and 120nt in human and mouse, respectively (Sections 3 and 4), the SINE content of human genes is about 5.5 higher than that of mouse genes.

The orientation of SINES in both mouse and human is biased in favor of the minus orientation. On the whole, in mouse 57.7% of SINEs B1 and in human 55.2% of SINEs Alu are present in the minus orientation, in both instances with a very significant deviation from a 1:1 distribution (binomial distribution; p
                        <0.01). However, the difference of the per cent incidences in mouse and human is not statistically significant.

In individual genes, as well as in individual introns, although the ratio between the plus and minus configurations is widely variable, a mouse/human positive correlation is present: on average r
                        =0.35; r
                        2
                        =0.12; k
                        2
                        =0.88.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Herein we have conducted a comparative analysis of the lengths of introns and the frequency, location and orientation of the intronic SINE inserts in homologous genes of mouse and human. Two groups of genes (mitochondrial solute carriers and cytokine receptors) were considered together since there seemed to be no remarkable differences between the two groups in the SINE distribution.

In all the genes examined an orderly arrangement of the exons (which are highly conserved) and the introns was conserved in the two species. The mouse and human introns, although different in length and composition, often exhibited relatively long segments of homology, so that several introns could be divided into topographically corresponding sections in the two species. This allowed mouse/human pairwise comparisons not only of entire genes and individual introns, but also, in more detail, of corresponding segments of introns.

In pairwise comparisons the correlation coefficient r is the primary tool for evaluating the similarity of the mouse and human distributions. However, the coefficients r
                     2 and k
                     2 are often more informative. r
                     2 (the coefficient of determination) denotes the proportion of the total variance of a series of data (e.g., the length of mouse introns), which depends on the variance of the cognate series of data (e.g., the length of human introns). k
                     2 (the coefficient of nondetermination) is the complement to 1 of r
                     2 (i.e., 1−
                     r
                     2) and denotes the residual proportion of the total variance of a series of data which does not depend on the variance of the cognate series of data. Thus, r
                     2 is an estimate of the deterministic component and k
                     2 an estimate of the stochastic component which, together, operate in determining the actual values in a given series of data, such as the number of nucleotides of introns.

The number of nucleotides in the mouse and human introns depends to a large extent on deterministic factors (Section 3.2 and Fig. 1B). About 15% of the total intronic sequences has been conserved in mouse and human (Section 3.1); in the remaining 85%, insertions, deletions and nucleotide mutations have “speciated” the mouse and human introns with respect to their common ancestor. Nevertheless, in the non-conserved sections the coefficient of determination of the segment length r
                     2 is as high as 0.79. Furthermore, the deviations from an ideal equal length in mouse and human tend to be compensated in other segments of the same intron, so that, with reference to whole introns, r
                     2 is 0.96. When viral sequences are deleted the number of nucleotides in each intron tends to be equal in mouse and human and the corresponding dot plot aligns almost exactly along a 45° diagonal (Fig. 1B). Further compensation is accomplished at the whole gene level, where r
                     2 is 0.99.

In human the SINE most commonly represented by far is a 300-bp SINE Alu which is absent in some gene introns but may account for as much as 50% of the intronic sequence of other genes. The average incidence of SINEs Alu in human introns is 16% (Section 3.3). Human SINEs Alu may be classified in different subfamilies with slight structural differences: the J subfamily of the older inserts (100–80 MYA); the S subfamily which corresponds to the major burst of integration and amplification (50–30 MYA); and the Y subfamily from viruses of more recent integration (25 MYA) (Polak and Domany, 2006; Deininger, 2011). In the genes considered here, excluding a small number of less characterized inserts, the J, S, and Y subfamilies showed percentages of 7, 55, and 35, respectively (Section 3.3), which is coherent with the general distribution in the human genome.

In mouse the most commonly represented SINE sequence is the SINE B1, which is structurally similar to the SINE Alu but only about half as long. The average incidence of SINEs B1 in mouse introns is 3.34%, although the actual incidence in the different genes may range from 0% to 17% (Section 3.4).

In both mouse and human genes the SINE incidence is negatively correlated with the intronic mouse/human conservation, which may range from 0% to 65% (Sections 3.5 and 3.6). This suggests that the spread of the SINE inserts, especially in those genes in which it was more massive, as in certain human genes, may have negatively affected the conservation in the two species of the intronic sequences of the common ancestor, possibly by overwriting or deleting short sections of the original intron. In this connection, it may be observed that at some sites in human introns, two (or even three) SINEs partly overlap and sections of their canonical sequence are absent, as if deleted by a more recently added insert.

In the groups of genes studied here, in both human and mouse, the percentage of genes involved decreased exponentially with the per cent of SINE occupancy (Sections 3.3 and 3.4). This exponential decay suggests that the insertion of a SINE sequence is, at least in part, a random process occurring with a given probability, which is 0.79 in mouse and 0.92 in human (Sections 3.3 and 3.4). Other reports have suggested that the actual liability to incorporate viral inserts is a characteristic of each functional class of genes and that such a characteristic is partly conserved during the evolution of Mammals. In orthologous genes of mouse and human, B1 and Alu elements show similar biases even if the viral inserts had spread independently in the two genomes (Waterston et al., 2002; Polak and Domany, 2006; Tsirigos and Rigoutsos, 2009). Our aim was to refine the analysis of some aspects of mouse/human intron conservation at different levels of organization, namely individual intron segments, whole introns and complete genes.

The short intronic conserved segments do not contain SINE inserts and in the intervening non-conserved short intronic segments the deterministic component is only 0.14 (Section 3.7). However, at higher levels of organization a stronger deterministic component emerges: r
                     2 is 0.56 in whole introns and 0.74 in whole genes (Fig. 4A). Thus, the (deterministic) actual proclivity to incorporate viral inserts seems to be regulated by factors which reside in the gene as a whole rather than in individual intronic segments. The absence of SINEs in the intronic mouse/human conserved segments indicates that the sequences of the common ancestor were not receptive to SINEs. The liability to incorporate SINEs apparently developed during speciation, running somewhat parallel in mouse and human, although a stochastic component actually accounts for at least 25% of the inserts in the two species.

Both human SINE Alu and mouse SINE B1 inserts may be incorporated either in the sense or antisense orientation, but in both species the orientation is slightly, but significantly, biased towards the antisense configuration (Section 3.8). The mouse/human correlation in connection with the orientation of SINEs in individual introns and whole genes is significantly positive, but the deterministic component is low (r
                     2
                     =0.12). These results suggest that although the orientation of the individual SINE inserts is largely random, some mechanisms conserved during evolution have slightly biased the total number of SINEs towards the minus configuration.

In several human genes, the frequent occurrence of SINEs Alu with an opposing orientation and often in close proximity to each other allows the formation in the pre-mRNA of secondary stem and loop structures, the stem being composed by the pairing of the two complementary viral sequences and the loop by the intervening unpaired nucleotides. Such secondary structures are likely to be quite stable since the associated energy level is ∼−700Kcal/mol. This is likely to occur also in some SINE-rich mouse pre-mRNAs (e.g., SLC25A41), although the energy level corresponding to the annealing of two complementary SINEs B1 is ∼−330Kcal/mol only. It has been proposed that such pre-mRNA secondary structures may affect the splicing pattern, either by masking binding sites for splicing factors or by bringing important sequences into close contiguity (Mahen et al., 2010; Warf and Berglund, 2010; Hadjiargyrou and Delihas, 2013).

To conclude, when comparing mouse and human, at the level of individual relatively short segments of the intronic sequences the stochastic variability appears to prevail in the local structuring. However, at higher levels of organization (complete introns, whole genes) a deterministic component emerges more clearly, which has been conserved during the divergent evolution despite the ample re-editing of the intronic sequences and the fact that processes such as SINE integration took place in an independent way in the two species.

Although relatively limited in scope, the present investigation highlights, for the first time, the play of the deterministic and stochastic components in the intron evolution of mammals at different levels of organization. Dedicated computer programs are needed to extend these findings to a wider number of genes and more transposable elements.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

We thank Prof. Vincenzo Mitolo for his guidance, fruitful criticism and encouragement; thanks are due to Ms. Mary V.C. Pragnell for linguistic text revision.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

