@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Comparative analysis of plant lycopene cyclases

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Plants have two types of lycopene cyclase (β-LCY and ϵ-LCY).


                        
                        
                           
                           In this study, we analyzed plant lycopene cyclases (LYCs).


                        
                        
                           
                           Phylogenetic analysis revealed that β-LCYs and ϵ-LCYs were classified within β and ϵ groups.


                        
                        
                           
                           Sequence analysis also elucidated V/IXGXGXXGXXXA motif which is common for both type of LYC.


                        
                        
                           
                           In addition to lycopene cyclase domain, V/IXGXGXXGXXXA motif can be used for exploring LYCs proteins and to annotate the function of unknown proteins.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Lycopene cyclase

Carotenoid

Rossmann fold domain

Beta carotene

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Carotenoids are essential isoprenoid pigments produced by plants, algae, fungi and bacteria. Lycopene cyclase (LYC) commonly cyclize carotenoids, which is an important branching step in the carotenogenesis, at one or both end of the backbone. Plants have two types of LYC (β-LCY and ϵ-LCY). In this study, plant LYCs were analyzed. Based on domain analysis, all LYCs accommodate lycopene cyclase domain (Pf05834). Furthermore, motif analysis indicated that motifs were conserved among the plants. On the basis of phylogenetic analysis, β-LCYs and ϵ-LCYs were classified in β and ϵ groups. Monocot and dicot plants separated from each other in the phylogenetic tree. Subsequently, Oryza sativa Japonica Group and Zea mays of LYCs as monocot plants and Vitis vinifera and Solanum lycopersicum of LYCs as dicot plants were analyzed. According to nucleotide diversity analysis of β-LCY and ϵ-LCY genes, nucleotide diversities were found to be π: 0.30 and π: 0.25, respectively. The result highlighted β-LCY genes showed higher nucleotide diversity than ϵ-LCY genes. LYCs interacting genes and their co-expression partners were also predicted using String server. The obtained data suggested the importance of LYCs in carotenoid metabolism. 3D modeling revealed that depicted structures were similar in O. sativa, Z mays, S. lycopersicum, and V. vinifera β-LCYs and ϵ-LCYs. Likewise, the predicted binding sites were highly similar between O. sativa, Z mays, S. lycopersicum, and V. vinifera LCYs. Most importantly, analysis elucidated the V/IXGXGXXGXXXA motif for both type of LYC (β-LCY and ϵ-LCY). This motif related to Rossmann fold domain and probably provides a flat platform for binding of FAD in O. sativa, Z mays, S. lycopersicum, and V. vinifera β-LCYs and ϵ-LCYs with conserved structure. In addition to lycopene cyclase domain, the V/IXGXGXXGXXXA motif can be used for exploring LYCs proteins and to annotate the function of unknown proteins containing lycopene cyclase domain. Overall results indicated that a high degree of conserved signature were observed in plant LYCs.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

With more than 600 different structures, carotenoids are common isoprenoid pigments synthesized by various organisms including plants, certain algae, fungi and bacteria (Alquezar et al., 2009). These are structurally localized in the thylakoid membrane and play a key role as accessory molecules for harvesting light, prevention from photo damage, and as antioxidants under stress conditions (Gao et al., 2010; Demmig-Adams et al., 1996; Cui et al., 2011). Carotenoids also provide the yellow, orange or red coloration characteristic of many flowers and fruits to attract animals and insects for pollination or for the dispersal of seeds (Bartley and Scolnik, 1995). The attractive colors and beneficial health effects of caretonoids, especially β-carotene, have received attention (Alquezar et al., 2009). In addition, β-carotene is a substrate for the biosynthesis of other carotenoids such as zeaxanthin, xanthphylls, neoxanthin, violaxanthin (Hugueney et al., 1995). Vitamin A is also synthesized from β-caroten (Rock and Zeevaart, 1991). Thus, vitamin A is not only fundamental for plants but also beneficial for human and animal nutrition.

Toward the end of metabolic processes of carotenoids, they are commonly cyclized at one or both ends of backbones by lycopene cyclase (Mohamed and Vermaas, 2006). Lycopene cyclization is a crucial branching point in the carotenogenesis (Alquezar et al., 2009). Lycopene cyclization is caused by β-LCY (EC:5.5.1.19) using NADP(H) or FAD as a co-factor (Hornero-Méndez and Britton, 2002; Yu et al., 2010). β-LCY alone produces β-carotene whereas two enzymes, β-LCY and ϵ-LCY (EC: 5.5.1.18), together form α-carotene (Beyer et al., 1991; Hornero-Méndez and Britton, 2002; Moreno et al., 2013).

β-LCYs of plants and bacteria have a conserved dinucleotide binding motif. Furthermore, several conserved domains such as conserved region β-LCY’s, β-LCY specific motif, cylase motif I and II (CMI and CMII), β-LCY CAD (catalytic activity domain) and a charged region are highly conserved in plants (Moreno et al., 2013; Hugueney et al., 1995). β-LCY CAD is essential for β-LCY activity (Moreno et al., 2013). Cyclization of lycopene is formed by LYCs and conserved in various organisms (Armstrong et al., 1990). Due to integrity of such biological process maintained in many organisms, it was observed that β-LCY and ϵ-LCY share high similarity in their amino acid sequences and likely evolved from the same ancestor (Sandmann, 2002; Cui et al., 2011).

This study represents a comparative genomic analysis of β-LCY and ϵ-LCY from various seed plants. Although previous studies have demonstrated that two types of LCY exist in plants, the structural and conserved motif analyses of LCYs are lacking. Moreover, despite the importance of LYCs, the crystal structures of β-LCY and ϵ-LCY has not been solved yet. This required us to work on structural analysis of LYCs accompanied with predicted ligand binding through in silico approaches. It is well known that Z. mays is the model monocot and important food resource (Suwarno et al., 2015), O. sativa is the model monocot (Garg et al., 2010), and S. lycopersicum is sequenced genome and model organism for caretenoid studies (Pecker et al., 1996; Ronen et al., 1999; Rosati et al., 2000; Liu et al., 2015). Furthermore, V. vinifera is recently sequenced genome (Velasco et al., 2007; Jaillon et al., 2007) and carotenoid content of grapevine berries has received much attention (Young et al., 2012). For the reasons mentioned above, O. sativa Japonica Group and Z. mays of LYCs as monocot representatives and V. vinifera and S. lycopersicum of LYCs as dicot representatives were used for structural analysis.

The sequences of proteins corresponding to β-LCY and ϵ-LCY proteins were obtained from the NCBI protein database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/protein/). A total of 40 β-LCY proteins and 26 ϵ-LCY protein sequences were analyzed. Initially, the sequences were searched for the lycopene cyclase domain. To do this, all the proteins were investigated in the SMART and PFam databases to confirm the presence of lycopene cyclase domain. The sequences were selected as predicted LYC proteins if their e value satisfied E
                        ≤
                        e
                        −10 in both databases and redundant sequences were removed. O. sativa and Z. mays as monocotyledonous plants, S. lycopersicum and V. Vinifera as dicotyledonous plants were selected for further analyses. Subsequently, β-LCY and ϵ-LCY proteins were searched in the O. sativa, Z. mays, S. lycopersicum, and V. Vinifera genomes at the Joint Genome Institute (http://www.phytozome.net) to assess lycopene cyclases of four plants by BLOSUM matrix. The LYC proteins in O. sativa, Z. mays, S. lycopersicum, and V. Vinifera were identified by using BLASTP searches against their annotated proteomes. The sequences were selected as predicted proteins if their e value satisfied E
                        ≤
                        e
                        −10 and redundant sequences were removed. All β-LCY and ϵ-LCY gene sequences were analyzed with DnaSP 5.1 (Librado and Rozas, 2009), including estimates of genetic diversity π (Nei, 1987).

Physicochemical analyses were computed by using ProtParam tool (http://web.expasy.org/protparam/) (Gasteiger et al., 2005). The putative conserved protein motifs were identified by using MEME (Multiple Em for Motif Elicitation) software (Timothy et al., 2009). The amino acid sequences of O. sativa and V. vinifera LYC proteins were analyzed for subcellular localization by WoLF PSORT (Horton et al., 2007) servers. In addition, interacting partners of LYCs and its co-expressed genes were predicted by using String software (http://string-db.org/) (Franceschini et al., 2013). We should note that since putative protein interacting partners for Z. mays, and S. lycopersicum LCYs were not available in the String database, we could not obtain interacting partners for both plants.

Forty β-LCY protein sequences and twenty six ϵ-LCY protein sequences were used for phylogenetic analysis. Multiple sequence alignment were performed by using the ClustalW program by BLOSUM matrix to perform optimum alignment for whole protein sequences without manual alignment (http://www2.ebi.ac.uk/clustalw). Phylogenetic analysis was evaluated with MEGA6 software (Tamura et al., 2011) by bootstrap analyses with 1000 replications. The evolutionary history was inferred by using the Neighbor–Joining (NJ) methods based on the JTT (Jones–Taylor–Thomton) matrix-based model (Jones et al., 1992). The evolutionary distances were computed with the Poisson correction method (Zuckerkandl and Pauling, 1965).

The predicted 3D structures of O. sativa β-LCY (Hereafter, Os β-LCY- Acc. no BAD16478.1), Z. mays (Hereafter, Zm β-LCY- Acc. no AAO18661.1), S. lycopersicum (Hereafter, Sl β-LCY1- Acc. no NP_001234226.1, Sl β-LCY2- Acc. no NP_001234445.1), V. vinifera β-LCY (Hereafter, Vv β-LCY1- Acc. no AFP28803.1, Vv β-LCY2- Acc. no AFP28799.1), O. sativa ϵ-LCYs (Herefater, Os ϵ-LCY- Acc. no BAC05562.1), Z. mays (Hereafter, Zm ϵ-LCY- Acc. no NP_001146840.1), S. lycopersicum (Hereafter, Sl ϵ-LCY- Acc. no NP_001234337.1), and V. vinifera ϵ-LCY (Hereafter Vv ϵ-LCY- Acc. no NP_001268093.1) were generated by using 3D LigandSite server (http://www.sbg.bio.ic.ac.uk/3dligandsite/) (Wass et al., 2010) and I-TASSER server (Roy et al., 2010). Also, the predicted binding sites and heterogens existing in the predicted binding site were analyzed with these servers. Structural evaluation and stereochemical analyses were performed by using Rampage Ramachandran plot analysis (http://mordred.bioc.cam.ac.uk/∼rapper/rampage.php).

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

In current study, plant β-LCY and ϵ-LCY proteins were analyzed. The multiple searches followed by confirming the presence of lycopene cyclase domain by using SMART and PFam, resulted in the identification of β-LCY and ϵ-LCY proteins. Based on domain analysis, all sequences contained lycopene cyclase domain (Pf05834). The gene ontology (GO) classification showed that all β-LCYs and ϵ-LCYs contained the same molecular function as carotenoid biosynthetic process (GO:0016117). We also made an attempt to study O. sativa Z. mays, S. lycopersicum, and V. vinifera as representative members of monocotyledonous and dicotyledonous for some analyses. We performed a BLASTP search in the O. sativa Z. mays, S. lycopersicum, and V. vinifera genomes at Joint Genome Institute (http://www.phytozome.net) which resulted in identification of lycopene cyclases of all plants. Subsequently, all predicted β-LCY and ϵ-LCY proteins of O. sativa Z. mays, S. lycopersicum, and V. vinifera were surveyed to verify whether they contained dinucleotide binding motifs (Fig. 1
                        ) as representatives, which are the main characteristic residual motifs in lycopene cyclase proteins (Alquezar et al., 2009; Cunningham et al., 1996; Krubasik and Sandmann, 2000). This motif involves in interaction with NAD/FAD cofactor (Armstrong and Hearst, 1996). All the lycopene cyclase family contains GXGXXG residues in dinucleotide binding region; this motif and surrounding residues are reasonably well conserved in the lycopene cyclase family (Mohamed and Vermaas, 2006). LCYs contain partial and full conserved motifs previously described as characteristics of plant lycopene cyclase such as: plant β-LCY conserved regions, a dinucleotide-binding domain, cyclase motifs I and II (CM I and CM II), which are essential domains for catalytic activity, and a charged region (Hugueney et al., 1955 Cunningham et al., 1996; Bouvier et al., 1997). The multiple sequence alignments of LYC protein sequences showed that the core region, which represents GXGXXG residues, is most conserved in Zm, Os, Sl, and Vv β-LCYs and ϵ-LCYs and other plant LYCs (Fig. 1, Supplementary Fig. S1). These conserved residues may be essential for function and physical interaction with FAD as binding domain in LYCs. Taken together, results indicated that Zm, Os, Sl, and Vv β-LCYs and ϵ-LCYs share the characteristics of LYC proteins (Fig. 1).

The length of β-LCY proteins were ranged from 489 (O. sativa) to 594 amino acids (Setaria italica) (Table 1
                        ). Chen et al. (2011) reported that β-LCY protein from Salicornia europaea contained 489 amino acids. The length of the ϵ-LCY proteins were ranged from 437 (Citrus maxima, Citrus. sinensis, and Citrus paradisi) to 540 amino acids (O. sativa and S. italica) (Table 2
                        ). Considering the protein length, S. italica was to have the longest protein for both β-LCY and ϵ-LCY. Although β-LCY pI values range from 5.86 (Bixa orellana) to 9.15 (Ficus carica), ϵ-LCY proteins ranged from 5.34 (Solanum lycopersicum) to 8.63 (Medicago truncatula). Other physiochemical parameters such as positively charged amino acids (+R) and hydropathicity (GRAVY) of β-LCY and ϵ-LCY protein sequences exhibited wide range of variability. Additionally, GRAVY index showed that majority of β-LCY and ϵ-LCY proteins were hydrophilic proteins (Tables 1 and 2). Molecular weights of LYCs were ranging from 53.6kDa to 60.1kDa. Sequence identity matrix revealed the lowest values to be (35.6%) between S. italica and M. truncatula, while the highest identity was observed to be 99.4% between C. sinensis and Citrus unshiu for β–LCY. Considering O. sativa and Z. mays β-LCYs, the identity value was 85.7% between Os β–LCY and Zm β–LCY, while it was 84.1% between Sl β-LCY1 and Vv β-LCY2. On the other hand, protein identity of β-LCYs was found to be 82% between Daucus carota and S. lycopersicum (Ronen et al., 2000) and 80.7% between D. carota and Capsicum annuum (Bouvier et al., 1996). The highest similarity value between C.maxima, C. sinensis and Citrus x paradise was found at 99%, while it was 58% (as the lowest one) between Brachypodium distachyon and Citrus maxima for ϵ-LCY proteins. In addition, the identity was found as 83.1% between Os ϵ-LCY and Zm ϵ-LCY, while it was 72.2% between Sl ϵ-LCY and Vv ϵ-LCY. The results indicated that sequence identity of β-LCYs showed a wide range of variability than those of ϵ-LCY. Similarity values, several structural, and functional domains – defined previously essential for lycopene cyclase activity (Cunningham et al., 1996; Alquezar et al., 2009) are highly similar in β-LCY and ϵ-LCY proteins.

We analyzed β-LCY and ϵ-LCY proteins composition of Z. mays, O. sativa, S. lycopersicum, and V. vinifera. In the analysis, the most abundant amino acid residue was Ala (A) in Os β-LCY and Zm β-LCY (12.27% and 11,6%, respectively). Meanwhile, Leu (L) was most abundant in remaining of β-LCY and ϵ-LCY proteins (Fig. 2
                        ). The measurements of the relative volume occupied by aliphatic amino acids such as Ala (A), Val (V), Leu (L), and Ile (I), is described as the aliphatic index (AI) and the thermo stability of a globular protein is directly correlated to aliphatic index value (Ikai, 1980). In agreement with high value of AI, the high rate of Ala and Leu were determined in all ϵ-LCYs and β-LCYs, suggesting LYCs are thermo stabil proteins. We also analyzed the putative subcellular localization of both LYCs in our plants. In collaboration with previous studies (Inoue et al., 2006), it was found that all proteins were localized in chloroplast. In addition to chloroplast localization, Sl β-LCY2 was also found in chromoplast. Although the results provide subcellular localization, experimental evidence of β-LCY and ϵ-LCY proteins localization is still pending to be investigated.

With analyzing of all gene sequences, number of polymorphic (segregating) sites was found to be 475 in β-LCY genes. Out of 475, 53 sites (11.1%) were variable (parsimony uninformative), however, parsimony informative sites were found as 422 (88.9%). 269 sites were invariable (monomorphic) for β-LCY genes. Nucleotide diversity was obtained as π: 0.30. In ϵ-LCY genes, number of polymorphic (segregating) sites was 617. Besides, it was found that 14.1% (87/617) were variable (parsimony uninformative) and parsimony informative sites were 85.9% (590) for ϵ-LCYs. 544 sites were invariable (monomorphic) as well. Furthermore, nucleotide diversity was found to be π: 0.25. When compared the nucleotide diversity of both genes, it was obviously observed that β-LCY genes showed higher nucleotide diversity than ϵ-LCY genes. These findings signify the evolution of LYC genes in plants.

Based on the conserved motif, three highly significant (<e
                        −50) putative conserved motifs were identified for all plant β-LCYs (Fig. 3
                        ). Pfam analysis revealed that all motifs were related with lycopene cyclase domain (Pf05834). A number of highly conserved motifs were observed in the LYCs from plants indicating strong conservation of these proteins. These motifs could provide deeper understanding that help gaining insights on the relationships of plant LYCs.

Phylogenetic tree among the plants was constructed by NJ method using MEGA6 program. LYCs were classified into two major LCY group (β and ϵ group). Interestingly, Cryoptemeria japonica was isolated from remaining β-LCYs. The divergence was also observed among β-LCY1 and β-LCY2 in S. lycopersicum, V. vinifera, and M. truncatula. Our phylogenetic analyses (Figs. 4 and 5
                        
                        ) implied that the β-LCY1/2 genes may be the result of a duplication of the ancestral β-LCY. Monocots were also in two subgroups within the β group with 62% and 100% bootstrap value, respectively (Fig. 4). This result may be related to variation in β-LCYs of monocot plants. Also, in consistent with divergence of β-LCY1 and β-LCY2, monocot β-LCYs may have followed different evolutionary pathway, which led to variation of β-LCYs in monocot plants. On the other hand, the proximity between monocot and dicot β-LCYs may represent the existence of an ancient β-LCY constituting a common ancestor of monocots and dicots. However, these findings should be expanded with further studies. In ϵ group, monocots were clustered with 91% bootstrap value suggesting that ϵ-LCYs were well conserved among dicots and monocots. Further, it may be suggested that this divergence could prove the separation both type of LYCs in seed plants. The Maximum Likelihod tree had also congruent topology to the NJ tree (data not shown). Later, we evaluated bacteria, green alga, and plant lycopene cyclases. The phylogenetic tree revealed that green algea (Chlamydomonas reinhardtii) and plant β-LCYs, and ϵ-LCYs were grouped together (98% and 96% bootstrap value, respectively). On the other hand, bacterial β-LCYs and ϵ-LCYs were outgrouped with 100% bootstrap value. In addition, CrtYs were isolated with 100% bootstrap value, in the phylogram (Fig. 5). CrtY is most likely an ancestor of CrtL, the β-cyclase gene in cyanobacteria (Cunningham et al., 1994), in turn, may have resulted in plant β-LCY and ϵ-LCY genes (Cunningham and Gantt, 2001; Cunningham et al., 1996) and to the gene for capsanthin/capsorubin synthase (Mohamed and Vermaas, 2006). In accordance with reports, hierarchical appearance of LYCs was obtained from the phylogenetic tree.

Additionally, lycopene cyclases interacting genes and their co-expression partners were predicted in rice and V. vinifera (Fig. 6
                        ) using String database. The analysis suggested that many proteins are present as interacting partners. In Os β-LCY, ten proteins were found as interacting partners, such as FAD dependent oxidoreductase, fatty acid hydroxylase, amine oxidase, phytoene dehydrogenase and violaxanthin de-epoxidase. Functional annotation of these proteins in Phytozome database showed that most proteins were related to caretonoid pathway (Supplementary Table). Besides, ten similar proteins were found for both β-LCY1 and β-LCY2 in V. vinifera such as zeaxanthin epoxidase (Zep), beta carotene hydroxylase (bch1), epsilon lycopene cyclase (GSVIVG00016526001), zeta carotene desaturase (GSVIVG00031131001), caretonoid isomerase (GSVIVG00027139001), and phytoene desaturase (PSD1). In regard to Os ϵ-LCY, FAD dependent oxidoreductase, fatty acid hydroxylase, amine oxidase, phytoene dehydrogenase and zeta carotene desaturase were found as interacting partners. Functional annotation of these proteins in the phytozome database confirmed that most proteins were involved in caretoneoid biosynthesis (Supplementary Table). We also found that beta lycopene cyclase (GSVIVG00025310001), zeta carotene desaturase (GSVIVG00031131001), carotenoid isomerase (GSVIVG00027139001), photosystem II protein (GSVIVG0015393001), phytone desaturase (PSD1), phytoene dehydrogenase (GSVIVG00036150001) and flavin containing aminooxidase (GSVIVG00031221001) interact with Vv ϵ-LCY. All mentioned proteins; zeta carotene desaturase (EC 1.14.99.30), beta carotene hydroylase (EC 1.14.13.129), phytoene dehydrogenase (EC 1.3.99), violaxanthin de-epoxidase (EC 1.10.99.3), carotenoid isomerase (EC 5.2.1.13) and phytoene desaturase (EC 1.3.5.5), are involved in caretoneoid biosynthesis and this result supports our findings. Contrary, flavins containing amino oxidases are related to arginine, proline and beta-alanine metabolism. However, similar to LYCs, these enzymes contain FAD binding motif (Dailey and Dailey, 1998). It should also be mentioned that photosystem II, multisubunit protein complex, is located thylakoid membrane of plants and other photosynthetic organisms. The complex absorbs the photons of light to capture the electrons which are then transferred to plastoquinone (Krivanek et al., 2007). It is shown that beta carotene is involved in photosystem II (Ferreira et al., 2004; Telfer 2005; Krivanek et al., 2007). It can thus be expected an interaction between LYCs and photosystem II protein.

According to the predicted binding site analysis, some divergences were detected in β-LCYs and ϵ-LCYs. However, all β-LCY sequences contained same binding residues such as Val, Gly, Pro, Ala, Asn, Ser but in different positions. Ile and Ala were first binding sites for Vv β-LCY1 and Sl β-LCY2, respectively while Val was first for other β-LCYs. Interestingly, very conserved residues in the same positions were observed in Os β-LCY and Zm β-LCY such as V73, G74, G76, P77, A78, N97, and P98 (Table 3
                        ). Similar to β-LCY, ϵ-LCY has also similar binding residues for plants but in different positions. Ile, Gly, Pro, Ala, and Asp were highly conserved in the first eight binding residues of ϵ-LCYs. Additionally, some residual changes were observed. The predicted binding sites such as V158 residues for Os ϵ-LCY changed as Y146 for Vv ϵ-LCY (Table 3). According to analyses, ϵ-LCY residues were more conserved than β-LCY residues. The ligand found in the analysis of β-LCYs and ϵ-LCYs proteins of four plants were FAD (Table 3). This result was in agreement with reports (Hornero-Méndez and Britton, 2002; Yu et al., 2010) evidencing that FAD is involved in lycopene cyclization as a cofactor.

Here, the predicted 3D structure modeling of representative β-LCYs and ϵ-LCYs from O. sativa, Z. mays, S. lycopersicum, and V. vinifera were generated using 3D LigandSite and I-TASSER servers. The structure examination showed that in general, the structure of β-LYCs and ϵ-LYCs are conserved sharing the same conformation of α and β secondary structural elements. Besides, predicted FAD location was at the interface between the alpha and beta subunits in the models (Fig. 7
                        ). Protein 3D structure is more conserved than protein sequences or functions and being shaped with a combination of mechanisms such as gene duplication, mutation, and selection (Kinch and Grishin, 2002; Filiz et al., 2014). Although, some structural changes may be observed among LYC protein sequences, it is known that protein structure, stability, and function must be protected (DePristo et al., 2005). Most structural differences were observed in the variable loop regions in the models, where sequence conservation is relatively weak (Garg et al., 2010). Meanwhile, lycopene cyclase domain is related to FAD/NADP(H) binding Rossmann fold domain superfamily. Rossmann folds can often be identified by GX(1–2)GXXG Motif (Kleiger and Eisenberg, 2002; Bhattacharyya et al., 2012). It was proposed that the first glycine provides a tight turn of the main-chain from the β-strand into the loop, and the second glycine allows close contact of the main-chain to the pyrophosphate of the nucleotide (Wierenga et al., 1986; Kleiger and Eisenberg, 2002). The last glycine of the GX(1–2)GXXG (Fig. 8
                        ) motif is also the first residue of GXXXG/A motif (Kleiger and Eisenberg, 2002). Together these two motifs stabilize FAD or NAD(P) binding fold and binding of the nucleotide cofactor to the domain (Kleiger and Eisenberg, 2002). This fold begins with a β-strand connected by a short loop to an α-helix (Fig. 9
                        ) (Rossmann et al., 1974). It was found that GXXXA motif was present in β-LYC and ϵ-LCY for four plants located in the loop region in predicted models. This motif stabilize β-strand and α-helix in both β-LYC and ϵ-LCY. In additon, this configuration in β-LCYs and ϵ-LYCs provides close interaction between helix and strand (Fig. 9). It was reported that the glycine or alanine residues of the GXXXG/A motif form van der Waals interactions with either a valine or isoleucine residue located either seven or eight residues further back along the polypeptide chain and such motif holds together the secondary structures in core protein (Kleiger and Eisenberg, 2002; Bhattacharyya et al., 2012). Therefore, V/IXGX(1–2)GXXGXXXG/A is more strongly indicative than previously described motif (GX(1–2)GXXG), (Kleiger and Eisenberg, 2002). In collaboration with mentioned remarks, four plants β-LCYs and ϵ-LYCs contained V/IXGXGXXGXXXA motif (Fig. 8). Also, V/IXGXGXXGXXXA motif was marked and found to be conserved structurally in β-LCYs and ϵ-LYCs (Fig. 9). Interestingly, V/IXGXGXXGXXXA motif is also well conserved for other plant LYCs (Supplemantary Fig. S1). The conserved structure in LYCs suggested that FAD may incorporate into an electron transfer system, with electrons passing from the former to the latter. Besides, this motif probably provides a flat platform for FAD molecule that may be stabilized and bound to the domain. Here, both type of LYC in O. sativa, Z. mays, S. lycopersicum, and V. vinifera contain FAD or NAD(P) binding Rossmann fold domain with similar structure proposed conserved structure and function in plants. It thus can be suggested, although the in silico modeled structures of LYCs showed some variability, that they may share site specific residues across plants with probable coincident structural formation.

In model validation, the Ramachandran plot analysis indicated that 91.9% (Os β-LCY), 92.7% (Zm β-LCY), 91.7% (Sl β-LCY1), 86.7% (Sl β-LCY2), 93.9% (Vv β-LCY1), 87.5% (Vv β-LCY2), 92.% (Os ϵ-LYC), 91.1% (Zm ϵ-LCY), 88.5% (Sl ϵ-LCY), and 91.7% (Vv ϵ-LYC) were in favored region, 3.6% (Os β-LCY), 3.1% (Zm β-LCY), 3.5% (Sl β-LCY1), 9.1% (Sl β-LCY2), 3.2% (Vv β-LCY1), 6.6% (Vv β-LCY2), 3.7% (Os ϵ-LYC), 4.1% (Zm ϵ-LCY), 6.2% (Sl ϵ-LCY), and 4.5% (Vv ϵ-LYC) in allowed region, and 4.5% (Os β-LCY), 4.3% (Zm β-LCY), 4.8% (Sl β-LCY1), 4.2% (Sl β-LCY2), 2.9% (Vv β-LCY1), 6% (Vv β-LCY2), 4.4% (Os ϵ-LYC), 4.8% (Zm ϵ-LCY), 5.3% (Sl ϵ-LCY), and 3.8% (Vv ϵ-LYC) in outlier region, suggesting that the 3D models were fairly in good quality.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

LYCs are important for secondary metabolism in plant kingdom. Two types of LYCs are conserved structurally in both monocot and dicot plants. The present study indicated that V/IXGXGXXGXXXA motif is common for LYCs. This motif is related to NAD(P) binding Rossmann fold domain. We thus propose that site specific residues are vital for LYC protein fold and function. This motif can also be used to investigate functionally unknown LYCs in plant.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The authors thank Dr. Scott Walters for editing manuscript.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2015.06.001.

The following are Supplementary data to this article:
                        
                           Fig. S1
                           
                              The depicted V/IXGXGXXGXXXA motif via alignment in both types of LYCs using MEGA6 program. Arrows indicate V/I, G and A residues in the alignment.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

