@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Experimental and molecular dynamics studies showed that CBP KIX mutation affects the stability of CBP:c-Myb complex

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           The KIX domain mutant decreased c-Myb-mediated transcription in MEFs.


                        
                        
                           
                           The KIX mutations slightly decreased stability of the CBP:c-Myb complex.


                        
                        
                           
                           The KIX mutations affected two salt bridges between CBP and c-Myb.


                        
                        
                           
                           The KIX mutations affected CBP’s hydrophobic interactions with Leu of c-Myb.


                        
                        
                           
                           Our data suggest that presence of an interacting protein has influence on the structure of a protein.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

CBP

c-Myb

Molecular dynamics

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The coactivators CBP (CREBBP) and its paralog p300 (EP300), two conserved multi-domain proteins in eukaryotic organisms, regulate gene expression in part by binding DNA-binding transcription factors. It was previously reported that the CBP/p300 KIX domain mutant (Y650A, A654Q, and Y658A) altered both c-Myb-dependent gene activation and repression, and that mice with these three point mutations had reduced numbers of platelets, B cells, T cells, and red blood cells. Here, our transient transfection assays demonstrated that mouse embryonic fibroblast cells containing the same mutations in the KIX domain and without a wild-type allele of either CBP or p300, showed decreased c-Myb-mediated transcription. Dr. Wright’s group solved a 3-D structure of the mouse CBP:c-Myb complex using NMR. To take advantage of the experimental structure and function data and improved theoretical calculation methods, we performed MD simulations of CBP KIX, CBP KIX with the mutations, and c-Myb, as well as binding energy analysis for both the wild-type and mutant complexes. The binding between CBP and c-Myb is mainly mediated by a shallow hydrophobic groove in the center where the side-chain of Leu302 of c-Myb plays an essential role and two salt bridges at the two ends. We found that the KIX mutations slightly decreased stability of the CBP:c-Myb complex as demonstrated by higher binding energy calculated using either MM/PBSA or MM/GBSA methods. More specifically, the KIX mutations affected the two salt bridges between CBP and c-Myb (CBP-R646 and c-Myb-E306; CBP-E665 and c-Myb-R294). Our studies also revealed differing dynamics of the hydrogen bonds between CBP-R646 and c-Myb-E306 and between CBP-E665 and c-Myb-R294 caused by the CBP KIX mutations. In the wild-type CBP:c-Myb complex, both of the hydrogen bonds stayed relatively stable. In contrast, in the mutant CBP:c-Myb complex, hydrogen bonds between R646 and E306 showed an increasing trend followed by a decreasing trend, and hydrogen bonds of the E665:R294 pair exhibited a fast decreasing trend over time during MD simulations. In addition, our data showed that the KIX mutations attenuate CBP’s hydrophobic interaction with Leu302 of c-Myb. Furthermore, our 500-ns MD simulations showed that CBP KIX with the mutations has a slightly lower potential energy than wild-type CBP. The CBP KIX structures with or without its interacting protein c-Myb are different for both wild-type and mutant CBP KIX, and this is likewise the case for c-Myb with or without CBP, suggesting that the presence of an interacting protein influences the structure of a protein. Taken together, these analyses will improve our understanding of the exact functions of CBP and its interaction with c-Myb.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Gene regulation is fundamental for many biological processes, and the regulatory mechanisms controlling gene expression are complex (Montminy et al., 1986). Initiation of transcription involves the assembly of a large number of proteins such as RNA polymerase II, general transcription factors (GTFs) (TFIIA, TFIIB, TFIID, TFIIE, TFIIF, and TFIIH), transcription factors, and transcriptional coactivators at the promoter or enhancer of a given gene (Parker et al., 1996; Radhakrishnan et al., 1997). Transcription factors contain a functionally independent DNA-binding domain that binds regulatory DNA sequences and one or more activation domains that bind and localize other components of the transcription machinery to the target gene (Parker et al., 1996). Coactivators are important binding partners for activation domains of transcription factors and contribute to transcription by acting as bridging molecules between transcription factors, or as enzymes that introduce regulatory modifications such as histone acetylation (Parker et al., 1996; Radhakrishnan et al., 1997). Specific concerted interactions and enzymatic reactions of transcription factors, coactivators, and components of the basal transcription complex are essential for gene activation in response to developmental and environmental stimuli in a time-dependent manner in higher eukaryotes (Giles et al., 1998).

CREB, cyclic AMP (cAMP) response element (CRE)-binding protein, was first identified during a search for transcription factors that bind the cis-acting element TGACGTCA (denoted as CRE element) that was shown to confer cAMP-inducible transcription of the neuropeptide hormone gene somatostatin (Montminy et al., 1986). The KID domain of CREB undergoes a conformational change that, when phosphorylated at Ser133 (pS133), results in the recruitment of transcriptional coactivator CREB binding protein (CBP, CREBBP) in response to increased cAMP level (Parker et al., 1996; Radhakrishnan et al., 1997). CBP and its paralog E1A-binding protein (p300) are transcriptional coactivators that integrate numerous signal transduction pathways by interacting with a number of signal-dependent and development-specific transcriptional factors (Giles et al., 1998) and play critical roles in various cellular processes such as cell proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis, and DNA repair (Goodman and Smolik, 2000). Both CBP and p300 are multifunctional proteins, and each has several separate transactivation domains (TADs) that physically interact with a number of transcription factors as well as GTFs, thus mediating recruitment of basal transcription machinery to the promoter. They perform an architectural role by bridging enhancer-bound transcription activators with RNA polymerase II complexes through protein–protein interactions (Chrivia et al., 1993; Arias et al., 1994). Additionally, they stimulate chromatin remodeling on target promoters via intrinsic and associated histone acetyltransferase (HAT) activities (Bannister and Kouzarides, 1996; Ogryzko et al., 1996). Most known functional domains of CBP/p300 are found within the highly conserved regions, including one enzymatic domain (HAT domain) and four recognized TADs (Wang et al., 2013): (1) the Cysteine–Histidine-rich region 1 (CH1) that encompasses the transcriptional adapter zinc finger 1 (TAZ1) domain (Bhattacharya et al., 1999; De Guzman et al., 2000), (2) the CREB-interacting KIX domain (Parker et al., 1996; Radhakrishnan et al., 1999), (3) another Cysteine–Histidine-rich region (CH3) containing the transcriptional adapter zinc finger 2 (TAZ2) domain and a ZZ-type zinc finger domain (De Guzman et al., 2000; Albanese et al., 1999), and (4) the nuclear receptor coactivator binding domain (NCBD) in the C-terminal Q-rich region (Lin et al., 2001; Demarest et al., 2002).

cAMP stimulates cellular gene expression with burst-attenuation kinetics like other secondary messengers. Binding of certain hormones to G protein-coupled receptors triggers the activation of adenylyl cyclases, which catalyze the production of cAMP from ATP. Binding of cAMP to regulatory subunits within the protein kinase A (PKA) heterotetramer liberates catalytic subunits which migrate to the nucleus and phosphorylate CREB at Ser133 (Altarejos and Montminy, 2011). Phosphorylation of CREB KID at Ser133 was shown to be essential for binding the KIX domain of CBP and for subsequent transcriptional activation (Parker et al., 1996; Chrivia et al., 1993). The NMR structure of the phosphorylated KID (pKID):KIX complex showed that KIX forms a helical bundle structure that is bound by the two helices (αA and αB) of pKID (119–146 aa), almost perpendicular to one another (Radhakrishnan et al., 1997). The phosphoserine residue 133 (pSer133) is located at the N terminus of the αB helix of CREB pKID. This helix makes multiple hydrophobic interactions with the shallow hydrophobic groove formed by the α1 and α3 helices of CBP KIX. NMR chemical-shift mapping (Zor et al., 2002) as well as mutagenesis studies (Parker et al., 1999) showed that the same hydrophobic groove of CBP KIX interacts with c-Myb, a constitutive transcriptional activator regulating cell growth and differentiation of hematopoietic cells (Weston, 1998), whose aberrant amplification or truncation has been observed in several types of leukemia (Oh and Reddy, 1999). Although pKID and c-Myb share a common binding site on KIX, there is no obvious sequence similarity in their binding regions. In the unbound state, the activation domains of both c-Myb and KID (either phosphorylated or unphosphorylated) are only partly structured, and binding to KIX is coupled with folding to form an amphipathic helix that binds the hydrophobic groove of KIX (Zor et al., 2002; Radhakrishnan et al., 1998). The affinity of KIX for phosphorylated KID is 20-fold higher than for c-Myb (Zor et al., 2002) probably because only a single bent helix of c-Myb interacts with the same hydrophobic groove of KIX as the αB helix of pKID, and the interaction with higher affinity between the αA helix of pKID and KIX is absent in the c-Myb:KIX complex (Zor et al., 2004). Biophysical and biochemical results indicated that unphosphorylated KID binds to KIX with a sevenfold lower affinity than that of c-Myb:KIX (Zor et al., 2002). This difference in binding affinity enables c-Myb to be a constitutive transcription factor while CREB is a phosphorylation-inducible transcription factor (Parker et al., 1996; Chrivia et al., 1993).

Modulation of the physical interactions between CREB pKID and CBP KIX and between c-Myb and CBP KIX are the essential regulatory mechanisms for gene expression in cell type and developmental dependent matters. Abnormal expression or mutations in either CREB, c-Myb, or CBP could lead to disease. Overexpression of CREB was also seen in neoplastic tissues from breast cancer patients (Chhabra et al., 2007), non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients (Seo et al., 2008), and the blast cells from patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) (Shankar et al., 2005). The key role of CBP and its paralog p300 in transcription regulation is underscored by the findings that mutations in the CBP gene have been described in various types of cancer and in Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome, a haplo-insufficiency disorder characterized by skeletal abnormalities, growth retardation, and a high incidence of tumors (Giordano and Avantaggiati, 1999). Defects in CBP/p300 are implicated in a number of human diseases including certain types of leukemia and lymphoma, gastric and colorectal carcinomas, and congenital malformation syndromes (Giles et al., 1998; Mullighan et al., 2011; Pasqualucci et al., 2011; Iyer et al., 2004). c-Myb plays an essential role in the regulation of hematopoiesis (Weston, 1998) and disregulation of c-Myb may play a role in tumorigenesis (Vargova et al., 2011).

Despite its relatively small size (∼90 residues), the first and third α-helices of CBP KIX forms a shallow hydrophobic groove for CREB and c-Myb binding. Interestingly, c-Jun, a transcription factor, and CREB utilize structurally distinct modes to recognize the small, globular KIX domain of CBP. Chemical shift perturbation mapping reveals two distinct surfaces of comparable size on KIX that accommodate CREB and c-Jun. The two distinct binding sites on KIX for the CREB and c-Jun activation domains allow KIX to bind the two activation domains simultaneously, as demonstrated by analytical ultracentrifugation and NMR spectroscopy (Campbell and Lumb, 2002). Unlike CREB, the results showed that c-Jun phosphorylation is not a prerequisite for binding KIX (Campbell and Lumb, 2002; Van Orden et al., 1999; Bannister et al., 1995). c-Jun phosphorylation, therefore, does not make a critical contribution to the binding enthalpy to overcome the entropy penalty associated with folding upon binding. At the almost same time, an NMR experiment demonstrated the structure of the ternary KIX:MLL:c-Myb complex. MLL (mixed-lineage leukemia) belongs to the evolutionarily conserved trxG family, which acts as a positive regulator of homeobox (Hox) gene expression to control segment specificity in early embryogenesis through an epigenetic mechanism (Shiama, 1997). The NMR structure of the ternary complex revealed that the MLL TAD binds to an opposite groove, formed at the interface between the G2 310-helix and the second and third α helices of KIX, from the groove for CREB and c-Myb binding (Goto et al., 2002). MLL is thought to bind the same site of KIX as c-Jun binds. Recent theoretical calculations (Law et al., 2014; Korkmaz et al., 2012) showed that MLL binding lowers the entropic cost for c-Myb by stabilizing CBP KIX domain (Law et al., 2014), suggesting that there is allosteric communication between the two CBP KIX binding sites: c-Myb and MLL (Korkmaz et al., 2012). Even more interesting, a recent structure solved by NMR showed that the CR2C and CR3 domains of FOXO3a, a transcription factor known as a tumor suppressor, interact with the KIX domain of CBP/p300 at both “MLL/c-Jun” and “CREB/c-Myb” binding sites simultaneously (Wang et al., 2012). In conclusion, CBP KIX domain contains at least two transcription factor binding sites (Radhakrishnan et al., 1999; Zor et al., 2004; Campbell and Lumb, 2002; Goto et al., 2002; Vendel and Lumb, 2004; Vendel et al., 2003), one is the CREB/Myb site and the other is the MLL/c-Jun site, possibly for Tat/Tax binding as well. The simultaneous binding of the KIX domain of CBP by two different transcription factors may contribute greatly to the specificity and synergy of gene expression by resulting in enhanced recruitment of CBP to target promoters.

Screening of compounds against the KIX domain could have value in basic research and generate candidates with high therapeutic potential in the pharmaceutical industry. Compounds that inhibit KIX-binding activators will be useful tools in dissecting the role of the KIX domain in physiological processes such as cell differentiation and hematopoiesis (Iyer et al., 2004, 2007; Kasper et al., 2006; Kimbrel et al., 2009). Furthermore, CREB, c-Myb, MLL, and c-Jun have been implicated in several cancers, including leukemias and solid tumors (Vargova et al., 2011; Kinoshita et al., 2003; Li et al., 2000; Ayton and Cleary, 2003; Leaner et al., 2003; Wisdom et al., 1999; Crans-Vargas et al., 2002); thus compounds that block these proteins from forming key interactions with CBP may prove useful in the development of transcription targeted therapeutics (Goodman and Smolik, 2000; Verdine and Walensky, 2007; Pandolfi, 2001; Darnell, 2002; Koh and Zheng, 2007; Koehler, 2010; Lee and Mapp, 2010; Mapp and Ansari, 2007; Vo and Goodman, 2001; De Guzman et al., 2006). With continuously improving computing power coupled with the increasing number of protein structures being solved experimentally (Zwier and Chong, 2010), computational methods, particularly simulation research, present an attractive and complementary approach to understand the molecular function and regulation of many proteins. Specifically, the NMR structures of the CREB:CBP (PDB ID: 1KDX) (Radhakrishnan et al., 1997) and c-Myb:CBP (PDB ID: 1SB0) (Zor et al., 2004) complexes have provided an opportunity, with computational methods, to better understand the function and dynamics of transcription factor (CREB and c-Myb) and coactivator (CBP) complexes. Proteins are highly dynamic and are constantly switching between different conformations. Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations can provide atomically detailed views of protein motions in vacuum or in solution, sampling multiple timescales ranging from nanoseconds to milliseconds using supercomputing resources (Zwier and Chong, 2010). Our previous studies demonstrated that mice homozygous for the CBP KIX mutations or especially for the p300 KIX mutations exhibit multiple blood defects as a result of attenuated c-Myb-mediated transcription (Kasper et al., 2013, 2002). However, it is almost unknown how the CBP KIX mutations affect CBP’s structure and binding to c-Myb. To understand the effects of the CBP KIX mutations, we have systematically investigated dynamics of the CBP:c-Myb complexes using MD simulations. Our results showed specific effects of the KIX mutations on c-Myb binding and will progress both understanding of their binding mode and the development of specific inhibitors targeting the CBP KIX domain.

To eliminate the contribution of wild-type (WT) CBP completely, we generated primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) that contain three mutant KIX alleles for CBP and p300, and one Cre/loxP conditional knockout CBPflox allele (Kang-Decker et al., 2004). As reported earlier (Xu et al., 2007), transient expression of Cre recombinase following infection with a Cre-expressing adenovirus resulted in efficient recombination of CBPflox. Growth of the mutant CBPΔflox/KIX;p300KIX/KIX (‘triple-KIX/Δflox’) and control (‘Δflox’, CBP+/Δflox;p300+/+) MEFs were comparable before and after Cre-adenovirus infection. Moreover, MEFs that do not express WT CBP did not have a major growth disadvantage, as the proportion of cells with the CBPΔflox allele did not decrease appreciably over a 14-day period. A CMV promoter driven full length c-Myb construct, a luciferase reporter containing a c-Myb response element cloned from the CD13 promoter, and the Gal-c-Myb plasmid (186–325 aa), all used here, were described in Parker et al. (1999). Transient transfection assays using MEFs were performed as previously described using the Promega Dual Luciferase Reporter Assay Kit (Madison, USA) where reporter gene luciferase activity is normalized to cotransfected Renilla luciferase reporter activity (Xu et al., 2007).

The molecular modeling procedure was based on the method described previously (Xu et al., 2014). The sequences were aligned using the ClustalW pairwise alignment algorithm of the Vector NTI software (Lu and Moriyama, 2004). The alignment data were imported into MODELLER version 9.9 (Sali and Blundell, 1993) to generate the structures of mouse CBP with three point mutations in the KIX domain: Y650A, A654Q, and Y658A designated as MUT CBP (or CBP KIX mutations) using the experimentally solved structure (PDB ID: 1SB0, Chain A) (Zor et al., 2004).

We have followed the procedure of our previous work (Xu et al., 2014) to calculate CBP KIX:c-Myb binding energy. The first step was to split the CBP-c-Myb.pdb file (PDB ID: 1SB0) into separate structure files: cbp-c-myb.pdb, cbp.pdb, and c-myb.pdb. These three structures were then used to create three gas phase prmtop and inpcrd file pairs for MM-PBSA and MM-GBSA calculations as well as one for the solvated complex in explicit solvent which was used to run the MD simulation. All prmtop files were created with the mbondi PB radii set in xLEaP with the ff99SB force field loaded. Next, the solvated complex was equilibrated by carrying out a short minimization, 50 picoseconds (ps) of heating, and 50ps of density equilibration with weak restraints on the complex followed by 500ps of constant pressure equilibration at 300K. All simulations were run with SHAKE turned on for hydrogen atoms, a 2 femtosecond (fs) time step, and Langevin dynamics for temperature control. Finally, a 20-ns production simulation was run using the PMEMD module, recording production coordinates every 10ps, and the binding energy was then calculated using the Perl script mm_pbsa.pl in the AMBER 12 package. More specifically, for MM-GBSA, Onufriev’s GB model was selected (igb=2) as well as appropriate values for SURFTEN and SURFOFF, 0.0072kcalmol−1
                        Å−2 and 0.0kcalmol−1, respectively (Onufriev et al., 2004). Salt concentration of mobile counterions was fixed at 0M. For the MM-PBSA calculation, mbondi radii from the prmtop file were kept and corresponding recommended values for SURFTEN and SURFOFF, 0.0072kcalmol−1
                        Å−2 and 0.0kcalmol−1, were chosen. The ionic strength of the PB solvent was fixed at 0mM. Binding energy calculations of WT CBP:c-Myb were independently performed for thirty-seven times of 2-ns simulations. The identical simulation protocol was used for calculating binding energy of MUT CBP:c-Myb, and this calculation was also performed for thirty-seven times. It should be pointed out that only the enthalpy contribution, not the entropy contribution, to the binding energy was calculated in our study. Amber 12 supports two types of decomposition: pairwise and per-residue. We performed both energy decompositions on the CBP:c-Myb systems. Per-residue decomposition calculates the energy contribution of single residues by summing its interactions over all residues in the system. Pairwise decomposition calculates the interaction energy between pairs of residues in the system.

Molecular dynamics simulations were based on the procedure described by Simmerling et al. (2002). All computations for WT CBP, MUT CBP, and c-Myb, including the initial energy minimization, heating, and MD equilibration runs, were performed under fully unrestrained conditions. All calculations used AMBER’s all-atom force field (ff99SB) as implemented in Amber 11 (Case et al., 2005). The SANDER and PTRAJ modules of AMBER, respectively, were used for computation and analysis. A total of 1000 steps of initial energy minimization, including 500 steepest descent steps (ncyc=500) followed by 500 conjugate gradient steps (maxcyc-ncyc) using a large cutoff (cut=999Å) and non-periodic simulation (ntb=0), were performed to adjust the structures. To give the system time to adjust as temperature is raised to the production temperature, the minimized system was slowly heated from 0 to 325 Kelvin (K) in seven increments of 50K over 50ps (5ps for the first six steps and 20ps for the seventh step). The production MD simulation was conducted for 500nano seconds (ns) at a constant 325K in one hundred 5-ns stages. The generalized Born solvent model was used in the heating and equilibration phases. Structure images were prepared using the Visual Molecular Dynamics (VMD) package (Humphrey et al., 1996).

Quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics (QM/MM) simulations started with initial minimization. A total of 1000 steps of initial non-periodic (ntb=0) energy minimization, including 500 steepest descent steps (ncyc=500) followed by 500 conjugate gradient steps (maxcyc-ncyc), using a classical non-bond cutoff (cut=10Å), were performed to adjust the structures. The side chains of residues 650 (WT CBP: Tyr and MUT CBP: Ala), 654 (WT CBP: Ala and MUT CBP: Gln), and 658 (WT CBP: Tyr and MUT CBP: Ala) of CBP and L302 of c-Myb were treated as the QM region by avoiding cut of polar or unsaturated bonds (Supplementary Fig. 1a and b). Charge of the defined QM region was 0. The theory used for QM calculation was PM3 semi-empirical Hamiltonian. The cutoff used for the QM region was 6.0Å. After minimization, the system was equilibrated for 250fs of QM/MM simulation at a constant temperature of 300K using Langevin dynamics for temperature control. The simulations applied Ewald type treatment (qm_ewald=1), specifically the Particle Mesh Ewald (PME) method (qm_pme=1) to the system for long range electrostatics. A weak constraint (restraint_wt=5kcal/mol) was employed to the main chain of the entire protein complex.

Binding energies of WT CBP and MUT CBP mutations were compared using Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) where variations due to sampling were adjusted. The analyses were performed with SAS version 9.3 or Microsoft Excel.

@&#RESULTS@&#

As stated earlier, CBP and p300 have several domains: nuclear receptor interaction domain (NRID), the CREB-binding domain (KIX), Cys/His-rich region-1 (CH1 or transcriptional-adaptor zincfinger-1, TAZ1), bromodomain (Br), plant homeodomain (PHD), HAT enzymatic region, zinc-binding domain (ZZ), TAZ2 (aka CH3), and the nuclear receptor binding domain (NCBD) (Dyson and Wright, 2005). Multiple sequence alignment demonstrated that the KIX domains of human, mouse, frog, and chicken CBP and p300 are highly conserved, and worm CBP is the least conserved KIX domain as expected. The three amino acids mutated in the KIX domain are indicated with arrows (Fig. 1
                        ) and this KIX mutant was used in this study.

c-Myb-mediated transcription was studied by two types of luciferase reporter assays: one is to use a c-Myb binding element-driven luciferase reporter and the other is to use a luciferase reporter containing five Gal4 binding sites. The first assay tests full-length c-Myb-mediated transcription and the latter tests a fusion protein Gal-c-Myb-mediated transcription. Dr. Brindle’s lab reported that CBP/p300 KIX mutations attenuated c-Myb mediated transcription. However, there is still one WT CBP or one WT p300 allele (Kasper et al., 2013) or two of WT CBP or WT p300 alleles (Kasper et al., 2002) in the two previous studies (Kasper et al., 2013, 2002). In this work, the last WT allele of CBP was deleted by CBPflox-Cre system similarly as we reported before (Xu et al., 2007). The Δflox control (CBP+/Δflox;p300+/+) and the triple-KIX/Δflox mutant (CBPΔflox/KIX;p300KIX/KIX) MEFs were transfected with empty vector, CMV, and the CMV-c-Myb construct. c-Myb-mediated transcription in the transfected MEFs was measured by dual luciferase assay. Our data from two independent experiments showed that there was reduced c-Myb-mediated transcription in the KIX mutant MEFs (Fig. 2
                        a). Similarly, the transient transfection assays using a fusion protein of Gal-c-Myb (186–325 aa) from three independent experiments showed that the transactivation function of c-Myb was attenuated >90% in the mutant MEFs (Fig. 2b) as expected based on our previous study (Kasper et al., 2013).

Based on our experimental data, the CBP KIX mutations affected binding between CBP and c-Myb. We took advantage of computational approaches to calculate binding energy between CBP and c-Myb. Specifically, we were interested in calculating the change in binding energy caused by the CBP KIX mutations. Computational methods that combine molecular mechanics energy and implicit or explicit solvation models, such as Molecular Mechanics/Poisson Boltzmann Surface Area (MM/PBSA) (Wang et al., 2001) and Molecular Mechanics/Generalized Born Surface Area (MM/GBSA) (Kollman et al., 2000), have been widely exploited in free energy calculations.

200 snapshots were randomly selected from the trajectory of one 2-ns production run for binding energy calculations. Our calculations from thirty-seven independent 2-ns simulations using MM/GBSA approach indicated that MUT CBP:c-Myb (−40.53kcal/mol±8.45) has a slightly higher binding energy than WT CBP:c-Myb (−56.69kcal/mol±8.53), indicating that the KIX mutations decrease stability of the complex (ANOVA analysis, p
                        <0.001) (Fig. 3
                        a). The binding energies between CBP and c-Myb calculated by either MM/GBSA or MM/PBSA method (WT CBP:c-Myb: −67.47kcal/mol±4.44 vs MUT CBP:c-Myb: −61.27kcal/mol±8.33) (ANOVA analysis, p
                        <0.001) showed similar binding defect of MUT CBP to c-Myb (Supplementary Fig. 2). In addition, the dynamics study showed that the CBP KIX mutations consistently destabilized the CBP:c-Myb complex with an increasing degree of the defect over the period of time of the simulations (Fig. 3b). The major favorable contributor to the binding of CBP and c-Myb of both methods is van der Waals energies (VDWAALS) (WT CBP:c-Myb: −59.20kcal/mol±5.14 vs MUT CBP:c-Myb: −59.57kcal/mol±3.52). Electrostatic energies (EEL) are disfavorable factors for binding energies (WT CBP:c-Myb: 14.92kcal/mol±3.68 vs MUT CBP:c-Myb: 22.44kcal/mol±8.19). Our data demonstrated that the KIX mutations affected EEL (ANOVA analysis, p
                        <0.001) but did not significantly affect VDWAALS (ANOVA analysis, p
                        =0.1017).

Next, we asked the question of whether the KIX mutations affect geometry and potential energy of CBP and c-Myb in the complex. Thus, we calculated potential energies of individual proteins: WT CBP, MUT CBP, and c-Myb in their complex. We found that MUT CBP in the MUT CBP:c-Myb complex has a lower potential energy than WT CBP in the WT CBP:c-Myb complex (Fig. 3c). c-Myb complexed with MUT CBP has a higher potential energy than it has with WT CBP (Fig. 3d). This result suggests that the KIX mutations not only affect the geometry of CBP but also affect the geometry of c-Myb. Fig. 4
                        a shows an overlay of the structures of WT CBP:c-Myb and MUT CBP:c-Myb, both with the lowest potential energies extracted from the simulation trajectory and the structure solved in the literature by NMR. The α helices of all three structures are aligned well with a minor degree of difference, but the loops are not aligned well, demonstrating the effect of the MD simulation and mutations on the structures.

The KIX mutations attenuated binding between CBP and c-Myb by modestly decreasing electrostatic energies. The binding between CBP and c-Myb is mediated by a shallow hydrophobic groove in the center where the side-chain of Leu302 of c-Myb is inserted into a deep hydrophobic pocket lined by the side-chains of Leu603, Lys606, Leu607, Tyr650, Leu653, Ala654, and Ile657 of CBP, and two salt bridges on each end: one end is the electrostatic interaction between Glu665 of CBP and Arg294 of c-Myb, and the other end is the interaction between Arg646 of CBP and Glu306 of c-Myb (Zor et al., 2004). The amino acids participating in hydrophobic and electrostatic interactions are shown in (Fig. 4b and c). Since the KIX mutations primarily affected electrostatic interactions, we first investigated the electrostatic interactions actually mediated by hydrogen bonds in greater detail. Our simulations demonstrated that the KIX mutations decreased hydrogen bond interactions of the R646:E306 and E665:R294 pairs, with stronger defect on the E665:R294 pair than the R646:E306 pair (Fig. 5
                        a). We further analyzed the dynamics of the two hydrogen bond pairs, and their dynamics are distinct. Hydrogen bonds of the R646:E306 pair of WT CBP:c-Myb complex are more stable while the R646:E306 pair of MUT CBP:c-Myb complex has initially fewer interactions but shows an increasing trend followed by a decreasing trend (Fig. 5b). A representative hydrogen bond between R646 and E306 of WT CBP:c-Myb is shown in Fig. 5c and a representative hydrogen bond between R646 and E306 of MUT CBP:c-Myb is shown in Fig. 5d. Hydrogen bonds of the E665:R294 pair are relatively stable for WT CBP:c-Myb while MUT CBP:c-Myb shows a fast decrease of hydrogen bonds (Fig. 5e). Two representative hydrogen bonds between E665 and R294 are shown in Fig. 5f (WT CBP) and g (MUT CBP). Our simulation showed one additional hydrogen bond between Y650 of WT CBP and E306 of c-Myb that is completely absent in MUT CBP:c-Myb complex since Y650 was changed to A650 in MUT CBP (Fig. 5c, d and h). In conclusion, the KIX mutations affected three hydrogen bond interactions between CBP and c-Myb.

Since each of our simulations was performed in a water box (TIP3PBOX and 12.0Å), we investigated hydrogen bond interactions between the complexes and water molecules. More specifically, we intended to investigate the effect of the KIX mutations on solvation. Our data indicates that solvation decreased in the first half of the 20-ns simulations and achieved stablility in the second half the simulations, and we did not observe any obvious effect of the mutations on solvation of the protein complexes (Supplementary Fig. 3a). Since our data supported that the KIX mutations weakened three specific hydrogen bonds between CBP and c-Myb, we also asked whether the KIX mutations affect total hydrogen bonding between CBP and c-Myb. Our analysis showed that the KIX mutations significantly altered total hydrogen bonds of the CBP:c-Myb complex (average and SD of WT CBP:c-Myb: 2623±244 vs average and SD of MUT CBP:c-Myb: 2331±211, t-test p
                        <0.001) (Supplementary Fig. 3b). In addition, we found that total hydrogen bonds between the complexes remained stable during the simulations.

A partner of a protein could have an influence on the protein’s structure due to their physical interactions. In other words, the structure of an individual protein with any partner(s) may not be the same or similar to that of the same protein without its partner(s). We investigated WT CBP, MUT CBP, and c-Myb structures in their complexes. To understand the effect of CBP on c-Myb structure, the effect of c-Myb on CBP structure, and the effect of the KIX mutations on CBP structure, we performed 500-ns MD simulations on each of three proteins: WT CBP, MUT CBP, and c-Myb. Next, we overlaid the simulated structures of WT CBP, MUT CBP with the experimentally solved CBP structure and overlaid the simulated structure of c-Myb with the experimentally solved c-Myb structure using the stamp structural alignment function in VMD. Compared with the simulated structure of CBP:c-Myb complex, we found that the simulated structures of the individual proteins differ more from the experimentally solved structures of CBP and c-Myb. In addition, the KIX mutations had a more profound effect on CBP structure (Supplementary Fig. 4a and b). Unexpectedly, MUT CBP has a slightly lower potential energy than WT CBP (Supplementary Fig. 4c).

Because of the slightly lower potential energy observed in MUT CBP, we studied dynamics of hydrogen bonds in WT CBP and MUT CBP. On average, MUT CBP (Supplementary Fig. 5a) has more total hydrogen bonds than WT CBP (Supplementary Fig. 5b) over the period of the simulations. This could be one of the reasons why MUT CBP had a lower potential energy. Both WT CBP and MUT CBP started to increase their hydrogen bonds after the first 5-ns of simulation, and then the hydrogen bonds stayed relatively stable over the later 45-ns of simulation. R646 and E665 of CBP are hydrogen bonds to E306 and R294, respectively, of c-Myb based on the literature (Zor et al., 2004) and our simulations. Thus, we next specifically studied the dynamics of possible hydrogen bonds mediated by CBP R646 and E665. E665 maintains relatively stable hydrogen bonds over the entire 50-ns simulation for both WT CBP and MUT CBP, and MUT CBP has slightly more hydrogen bonds on average than WT CBP (Supplementary Fig. 5c and d). In contrast, hydrogen bond dynamics of R646 of WT CBP and MUT CBP are significantly different. Hydrogen bonds of R646 of WT CBP dramatically increase after 5-ns of simulation and then stay stable (Supplementary Fig. 5e). However, hydrogen bonds of R646 of MUT CBP vary over the entire 50-ns of simulation (Supplementary Fig. 5f).

Similarly, we studied hydrogen dynamics of c-Myb. Overall, total hydrogen bonds of c-Myb are lower in the first three 5-ns of simulation than the rest of the seven 5-ns of simulation where hydrogen bonds are stable (Supplementary Fig. 5g). As stated earlier, R294 and E306 of c-Myb have hydrogen bonding interactions with CBP. We further studied hydrogen bonds of R294 and E306 of c-Myb. R294 is still highly hydrogen bonded (Supplementary Fig. 5h) while E306 did not participate in significant hydrogen bonding over 50-ns of simulation (data not shown).

We recently reported that in the context of the p300 KIX mutations, the CBP KIX domain mutations (Y650A, A654Q, and Y658A) affect platelets, B cells, T cells, and red blood cells (Kasper et al., 2013). Leu302 of c-Myb provides a major driving force for binding into the deep hydrophobic pocket on CBP. Even changing Leu302 of c-Myb to Ile or Val had a detrimental effect on its binding to CBP, whereas mutating its nearby charged residues in c-Myb to Ala had little or no effect (Parker et al., 1999). CBP KIX domain mutations (Y650A, A654Q, and Y658A) were designed to disrupt interactions with Leu302 of c-Myb. Our analyses of hydrogen bond dynamics show that the CBP KIX mutations decreased two salt bridges at the two ends of the CBP:c-Myb complex. To explore more on the local structure of the CBP KIX mutations around c-Myb Leu302 and to quantify specific effect of the mutations on these two salt bridges, we performed analyses of pairwise energy decomposition.

Based on the NMR structure (Zor et al., 2004) and experimental data (Parker et al., 1999), the side-chain of Leu302 of c-Myb is inserted into a deep hydrophobic pocket lined by the side-chains of Leu603, Lys606, Leu607, Tyr650, Leu653, Ala654, and Ile657 of CBP (Zor et al., 2004). We performed analyses of pairwise energy decomposition for all residues in the complexes of WT CBP or MUT CBP with c-Myb. We only reported the specific binding energies of c-Myb Leu302 with those WT CBP and MUT CBP residues by MM/GBSA and MM/PBSA methods in Table 1
                         because of the essential role of Leu302 of c-Myb in its binding to CBP. Overall, c-Myb Leu302 has higher hydrophobic binding affinity to the residues 603, 606, 607, 650, 653, 654, and 657 of WT CBP (average±SD: −4.98±1.07kcal/mol by MM/GBSA and average±SD: −5.19±0.57kcal/mol by MM/PBSA) than to MUT CBP (average±SD: −3.79±0.84kcal/mol by MM/GBSA and average±SD: −3.78±0.82kcal/mol by MM/PBSA) (p
                        <0.001 t-test). The representative hydrophobic interactions between c-Myb-Leu302 and the surrounding WT CBP and MUT CBP residues are shown in Fig. 6
                        a. The greatest effect of hydrophobic interactions caused by the KIX mutation is residue 650 (WT CBP-Tyr650:c-Myb-Leu302: −1.1148±0.3834kcal/mol vs MUT CBP-Ala650:c-Myb-Leu302: −0.3735±0.2919kcal/mol). The dynamics study showed consistently lower van der Waals energies of WT CBP-Tyr650 to c-Myb-Leu302 than the MUT CBP-Ala650:c-Myb-Leu302 pair during the simulations (Fig. 6b). This is probably due to the change of aromatic residue Tyr to small residue Ala in the KIX mutations. Among those residues, the least effect of hydrophobic interactions caused by the KIX mutation is residue 653 (WT CBP-Lue653:c-Myb-Leu302: −0.8514±0.1933kcal/mol vs MUT CBP-Leu653:c-Myb-Leu302: −0.8242±0.1624kcal/mol) (p
                        =0.558 t-test). The interactions of CBP-Leu653:c-Myb-Leu302 pair appear relatively stable during the simulation for both WT CBP and MUT CBP (Fig. 6c). In addition to calculating the hydrophobic interactions, we also quantified the effect of the KIX mutations on the two salt bridges. Our data support that the KIX mutations in the hydrophobic groove attenuated these two salt bridges by either MM/GBSA (Fig. 6d) or MM/PBSA (Supplementary Fig. 6) in agreement with the hydrogen bond analyses. Collectively, our calculations of binding energy, hydrogen bonds, and pairwise energy decomposition show that the KIX mutations of CBP attenuate the two salt bridges and also consistently decrease overall electrostatic interactions by the MM/GBSA method (Fig. 7
                        a) or MM/PBSA method (Supplementary Fig. 7). As to van der Waals interactions, our calculations of binding energy and pairwise energy decomposition show that the KIX mutations of CBP modestly decrease its interactions with residue Leu302 of c-Myb although no consistent effects on total van der Waals interactions are observed during the simulations (Fig. 7b).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

We have employed molecular modeling and simulations to investigate, with atomistic detail CBP and c-Myb in the rigor state. Although our 500-ns MD simulations of the proteins are more extensive than previous ps-level simulations, the time simulated remains relatively short when compared to the functionally relevant time scales for CBP and c-Myb folding in solution. Additionally, we carried out multiple 20-ns MD simulations for CBP:c-Myb complexes that also represent a relatively short time scale for binding.

The KIX triple point mutations mainly locate in the shallow hydrophobic groove, suggesting that changes in the hydrophobic center will have an impact on electrostatic interactions at each end. The KIX mutations specifically decreased two salt bridges between CBP and c-Myb: CBP-R646 and c-Myb-E306; CBP-E665 and c-Myb-R294. The experimental data showed that both R294A and E306A/N307A mutations of c-Myb slightly decreased their binding to CBP (Parker et al., 1999). The structure of CBP:c-Myb complex solved by NMR suggests that the orientation of c-Myb in the hydrophobic groove is determined by the electrostatic interactions on the two sides. Collectively, changes in the hydrophobic groove in the center could influence the electrostatic interactions at the ends, or vice versa. We predicted and demonstrated that the KIX mutations will change hydrophobic interactions between CBP and c-Myb. Our simulation data showed that the mutations did not significantly alter overall hydrophobic interactions and, instead, modestly decreased electrostatic interactions. During our ten 2-ns simulations, we found that a hydrogen bond interaction between Y650 of CBP and E306 of c-Myb was retained for >80% of our simulation time. This hydrogen bond interaction is completely absent in the simulations of the KIX mutations. It is possible that the hydrogen bond between Y650 of CBP and E306 of c-Myb may have an influence on hydrogen bonds between R646 of CBP and E306 of c-Myb. In addition, our data suggests that electrostatic interaction on one end could affect electrostatic interaction on the other end. Specifically, we observed that the KIX mutations in the center of the complex slightly alter electrostatic interactions at the two ends (Fig. 8
                     ). It will be interesting to employ distance constraints to fix electrostatic interactions and study the effect of the KIX mutations on hydrophobic interactions for longer simulations in the future.

Our transient transfection data demonstrated that the KIX mutations dramatically affected c-Myb-mediated transcription, suggesting that these three point mutations completely disrupt the binding of CBP to c-Myb (Fig. 2). The pulldown assay with the c-Myb transactivation domain (186–325 aa) fused to GST using extracts from WT and CBP
                     KIX/KIX MEFs demonstrated that endogenous CBP with the KIX mutations can not bind to GST-c-Myb (Kasper et al., 2013). Both our transient transfection data reported here and previously as well as our GST pulldown experimental data support that CBP with the KIX mutations can not bind c-Myb (Kasper et al., 2013). We expected that the KIX mutations will dramatically decrease binding energy between CBP and c-Myb. Surprisingly, our theoretical calculations showed only a modest increase in binding energy of MUT CBP to c-Myb. The domains CBP (87 aa) and c-Myb (25 aa) used in the MD simulations are very short fragments. Our experimental data investigated interactions of full-length mouse CBP (2441 aa) with full-length c-Myb or c-Myb transactivation domain (140 aa). In addition, we performed relatively short MD simulations (20ns). As stated earlier, longer MD simulations with constraint could reveal a greater effect of the KIX mutations on binding energy although it is still challenging to determine the level of constraint for theoretical calculations. We selected Y650, A654, and Y658 of WT CBP and L302 of c-Myb as the QM region (Supplementary Fig. 1a) and comparably selected Y650A, A654Q, and Y658A of MUT CBP and L302 of c-Myb as the QM region (Supplementary Fig. 1b). The overall structures of either WT CBP (Supplementary Fig. 8a) or MUT CBP (Supplementary Fig. 8b) from our QM/MM and MD simulations are comparable, suggesting that short QM optimizations did not cause significant changes to overall structures. In addition, we did not observe dramatic changes of local minimum structures by comparing the QM/MM optimization with the MD simulation. The local minimum structure of Y650, A654, and Y658 of WT CBP and L302 of c-Myb from the QM/MM optimization is similar to that of the MD simulation (Supplementary Fig. 8c). A similar result was obtained for MUT CBP (Supplementary Fig. 8d).

In summary, our MD simulations of the 3-D structures of mouse WT CBP, MUT CBP, and c-Myb and their associated binding modes shed light on CBP and c-Myb structural dynamics and interactions between the two proteins. Our results provide a means to evaluate the function of CBP and c-Myb. These results will help to improve our understanding of the exact biochemical and physiological functions and regulation of CBP and c-Myb.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The authors thank Dr. Brindle for comments on this study. The authors also thank the Enhancement Program of Louisiana Board of Reagents [LEQSF(2014-15)-ENH-TR-28] for support to W.X. The MD simulations of mouse CBP and c-Myb were conducted with high performance computational resources provided by the Louisiana Optical Network Initiative (LONI) (http://www.loni.org). The authors thank the LONI support team, especially Alexander Pacheco.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2016.03.004.

The following are Supplementary data to this article:
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

