@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
               In silico allergenicity prediction of several lipid transfer proteins

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Eleven EST sequences coding for previously unknown nsLTPs were identified.


                        
                        
                           
                           Twenty-eight protein sequences were in silico analyzed for allergenicity prediction.


                        
                        
                           
                           Twenty-four sequences showed a potential allergenicity according to 7 web tools.


                        
                        
                           
                           Some LTPs displayed high similarity to Pru p 3 within its IgE-binding epitope.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

LTP

Allergenicity prediction




                     In silico analysis

Cross-reactivity

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Non-specific lipid transfer proteins (nsLTPs) are common allergens and they are particularly widespread within the plant kingdom. They have a highly conserved three-dimensional structure that generate a strong cross-reactivity among the members of this family. In the last years several web tools for the prediction of allergenicity of new molecules based on their homology with known allergens have been released, and guidelines to assess potential allergenicity of proteins through bioinformatics have been established. Even if such tools are only partially reliable yet, they can provide important indications when other kinds of molecular characterization are lacking. The potential allergenicity of 28 amino acid sequences of LTPs homologs, either retrieved from the UniProt database or in silico deduced from the corresponding EST coding sequence, was predicted using 7 publicly available web tools. Moreover, their similarity degree to their closest known LTP allergens was calculated, in order to evaluate their potential cross-reactivity. Finally, all sequences were studied for their identity degree with the peach allergen Pru p 3, considering the regions involved in the formation of its known conformational IgE-binding epitope. Most of the analyzed sequences displayed a high probability to be allergenic according to all the software employed. The analyzed LTPs from bell pepper, cassava, mango, mungbean and soybean showed high homology (>70%) with some known allergenic LTPs, suggesting a potential risk of cross-reactivity for sensitized individuals. Other LTPs, like for example those from canola, cassava, mango, mungbean, papaya or persimmon, displayed a high degree of identity with Pru p 3 within the consensus sequence responsible for the formation, at three-dimensional level, of its major conformational epitope. Since recent studies highlighted how in patients mono-sensitized to peach LTP the levels of IgE seem directly proportional to the chance of developing cross-reactivity to LTPs from non-Rosaceae foods, and these chances increase the more similar the protein is to Pru p 3, these proteins should be taken into special account for future studies aimed at evaluating the risk of cross-allergenicity in highly sensitized individuals.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Non-specific lipid transfer proteins are low-molecular-weight proteins ubiquitously present throughout the plant kingdom, and they are currently believed to play a primary role in fighting plant stress, by inhibiting fungal and bacterial pathogens (Egger et al., 2010). This defensive action seems to be confirmed by the fact that their genetic expression is increased when plants are exposed to pathogen attack (Salcedo et al., 2007). Their evolutionary conservation seems to suggest that this class of proteins, belonging to the prolamin superfamily, might play a vital role in the survival of plants. Unfortunately, nsLTPs are also potent allergens. Although the sensitization via the respiratory route is believed to account for the majority of LTP allergy (pollen food syndrome), and even skin contact has been proposed as a route of exposure, the ingestion of LTP-containing fruits or vegetables seems to be responsible for the primary sensitization. Primary food allergy can be accompanied by the possibility of severe allergic symptoms, and anaphylaxis has been associated with LTPs in various plant-derived foods (Van Winkle and Chang, 2014).

Due to the severity of their induced symptoms and their large presence within all known cultivated plants, LTPs have been, and currently are, extensively studied. By 2011 the Allergome database reported 63 allergenic LTPs, and the number raised to 80 by the end of 2014 (www.allergome.org). The level of investigation can vary a lot within this group of allergens, going from the basic identification at genetic level to more advanced studies focused on their physical and biochemical properties. The most studied one is undoubtedly the peach LTP, Pru p 3, believed to be the primary source of sensitization for LTP allergic individuals in the Mediterranean area (Fernandez-Rivas et al., 2006). The Allergome database reports around 280 original papers regarding various aspects of Pru p 3 allergen written before the end of 2013.

The ability of a given protein to induce humoral and cellular Th2 immune responses, resulting in the formation of allergen-specific IgE and Th2 cytokines and subsequently in the induction of clinical symptoms, is a measure of its allergenicity (Scheurer et al., 2015). Such property is usually assessed by in vitro and in vivo tests, and no protein can be classified as allergenic without at least the evidence of the ability to bind in vitro IgEs from sera of sensitized individuals. However, the probability that a newly discovered protein has an allergenic potential can be calculated in silico using specific algorithms. The need to assess the allergenic potential primarily arises from the current large employ of biotechnology-derived products, such as genetically modified crops, vaccines and therapeutics, which need to undergo an extensive safety evaluation prior to commercialization (Ladics et al., 2011), as well as it is important to identify new allergens from sequenced genomes. Although no single factor is currently recognized as a reliable marker for protein allergenicity, in silico screening of genetic modifications has become mandatory: this kind of test may help to identify novel proteins possibly cross-reacting with known allergens, and therefore warranting subsequent experimental tests for confirmation (Mirsky et al., 2013).

The FAO/WHO and the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) have established guidelines to assess potential allergenicity of proteins using bioinformatics (FAO/WHO, 2001; EFSA, 2004). However, these guidelines focus on sensitivity to prevent potential new allergens entering the food market. Therefore, these criteria lack accurate prediction and generate a high number of false positives (Ladics et al., 2011). Over the last decade, a variety of internet-based bioinformatics testing tools for protein potential allergenicity have been developed, traditionally based on a search for short linear epitopes through a comparison of primary amino acid sequences (Cressman and Ladics, 2009). There are fundamentally two types of approaches for allergen prediction: the first one follows FAO/WHO guidelines seeking for sequence similarity, while the second approach is based on identification of patterns for allergenicity, called motifs. Most of the methods that follow this approach are based on supervised machine learning.

The use of prediction tools in the determination of the allergenic power of newly identified ‘natural’ proteins is very recent, and few papers have been issued on the matter. Recently, two papers focused on the in silico determination of the potential allergenicity features of 7 known proteins from chickpea (Kulkarni et al., 2013) and a thaumatin-like protein from sapodilla (Manilkara zapota), a tropical fruit recently associated to isolated cases of oral allergy syndrome (Ashok Kumar and Venkatesh, 2014), were published. A third one, issued this year, employed bioinformatics to predict the allergenicity of a newly characterized LTP isoform from almond (Buhler et al., 2015).

In this work we performed an in silico analysis on 28 amino acid sequences homolog to LTPs. Even though so far none of the foods considered in this analysis, with the exception of asparagus, has ever been reported as a threat to LTP allergic patients, the expression of this class of proteins has been proven at least at genetic level. The objective of our study was to employ bioinformatics-based tools to predict the allergenic potential of several lipid transfer proteins currently not classified as allergens. Moreover, their similarity with known allergens, with particular attention toward Pru p 3, was evaluated, in order to provide new insights into possible cross-reactions.

All databases and software used in this study are publicly available on the world-wide web. All information about currently known plant LTPs were retrieved from the Allergome database. The UniProt database (www.uniprot.org) was employed to collect primary sequences of both known allergens and known lipid transfer proteins not yet characterized as allergens.

The BLAST program (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi) was used to individuate the mRNA sequences coding for the putative lipid transfer proteins: firstly, the tBLASTn suite, which searches translated nucleotide databases using a protein query, was employed to screen the various cDNA libraries present within the NCBI database. Secondly, EST sequences showing the highest E-value were selected and analyzed by the BLASTx suite, which searches protein databases using a translated nucleotide query. The CDD tool (Marchler-Bauer et al., 2013) was employed to recognize the nsLTP1 conserved domain on the translated EST sequence.

For prediction of the potential allergenicity of all the amino acid sequences (retrieved from the databases or deduced) according to the current recommendations of the FAO/WHO Expert Consultation, as outlined in the Codex Alimentarius Commission (2003), the web-based tool Allermatch™ (www.allermatch.org) was employed. Three different algorithms were used: algorithm 1 carries out an 80 amino acids sliding window alignment using a 35% of identity cutoff. Algorithm 2 looks for a small exact wordmatch: for our analysis we tried with a 6, 8 and 13 wordlength. Finally, algorithm 3 performs a full FASTA alignment, providing the E-values of each query.

The sequence-based prediction analysis was compared to the motif-based one by employing 6 different tools, AlgPred™ (www.imtech.res.in/raghava/algpred/submission.html), Allerdictor (http://allerdictor.vbi.vt.edu), AllerHunter (http://tiger.dbs.nus.edu.sg/AllerHunter/running.html), AllerTOP (www.pharmfac.net/allertop), EVALLER™ (www.slv.se/en-gb/Group1/Food-Safety/e-Testing-of-protein-allergenicity/e-Test-allergenicity) and proAp (gmobl.sjtu.edu.cn/proAP/prediction.html). The proAP analysis was performed by selecting the SVM-AAC method.

Finally, based on the known information on the conformational epitopes of peach LTP, the analyzed amino acid sequences were aligned to the Pru p 3 sequence Q9LED1, using the free software LALIGN (http://www.ch.embnet.org/software/LALIGN_form.html), in order to evaluate sequence identity degree and common residues.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

Information on all the allergens reported as members of the nsLTP family were collected starting from the most updated database, Allergome (www.allergome.org). The list was generated by setting the following options in the advanced search tool: in the first archive we set ‘biological functions’ and looked for ‘LTP’, while in the second archive we set ‘source’ and looked for ‘plant’. Eighty molecules resulted from the search: of these, 44 allergens are officially approved by the WHO/IUIS Allergen Nomenclature Sub-committee, while 36 have been added to the database based on published data (Table S1). Information on the primary sequence of these allergens can vary a lot: nsLTPs can present more than one isoform within the same species, and in some cases the complete sequences of several of these isoforms can be found. In other cases the displayed amino acid sequence is only partial, or it is not reported at all. According to the WHO/IUIS guidelines, new allergens can be incorporated into the official list only in case of recognized IgE binding from at least 5 sera (or 5% of all the tested sera) of patients allergic to the respective allergen source (www.allergen.org). Nonetheless, several other LTPs currently not included in the WHO/IUIS list have proven their allergenicity: some of them through in vitro tests, like Dau c 3, where the biological activity of the recombinant carrot LTP was assessed by histamine release assay and peripheral blood mononuclear cells stimulation (Ballmer-Weber et al., 2005), or Lyc ba 3, where a protein identified as an LTP by MS/MS was able to bind IgE from the sera of six patients displaying respiratory or cutaneous symptoms against Goji berries (Carnes et al., 2013). Other allergens instead, like All c 3 from onion, Pet c 3 from parsley, or Ros r 3 from Japanese rose, have only been reported in isolated clinical cases of allergic reaction (Enrique et al., 2007; Cordobes-Duran et al., 2007; Lleonart et al., 2007).

However, most of the allergenic LTPs retrievable in the Allergome database, but excluded from the official WHO/IUIS list, owe their title just to their homology with other known LTPs, without any clinically reported evidence. Moreover, with the exception of Cit cl 3, Hor v 7k-LTP, Pru ar 7k-LTP, Tri td 7k-LTP and Vit ae 3, whose primary structure was also determined by mass spectrometric analyses (Serra et al., 2013; Lindorff-Larsen et al., 2001; Conti et al., 2001; Monnet et al., 2001; Jaeckels et al., 2013), all other LTPs were identified just at genetic level, and their primary amino acid sequences were only derived in silico. In one case, the allergenic power of the LTP from chickpea, Cic a 3, has also been predicted in silico exploiting available web tools (Kulkarni et al., 2013).

Since nsLTPs are considered panallergens (Ballmer-Weber, 2002), they are thought to be present in nearly every plant. Currently there are several plants, known to produce edible fruits, seeds or leaves that are source of allergens, where no allergic reaction triggered by hypothetical nsLTPs has been reported so far by clinicians. Nevertheless, all of them most likely express this type of proteins in their tissues. We found 15 common plant foods (bell pepper, canola, castor bean, cocoa, coffee, cucumber, mungbean, oriental mustard, pea, pineapple, poppy seeds, rye, sesame, soybean and spinach) which LTPs are currently retrievable on the UniProt database without being characterized as allergens. In most of the cases the UniProt database presents, for each organism, several entries matching with the definition of lipid transfer protein. These multiple entries can be either duplicates of the same sequence or structural isoforms that conserve the same core domain. A list of the 15 plants and the relative UniProt information is reported in Table S2. All these proteins have been identified and submitted by researchers over the years, but no evidence of any ability to trigger an allergic reaction has been reported so far.

Despite the large number of known LTPs, there are allergenic plants that do not present at the moment any information regarding the possible expression, at protein level, of a lipid transfer protein. In order to find evidences of the existence of an LTP homolog, we selected 10 plants with no reported evidence of LTP presence, and for each of them we looked for the taxonomically closer organism with a known LTP (Fig. 1
                        ). Moreover, two more plants, namely the gold kiwi and the asparagus, which LTP sequences are known for just few amino acids, were included in the analysis. In Fig. S1 an example of the workflow of our in silico analysis is displayed: we started from the amino acid sequence of the closest organism’s LTP, which was submitted to tBLASTn analysis. Here we looked in the EST database of the plant under investigation, and the mRNA sequence displaying the highest E-value and similarity degree to the query was then analyzed using the BLASTx suite. A positive result was defined by the identification, by the CDD tool, of the nsLTP conserved domain on the translated EST sequence. To further confirm the result, the EST sequence was in silico translated into protein using the ExPASy Translate tool (http://web.expasy.org/translate): as members of the prolamin superfamily, nsLTPs share with the 2S albumins and the α-amylase trypsin inhibitors a common pattern of eight cysteine residues, ...C...C.../...CC...CXC...C...C... (Henrissat et al., 1988), which presence could be observed also in the translated mRNA sequences.

The taxonomical relationships between plants which LTP coding EST was identified and their closest relatives with a known LTP are represented in Fig. 1: 11 new putative LTP coding ESTs so far uncharacterized were identified through our analysis. The plants sources of these sequences were gold kiwi (Actinidia chinensis), oat (Avena sativa), papaya (Carica papaya), watermelon (Citrullus lanatus), pumpkin (Cucurbita maxima), persimmon (Diospyros kaki), buckwheat (Fagopyrum esculentum), narrowleaf lupine (Lupinus angustifolius), mango (Mangifera indica), cassava (Manihot esculenta) and pistachio (Pistacia vera). The translated product of the LTP coding sequence identified from the A. chinensis EST database (GenBank FG517393) showed a poor homology both with the known partial sequence of the allergen Act c 10 (P85204) from gold kiwi (7 residues out of 15) and with the partial sequence of the LTP from green kiwi, Act d 10 (P85206, 51,1% of identity). Therefore, we conclude that this sequence codifies for an isoform of gold kiwi LTP different from the known Act c 10.

Finally, the two partial amino acid sequences of Aspa o 1 isoforms from asparagus (Diaz-Perales et al., 2002) were in silico completed by consulting the Asparagus officinalis EST database. A list of all the ESTs and the complete deduced amino acid sequences is available in Table 1
                        
                     

A total of 7 web-based tools were then employed to predict the potential allergenicity of 28 LTP amino acid sequences (15 coming from the organisms reported in Table S2 and 13 deduced from ESTs and reported in Table 1). Firstly, we performed a sequence-based prediction analysis using the Allermatch™ tool (Fiers et al., 2004). Subsequently, a motif-based analysis was carried out using 6 other free prediction tools, in order to compare the outcomes obtained.

The FAO/WHO Expert Consultation originally recommended a positive assessment of possible allergenicity for a query protein if there was either any alignment between any 80 aa-long window on the query protein and an allergen with ≥35% sequence identity over an alignment length ≥80, or any sequence of 6 aa or more found in both the query protein and an allergen. However, a recent analysis, aimed at evaluating the reliability of the bioinformatics allergenicity assessment, pointed out that by employing this inclusion criterion a very large number of false positives are produced (Mirsky et al., 2013). One of the premier metrics quantifying the significance of a sequence alignment made by the FASTA alignment tool is the E-value, which is indicative of the possibility that a particular sequence alignment could occur by chance. It has been suggested that an alignment between a query protein and an allergen possessing an E-value below ∼10−6 may indicate that the query protein is allergenic (Silvanovich et al., 2009). In their paper, Mirsky et al. observed that by just increasing the width of the amino acid matching window from six to eight, the false positive rate substantially reduces to ∼10%, while the ability to detect true positives only slightly lowers. The most effective criterion proposed was the one declaring a query protein potentially allergenic if there is either (i) an alignment between it and an allergen having ≥35% sequence identity over an alignment length ≥80 or (ii) some sequence of 13 aa or more found both in it and an allergen, and (iii) there is an alignment between it and an allergen with an E-value ≤10−4. This adjustment in the acceptability was able to generate fewer than 6% false positives, while causing no increase in false negatives (Mirsky et al., 2013).

The results of our in silico analysis performed using the Allermatch™ tool are displayed in Table 2
                           : with the only exception of the LTP from Coffea arabica, all other entries were recognized as homologs of allergenic LTPs from other major plants. The pineapple LTP could not be analyzed using the algorithm 1 because the sequence present in the UniProt database did not exceed 80 aa. In only two cases (pea and castor bean) the percentage of identity of the best hit calculated using the algorithm 1 was lower than 50 (Table 2). The algorithm 2 was employed by looking for 6, 8 and 13 aa of exact wordmatch. With the only exception of castor bean LTP, all queries displayed a match with a known allergen when they were searched for a 6 aa window. LTPs from coffee and pea matched Ani s 2 and Pis s 1, respectively, which are not members of the nsLTP family. When queries were searched for an 8 aa window, LTPs from coffee and pea, but also from oriental mustard, did not find any match (Table 2). Finally, when queries were searched for a 13 aa window, only proteins from bell pepper, cassava, cucumber, mango, mungbean, papaya, poppy and pistachio showed a positive match with a known LTP. Algorithm 3 was used to verify the E-values of the FASTA alignment, and, with the only exception of coffee LTP, all other sequences displayed values ≤10−4 (Table 2).

According to the original indications of the FAO/WHO Expert Consultation, all the 28 entries analyzed could be considered as potential allergens. However, thanks to the suggestions provided by Mirsky et al., we would rule out the coffee LTP from the list. Regarding the other individuated LTPs, none of them could be safely excluded from the potential risk of allergenicity. The analyzed LTPs from bell pepper, cassava, cucumber, gold kiwi, lupine, mango, mungbean, oat, papaya, soybean and watermelon presented a high similarity degree with the corresponding allergens from tomato, rubber, mulberry, celery, plane, mulberry, green beans, corn, green beans, green beans and mulberry respectively. Also, LTPs from pistachio and poppy showed a match even in the 13 aa window with Pha v 3 and Art v 3 respectively, and could therefore be considered likely to be allergenic according to Mirsky et al., although the Allermatch™ analysis performed using different algorithms does not exactly clarify to which known allergen they are more similar (Table 2).

For our motif-based allergenicity prediction analysis we used 6 free web tools based on different algorithms.

The AlgPred™ server, developed for predicting allergenic proteins and for mapping IgE epitopes (Saha and Raghava, 2006), bases its allergenicity prediction on four methods: the first method uses support vector machine (SVM) to predict allergens based either on amino acid or on dipeptide composition of the protein, achieving an accuracy of 85.02 and 84.00%, respectively. All 28 queries analyzed with the SVM method based on amino acid composition (included the coffee LTP) resulted potentially allergenic (data not shown). The second approach uses the software MEME/MAST, developed by Stadler and Stadler (Stadler and Stadler, 2003): MEME (Multiple Em for Motif Elicitation) is a tool for discovering motifs in a group of related protein sequences, and uses statistical modeling techniques to automatically choose the best width, number of occurrences and description for each motif. MAST (Motif Alignment and Search Tool) is a tool for searching biological sequence databases for sequences that contain one or more of a group of known motifs. By choosing this approach none of the queries analyzed were indicated as allergens (data not shown). Because this type of outcome was unexpected, we tried to employ the sequence of the allergen Pru p 3 (UniProt Q9LED1) directly as query, and the result was that even this protein was not recognized as allergen by the system. The conclusion is that clearly the software MEME/MAST is not applicable to the prediction of allergenicity of LTP homologs. The third method assigns a protein as allergen if it has a segment similar to allergen representative peptides (ARPs), by using a dataset composed of almost 3000 24mers peptides derived from allergens and non-allergens (Björklund et al., 2005). With the exception of oat, coffee, pea and castor bean LTP, all other queries were predicted as allergens by employing this method (Table 3
                           ). Finally, in the fourth approach, a protein is assigned as allergen if it has a segment identical to known IgE epitopes. This method is limited by the knowledge of only few epitopes and allergenic domains.

Even though some IgE binding epitopes of different LTPs have been disclosed (Egger et al., 2010), neither Pru p 3 (UniProt Q9LED1) nor almost none of the 28 queries seemed to contain experimentally proven IgE epitopes (data not shown). The only exception was the EST-deduced LTP from oat, which showed to contain an IgE epitope from Par j 1, the nsLTP from pellitory (Parietaria judaica). The method based on the similarity to ARPs seems therefore the most reliable when applied to the allergenicity prediction of LTP homologs.

EVALLER™ (Martinez Barrio et al., 2007) is a web server based on the algorithm DFLAP (Detection based on Filtered Length-adjusted Allergen Peptides). This in silico system is founded on two main features, a peptide selection procedure from allergens, realized by comparing allergens with presumed non-allergens, and a specific education of a support vector machine to which a query amino acid sequence can be presented (Soeria-Atmadja et al., 2006). When submitting any query sequence in FASTA format, the server returns an assessment of its potential allergenicity. As shown in Table 3, only the LTPs from coffee and castor bean were presumably considered as non-allergenic, while for all other sequences the probability of not being an allergen was comprised between 0.0 and 0.8%.

AllerHunter is an allergenicity prediction system that combines an iterative pairwise sequence similarity encoding scheme with SVM as the discriminating engine. The search is performed by comparing the query both to known allergens and to putative non-allergens and the system is capable of detecting motif or domain-sized similarities in novel proteins even when overall sequence similarity with known allergens is low (Muh et al., 2009). With the only exception of coffee and pea LTPs, all other 26 entries were classified as allergens by the server (Table 3). The developers reported that AllerHunter displayed a sensitivity of 83.4% and a specificity of 96.4%, with an accuracy of 95.3% (Muh et al., 2009).

In 2013 Wang et al. comprehensively evaluated the performances of sequence-based and motif-based allergen prediction approaches using the training and testing datasets respectively. All these approaches were integrated and optimized in a web-based application proAP (Wang et al., 2013). . The developers highlighted that the SVM-based method outperformed the others with higher accuracy and specificity (Wang et al., 2013), therefore we decided to analyze our queries using only this approach. The results split our group of proteins almost in two halves, with 13 sequences predicted as allergens (from asparagus, buckwheat, cassava, gold kiwi, lupine, mango, oat, papaya, pistachio, pumpkin, persimmon and watermelon), and 15 predicted instead as non-allergens (from bell pepper, canola, castor bean, cocoa, coffee, cucumber, mungbean, oriental mustard, pea, pineapple, poppy, rye, sesame, soybean and spinach). In their paper, the Authors describe the SVM-based approach having an accuracy of 91.70%, with a sensitivity of 92.82% and a specificity of 90.59% (Wang et al., 2013).

Allerdictor is a sequence-based allergen prediction tool that models protein sequences as text documents and uses support vector machine in text classification for allergen prediction. This new tool improved the speed of analysis and introduced the chance of simultaneously scanning multiple datasets. Comparative tests showed that Allerdictor performed better than AlgPred and EVALLER, and that it slightly outperformed even AllerHunter (Dang and Lawrence, 2014). By analyzing our sequences with this tool, 7 LTPs were assigned as non-allergens (Table 3), included Aspa o 1.02, one of the two isoforms of the asparagus LTP, which was found to play a major role in severe diseases driven by contact or inhalation (Tabar et al., 2004).
                        

Finally, our group of sequences was analyzed using a web prediction tool not based on the identification of linear motif but on the main physicochemical properties of the protein. AllerTOP introduced the concept of basing the prediction on conformational rather than on linear epitopes, by developing an alignment-independent method based on the auto- and cross-covariance (ACC) transformation of protein sequences into uniform, equal-length vectors (Dimitrov et al., 2013). The accurate prediction of B-cell epitopes cannot be presently achieved using computation methods (Ladics et al., 2014), although a number of software has been implemented over the last years (Dall’Antonia et al., 2014). According to the developers, AllerTOP outperformed other servers for allergen prediction (AlgPred, AllerHunter) with 94% sensitivity. Moreover, the software was found able to predict not only the allergenicity but also the possible route of exposure of the allergen of interest. Twenty-four out of 28 of the tested sequences were assigned as probable allergens. With the only exception of the pineapple LTP (whose submitted sequence was just 68 aa long), all other classified allergens displayed probabilities of being food allergens spanning from 33.3 to 99.9% (Table 3).

According to Aalberse, just considering the protein primary structure, a high risk of cross-reactivity exists among proteins with >70% identity, while an amino acid identity lower than 50%, even in case of a similar overall fold, rarely results in antigenic cross-reactivity (Aalberse, 2000). All amino acid sequences, with the exception of coffee LTP, were analyzed for their identity degree with their best matching known allergens provided by the software Allermatch™ (Table 4
                        ). Primary sequences of proteins from bell pepper, mungbean, soybean, mango and cassava displayed more than 70% of identity with known allergens from tomato, green beans, green beans, mulberry and rubber, respectively. With the exception of pea and castor bean LTPs, all other sequences showed identity degrees with their best matching allergen sequences included between 51 and 69%.

All the LTPs isolated from members of the Rosaceae family have primary sequences highly homolog to Pru p 3, and they all showed levels of cross-reactivity to peach LTP. Distantly related LTPs instead do not always share a high similarity level, and their immunologic behavior is not homogeneous. Cross-reactivity between peach Pru p 3 and distantly related LTPs sharing a low degree of similarity at amino acid sequence level (between 40 and 55%) has been reported for mustard (Tordesillas et al., 2011), celery (Gadermaier et al., 2011), mugwort (Diaz-Perales et al., 2000), rice (Enrique, 2005), onion (Enrique et al., 2007) and banana (Palacin et al., 2011). Conversely, other LTPs with a little similarity to Pru p 3, like those identified from kiwifruit (Bernardi et al., 2011), carrot (Asero et al., 2007) and wheat (Palacin et al., 2010), showed an absent, or dubious, cross-reactivity with Pru p 3, so these foods are considered moderately safe for LTP allergic patients. These evidences suggest that primary structure cannot be the only responsible for the cross-reactivity among LTPs, but other factors, such as the matrix composition, the size of the exposure, the characteristics of the patient and so on, as well as the presence of defined conformational epitopes, can play a decisive role (Morales et al., 2014). The employ of Pru p 3 as lone indicator of an LTP sensitization is not exhaustive, and recent studies suggested that subjects having isolated IgE positivity to single LTP should be further explored with a broader allergen panel, in order to identify whether sources other than peach can account of an IgE sensitization (Bernardi et al., 2011).

The three-dimensional structure of LTPs is extremely conserved (Diaz-Perales et al., 2000; Asero et al., 2002). It includes four α-helixes separated by short turns and a flexible and non-structured C-terminal coil. The structure is firmly held by four disulphide bridges, and presents a large internal hydrophobic tunnel-like cavity able to harbor lipidic components (Salcedo et al., 2004). The outer part of the protein generally consists of a large surface area filled with IgE-binding regions, all easily accessible by the immunoglobulins (Borges et al., 2008). This peculiar conformation and the high stability of LTP allergens suggest that conformational B-cell epitopes represent the main IgE-binding structural motifs. B-cell epitopes can be linear or discontinuous, and they are usually characterized by a high proportion of surface-exposed hydrophobic residues (Furmonaviciene et al., 2005).

The IgE-binding epitopes of Pru p 3, considered the prototype LTP allergen, have been identified several years ago (García-Casado et al., 2003), and even the mapping of the major T-cell epitopes has been recently attempted (Tordesillas et al., 2009). The employ of the mimotope mapping strategy allowed the identification of two relevant conformational IgE-binding regions on the surface of Pru p 3. The first consensus sequence (L37 R39 T40 P42 D43 R44 A46 P70 S76 P78 Y79) was mainly recognized by sera coming from a pool of patients showing only oral allergy syndrome, while the second one (N35 N36 L37 R39 T40 D43 A46 S76 I77 P78) was associated to patients with at least one systemic reaction. Both these conformational epitopes are formed by the association, at three-dimensional level, of two linear sequences, corresponding to the helix 2-loop-helix 3 region (from N35 to A46) and to part of the non-structured C-terminal coil (from P70 to Y79). It has been suggested that the high variability in the degree of similarity of these two consensus epitopes might account for the variability in the frequency of cross-reactions among the different LTPs (Pacios et al., 2008). Most studies reported the peach LTP as the most potent inhibitory molecule when employed in immune inhibition assays (Egger et al., 2010), while its in vitro inhibition by other LTPs can only be partially achieved. The reason for this discrepancy might lie in the fact that this molecule possesses more epitopes and/or epitopes with higher IgE-binding affinity compared to other LTPs (Zuidmeer et al., 2006).

All plants reported in Table 4 are ordered according to the identity degree of their corresponding LTP sequences to peach Pru p 3. This goes from a maximum of 69,9% of cassava LTP to a minimum of 29,7% of castor bean LTP. Moreover, for each sequence, we calculated the number of common residues present in the two regions responsible for the formation of the conformational B-cell epitope. As it can be observed from the table, the similarity degree displayed by each sequence is not always proportional to the number of shared residues in these two regions. These differences are even more evident if we compare the consensus sequence of Pru p 3 IgE-binding epitope with those of the other LTPs (Fig. 2
                        ). For example, if we look at the LTP from papaya, we can see that despite it shows just 58,1% of identity with Pru p 3, their sequences are almost identical in the IgE-binding epitope regions (Fig. 2). Vice versa, although the complete pistachio LTP sequence displays a high degree of identity to Pru p 3 (62,6%), they share only 7 residues out of 14 in the consensus region, and almost all of them are located in the C-terminal coil.

The reported observations are obviously not sufficient to calculate the chance of cross-reactivity between these proteins and the peach LTP, but we can say, for example, that both isoforms of the asparagus LTP, which showed identities between 60 and 54% with Pru p 3 (Table 4) and a number of shared residues equal to 8 for both proteins (Fig. 2), were previously seen to strongly react to anti-Pru p 3 antibodies (Diaz-Perales et al., 2002). The fruits cassava, mango and papaya, which LTPs showed a moderate similarity to peach Pru p 3, both generally (from 58 to 70% of identity) and especially within the epitope consensus region, are listed among those foods responsible for the latex-fruit syndrome, an association between latex sensitivity and food allergy due to the structure homology between some of the proteins of the rubber plant (Hevea brasiliensis) and those of several other plants, like avocado, banana, chestnut, fig, kiwi, melon, passion fruit, pineapple and tomato (Brehler et al., 1997). No cases of potentially LTP induced allergy have been reported so far for these fruits. The reactive forms of LTP from green and gold kiwifruit (Act d 10, Act c 10) showed a low amino acid identity with Pru p 3, believed to be the cause of the inhomogeneous IgE recognition observed in LTP allergic patients (Bernardi et al., 2011). The LTP isoform from gold kiwi described in this paper shares instead a higher level of identity with the peach LTP (Table 4). In their paper Bernardi et al. reported that additional isoforms of LTP could not be isolated from the seed extracts of green kiwi, probably because of their low yield. Although no LTPs have ever been found involved in the allergic disease caused by pistachio, a study aimed at evaluating the cross-reactivity among different plant-derived foods suggested that an LTP may have a role also in pistachio allergenicity (Asero et al., 2000). The LTP from lupine identified in this study showed an average identity degree of 56% with Pru p 3 (Table 4), while the similarity in the consensus region was poor (Fig. 2). So far no LTPs seem to be involved in the allergic reactions to lupine, although this legume has not been included within the group of safe foods for LTP-allergic patients (Asero et al., 2007). In the past legumes have been considered safe for LTP-allergic patients (Asero et al., 2005), but recent evidences about the existence of individuals reacting to the LTPs of beans (Pastorello et al., 2010) and lentils (Akkerdaas et al., 2012) have questioned this belief. Finally, LTPs from buckwheat, rye, cocoa, bell pepper, oat, oriental mustard, pea and castor bean showed little similarity both in the full sequence and in the IgE-binding consensus region.

The level of IgE raised against Pru p 3 has generally been taken as a reliable indicator of the LTP sensitization degree. This concept has been lately revised by some Authors, suggesting that sometimes fruit LTPs other than Pru p 3 are responsible for the primary sensitisation, and are able to produce a secondary sensitisation to peach (Morales et al., 2014). According to a recent study carried out to assess the clinical usefulness of currently available in vivo and in vitro tests in LTP-hypersensitive patients, peach is the primary sensitizer to LTP, and the level of IgE to peach LTP is the main factor associated with cross-reactivity, and clinical allergy, to non-Rosaceae foods (Asero, 2011). In another work, Asero suggested that, when sera of individuals monosensitized to peach LTP are tested with food extracts other than peach, the trend of IgE levels is predictable and follows a regular sequence (Asero, 2014). He also observed that the higher were peach-specific IgE levels, the higher was the probability that other plant-derived foods scored positive: this would mean that, when specific IgE titer is high, the chances to develop a reaction against a homolog of the target protein grow with the increase of the similarity between the homolog and the target. In any case, it is important to underline that specific IgE levels are only partially predictive of clinical allergy (Asero et al., 2011), and it is still unclear whether a real association between clinical symptoms and IgE levels exists or not (Rossi et al., 2009; Asero, 2014).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

An allergenicity prediction analysis has been carried out on 28 amino acid sequences identified as homolog to nsLTPs, by employing 7 publicly available web tools that use different algorithms. Twenty-four of these sequences were identified as potential allergens by at least 5 servers, 21 by 6 and 11 by all systems used. According to this analysis, the LTPs from C. arabica (UniProt S6FDF9), Pisum sativum (UniProt Q9M7D7), Ricinus communis (UniProt B9T6A0) and Brassica juncea (UniProt A8CT72) could be reasonably considered as safe for LTP sensitized individuals. The LTP homologs analyzed from bell pepper, cassava, mango, mungbean and soybean showed high similarity with known allergenic LTPs, and could therefore be considered for further clinical analysis, which would be anyway required for confirmation of their allergenicity and eventual cross-reactivity. Moreover, some of the analyzed LTPs displayed a good similarity to Pru p 3, both considering the full sequence and especially regarding the two linear regions forming the conformational B-cell epitope responsible for most of the IgE binding. Since IgE cross-reactivity is proportional to the similarity degree, and recent studies highlighted how in peach LTP mono-sensitized patients also the levels of IgE to Pru p 3 seem directly associated with cross-reactivity to non-Rosaceae foods, these proteins could represent the first candidates for a risk evaluation.

Even though the nsLTP family consists of phylogenetically- and structurally-related pan allergens, the IgE cross-reactivity possesses various degrees of clinical relevance, and it is not necessarily accompanied by a cross-allergenicity to the corresponding fruits, therefore its importance can be controversial. In any case, it is a complex term that depends on several factors, and its assessment cannot be resolved through an informatics analysis. Cross-reactivity is not the only actor playing for a protein allergenicity, which is determined by additional factors, such as the amount and duration of exposure to the immune system, the environmental conditions including microbial exposure, the immune-modulating components of allergenic sources facilitating Th2 immune responses, as well as the intrinsic effects of the protein on the innate and adaptive immune system. It is important to highlight that not all members of a certain protein family are allergens, and evidences suggest that it is difficult to develop a general paradigm for the prediction of allergenicity on the basis of the biological function of a given protein (Scheurer et al., 2015). The in silico evaluation of allergenicity performed through bioinformatics tools can nonetheless provide useful insights into possible cross-reactivity, and in the future, such approach could be reasonably applied to other classes of allergen. It is worth reminding though, that the main limitation of these bioinformatics approaches is that these predictions can only be used to suggest experiments to be run in the lab. In silico allergenicity evaluation cannot be a replacement for empirical assessment of IgE binding, and without experimental data confirming the theoretical studies no conclusions can be safely thrown. On the other hand, as previously happened, these in silico analyses will maybe open the way to further characterizations of putative new allergens at molecular level, and, combined with experimental validated methodologies, will help define a more efficient and comprehensive approach to the assessment of the allergenic power of novel proteins, thus contributing with new data to the food safety evaluation.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2015.11.006.

The following are Supplementary data to this article:
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

