@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Genome-wide identification and expression analysis of WNK kinase gene family in rice

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Identified 9 members of WNK in rice, that showed resemblance to Arabidopsis and human WNK.


                        
                        
                           
                           Phylogenetic analysis of all WNK was performed and categorized into five main clades and subclades.


                        
                        
                           
                           Their gene expression pattern of tissue specific and under various abiotic stresses reveals differential expression pattern.


                        
                        
                           
                           The presences of various abiotic stress responsive cis-elements in the promoter region of OsWNK also predict their importance in providing basal tolerance to rice during critical conditions.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

WNK

With no lysine kinase

Rice

Gene expression

Abiotic stress

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Eukaryotic protein kinases represent one of the largest gene families involved in diverse regulatory functions. WNK (With No Lysine) kinases are members of ser/thr protein kinase family, which lack conserved catalytic lysine (K) residue at protein kinase subdomain II and is replaced by either asparagine, serine or glycine residues. They are involved in regulation of flowering time, circadian rhythms and abiotic stresses in Arabidopsis thaliana. In the present study, we have identified 9 members of WNK in rice, showed resemblance to Arabidopsis and human WNK and clustered into five main clades phylogenetically. The predicted genes structure, bonafide conserved signature motif and domains strongly support their identity, as members of WNK kinase family. We have analyzed their chromosomal distribution, physio-chemical properties, subcellular localizations and cis-elements in the promoter regions in silico. Further, transcript analysis of OsWNK by qRT-PCR revealed their differential regulation in tissue specific and abiotic stresses libraries. In conclusion, the identification of nine OsWNK and transcript level expression pattern under abiotic stress using qRT-PCR in rice will significantly contribute towards the understanding of WNK genes in monocots and thus provide a set up for functional genomics studies of WNK protein kinases.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Protein kinases are one of the largest superfamilies, broadly classified into nine groups, 134 families and 196 subfamilies in eukaryotes (Manning et al., 2002). They are capable of transferring gamma phosphate group of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to phosphorylate serine, threonine or tyrosine residues of protein (Hanks and Hunter, 1995). They are essential regulator of various cellular processes such as development, cell cycle and signal transduction. The catalytic domain of protein kinases are 250–300 amino acid residues in length and demarcate as 12 conserved regions, referred to as subdomains (Hanks and Quinn, 1991). With No lysine (WNK) kinase (hereafter referred to as WNK), a subfamily of serine/threonine protein kinases related to the STE20/PAK-like family is found in higher organisms (Xu et al., 2002). A unique feature of WNK subfamily is marked by the absence of catalytic lysine (K) residue in kinase subdomain II, which is essential for the coordination of ATP in the active center and conserved among all other kinases (Xu et al., 2000; Wilson et al., 2001; Xu et al., 2002). In contrast, the catalytic lysine of WNK kinases is shifted towards sub-domain I and replaced by cysteine (C) residue in human. The WNK homologues have been recorded in various eukaryotes except yeast and it is proposed that they may be restricted to multicellular organisms (Verissimo and Jordon, 2001). They are involved in diverse physiological function such as regulation of ion balance, cell signaling, proliferation and organ development in animals.

In plants, WNK members are involved in various physiological processes, such as regulation of flowering time by modulating the photoperiod and maintaining circadian cycle (Kahle et al., 2006; Uchida et al., 2014). In Arabidopsis thaliana 11 members of WNK have been reported and among them only two members have so far been well characterized (Huang et al., 2007; Wang et al., 2008). An in vitro study proved that AtWNK1 phosphorylate to the circadian clock component APRR3 and suggested that it may be involved in circadian rhythms (Nakamichi et al., 2002; Kojima et al., 2002). AtWNK8 interacted with vacuolar H+-ATPase (V-ATPase) subunit C through C-terminal domain and postulated that it might be involved in regulating ion transport in plants (Hermesdorf et al., 2006). Further MALDI-TOF MS analysis confirmed that AtWNK8 autophosphorylate as well as phosphorylates the vacuolar H+-ATPase subunit C at multiple sites. AtWNK8 mutant study showed that, it improves tolerance against salt and osmotic stresses through modulating proline content and activities of catalase and peroxidase (Zhang et al., 2013). AtWNK8 protein interacts with receptor of activated C kinase1 (RACK1) scaffold protein and phosphorylates at two residues, Ser122 and Thr162 (Urano et al., 2015). Another member of WNK family AtWNK9 plays a positive role in ABA signaling cascade and enhances drought tolerance in transgenic Arabidopsis (Xie et al., 2014). Other than Arabidopsis WNKs, very few reports are available on plant WNK members. Soybean WNK1 was characterized and observed that it may be involved in regulation of stress responsive abscisic acid signaling in the root system (Wang et al., 2010). Further constitutive over expression study of GmWNK1 in A. thaliana proved that it altered the sensitivity against salt and osmotic stresses (Wang et al., 2011). Rice OsWNK1 expression pattern was observed and suggested its involvement in regulation of biological circadian cycle and their possible role in abiotic stresses (Kumar et al., 2011). Interestingly, OsWNK family members have been shown significant transcript level regulation in rice seedlings when subjected to potassium (K+) deficiency (Ma et al., 2012). Furthermore, few reports are available on the involvement and the role of WNK in abiotic stresses.

In the present study, putative WNK homologues were identified and confirmed by absence of catalytic lysine (K) residue in the kinase subdomain II which is replaced by asparagine/serine/glycine residue. We constructed phylogenetic tree for all WNKs and categorized into five major clades (I–V) and six subclades. The current study was mainly focused on rice WNK family, consisting of nine putative members distributed on 5 different chromosomes. Furthermore, we analyzed protein domain, phylogenetic relationship and gene structure of OsWNK. Moreover, we performed tissue specific gene expression patterns of rice OsWNK genes under the normal growth condition and against various abiotic stresses (drought, salt, heat and cold), exhibited differential regulation pattern. It underscored functional importance of OsWNK in the different tissues and might be involved in regulation of various abiotic stresses.

With No lysine (WNK) kinase protein sequences were obtained from the NCBI (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/‎) protein database with WNK protein as the query search. The search for plant WNK gene was carried out using BLASTP and 50% identity was taken as the threshold (Altschul et al., 1990). The obtained sequences were searched in various plant genome databases such as TAIR (http://www.arabidopsis.org/), NCBI (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/‎), Gramene (http://www.gramene.org/), rap-db (http://rapdb.dna.affrc.go.jp/), TIGR (http://rice.plantbiology.msu.edu/), Phytozome (http://www.phytozome.net/) and Medicago genome project (http://www.jevi.org/medicago). 155 WNK sequences from various plant species viz. Cyanidioschyzon merolae, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Physcomitrella patens, Amborella trichopoda, Selaginella moellendorffi, Brachypodium distachyon, Sorghum bicolor, Zea mays, Oryza sativa, Hordeum vulgare, A. thaliana, Medicago truncatula, Solanum lycopersicum, Populus trichocarpa, Brassica rapa and Glycine max were retrieved. All WNK sequences were aligned and HMM profile was constructed (Sievers et al., 2011). Non redundant protein database was searched using HMMER 3.0 (hmmer.janelia.org) (Finn et al., 2011). HMMER and BLAST hits were compared and manually edited to avoid redundant sequences. Plant WNKs were aligned and submitted to weblogo, which is a web based tool to make of sequence logos (http://weblogo.berkeley.edu/logo.cgi) (Crooks et al., 2004).

All WNK amino acid sequences were aligned using Clustal W (multiple sequence alignment) tool and a phylogenetic tree was constructed by neighbor joining (NJ) as well maximum likelihood tree. The NJ tree with following parameters: p-distance, pairwise deletion, and bootstrap analysis with 1000 replicates. The maximum likelihood tree was constructed with JTT model and evaluated based bootstrap 1000 replicates and both trees were constructed using MEGA 6.06 tool (Tamura et al., 2013).

Rice OsWNK amino acid sequences were analyzed for the presence of protein kinase domain using Interproscan 5 (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/pfa/iprscan/), Prosite (http://prosite.expasy.org/) and SMART databases (Schultz et al., 2000; Zdobnov and Apweiler, 2001; Sigrist et al., 2013). Physiochemical data were generated from the ExPASy ProtParam server (http://web.expasy.org/protparam/) including sequence length, molecular weight and theoretical isoelectric point (pI) values (Gasteiger et al., 2005). Protein subcellular localization was predicted by LOCTREE3 and plant mPLoc predictive system (https://www.rostlab.org/services/loctree3) (Chou and Shen, 2010; Goldberg et al., 2014). Gene structure, exons and introns were obtained by comparing open reading frame (ORF) and genomic sequences. Gene structures were displayed using a GSDS 2.0 (http://gsds.cbi.pku.edu.cn) (Guo et al., 2007).

Rice seeds (O. sativa ssp. Indica cultivar IR64) were surface sterilized with 5% sodium hypochlorite and imbibed in water in the dark at 28°C for 2 days. Germinated seeds were planted in plastic trays and grown hydroponically in Hoagland solution with a 16h light/8h dark cycle. After three weeks, the seedlings were subjected to the abiotic stress treatments. For salt and drought treatments, seedlings were treated with Hoagland solution containing 200mM NaCl and 20% PEG-6000 respectively. For cold and heat shock treatments, seedlings were exposed to 4°C and 45°C respectively. After stress treatment, samples were collected separately at 0, 0.5, 3, 6 and 12h intervals. For tissue specific expression young leaf, flag leaf, culm, panicle and roots were collected from pot grown rice plants. Three replicates for each experiment were performed in this study. After harvest samples were immediately flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°C until RNA extraction.

Total RNA was extracted using the RNeasy plant mini-kit (Qiagen) and quantified by nanodrop (Thermo scientific). Specific primer pairs were designed for all the nine OsWNK genes (Supplementary information Table S1) and their specificities were confirmed by running the RT-PCR product in agarose gel, before they were used for qRT-PCR analysis. The amplicon size of each of them was around 200bp. qRT-PCR was performed in an eppendorf realplex 2.2 PCR system (Eppendrof) using SYBR Green master mix (DyNAmo ColorFlash SYBR Green qPCR kit F-416L, Thermo scientific). The dissociation curve was used to detect the presence of primer dimer or other nonspecific amplified products that would produce a detectable CT value and negatively skew the results. Eukaryotic elongation factor (eEF1α) was used as housekeeping genes for normalization. The relative expression change of OsWNK in response to abiotic stresses and tissue specific expression was quantified using the 2−ΔΔCT method (Livak and Schmittgen, 2001).

Rice qRT-PCR tissue specific and abiotic stress data were used for heatmaps construction using CIMminer online tool (http://discover.nci.nih.gov/cimminer) (Weinstein et al., 1994, 1997). We retrieved A. thaliana microarray expression values from AtGenExpress visualization tool database using respective gene IDs (http://jsp.weigelworld.org/expviz/expviz.jsp). The heatmaps were generated for tissue specific and abiotic stress values using CIMminer tool.

The promoter regions of OsWNK (−1500 to −1bp) were retrieved from NCBI O. sativa Genome map viewer database. Sequence analysis was performed using different databases including PlantCARE (http://bioinformatics.psb.ugent.be/webtools/plantcare/html) (Lescot et al., 2002). The cis-acting elements were searched in both forward and reverse strands. Eight cis-elements were predicted in this study: dehydration responsive element (MBS:TAACTG), abscisic acid responsive element (ABRE:TACGTG), circadian control responsive element (circadian: CAANNNNATC), light responsive element (G-box: CACGTG), heat shock responsive element (HSE: AAAAAATTTC), auxin responsive element (TGA: AACGAC), ethylene responsive element (ERE: ATTTCAAA), anaerobic induction regulatory element (ARE: TGGTTT).

@&#RESULTS@&#

In the present study, sixteen plant genome databases belonging to algae, bryophyte, lycophytes and angiosperms were searched and analyzed for distribution of WNK homologues. 155 nonredundant plant WNK sequences were retrieved by performing BLASTP. The WNK genes were identified and confirmed on the basis of the replacement of catalytic lysine residue with either asparagine (N)/ serine (S) or glycine (G) residues in plant (Fig. 1
                        ). Sequence logo was developed for WNK kinase subdomain I and II showing highly conserved protein kinase subdomain. The catalytic lysine (K) residue of subdomain II replaced by either asparagine (N) or serine (S) at position 30 and shifted to subdomain I at position 13 (Fig. 1).

Phylogenetic relationship among all plant WNKs were demonstrated using two different methods neighbor joining and maximum likelihood. According to NJ all plant WNKs were clustered into 5 different clades (Class I–V) (Fig. 2
                        ). Clade I and clade II comprised of three members each belonging to Physcomitrella, Cyanidioschyzon and Chlamydomonas. Similarly clade III has 54 members with further subdivision into 2 subclades. Subclade IIIA has 27 members with OsWNK7 and OsWNK8, while subclade IIIB has 27 members with OsWNK5. Clade IV is subdivided into two subclades, subclade IVA and subclade IVB with 22 and 16 members respectively. OsWNK4 is a member of subclade IVA, however OsWNK6 and OsWNK9 are members of subclade IVB. Clade V is divided into two subclades, subclade VA and subclade VB. OsWNK2 is the member of subclade VA, while OsWNK1 and OsWNK3 are members of subclade VB. All rice OsWNKs belongs to clades III, IV and V (Fig. 2).

However, maximum likelihood tree was constructed based on JTT model and evaluated using bootstrap 1000 replicates (Supplementary information Fig. S1). Similarly, all WNKs were clustered in to 5 clades and 4 subclades. Clade I is again categorized into two subclades, IA and IB which consisting of 22 and 16 members respectively. OsWNK6 and OsWNK9 belong to subclade IA and OsWNK4 is a member of subclade IB. Clade II comprised of 35 members and OsWNK5 is part of clade II. Clade III and clade IV represents smallest group which comprises 15 and 9 members each respectively. Clade V is classified into two subclades, subclade VA consisting of 25 and VB consist of 33 members. OsWNK7 and OsWNK8belongs to subclade VA, while OsWNK1 and OsWNK 3 belongs to subclade VB.

Genome wide analysis of rice revealed 9 members of WNK gene family (designated as OsWNK1–OsWNK9). The summary of OsWNK genes, such as: names, locus IDs, ORF lengths, AA length, nucleotide length, locations on chromosome and basic physiochemical parameters of putative protein, were recorded. Nucleotide length range between (984–2115bp), protein length (328–705 AA), molecular weight (36,623.5–79,820.5g/mol) and isoelectric point (pI) (4.64–6.81) were observed (Supplementary information Table S2). Chromosomal distribution and locations were determined for OsWNK, based on their mapped coordinates from the rice genomic database (http://rice.plantbiology.msu.edu/). Rice WNKs were distributed on the chromosome no. 2, 5, 7, 11 and 12. OsWNK1 (Os07g0572800), OsWNK3 (Os07g0185000) and OsWNK5 (Os07g0584100) genes were located on chromosome number 7; OsWNK6 (Os11G0160300) and OsWNK7 (Os11g0114600) were present on chromosome number 11; OsWNK8 (Os12g0114100) and OsWNK9 (Os12g0162100) were found to be present on chromosome number 12 whereas OsWNK2 (Os05g0108300) and OsWNK4 (Os02g0672800) genes were located on chromosome number 5 and 2, respectively as shown (Fig. 3
                        ). Similarly, we have observed 3 pairs of OsWNK proteins with high levels of protein sequence similarity. The entire protein sequences of OsWNK7 and OsWNK8 shared 92.6%, OsWNK6 and OsWNK9 shared 72% while OsWNK1 and OsWNK3 shared 52% sequence resemblance (Fig. 4
                        a). All OsWNK have introns in their genomic structure and the number of exons varied from 2 to 9, while highest number of introns and exons were observed in OsWNK2 (Fig. 4b). The superfamily database of structural and functional protein annotations showed that protein kinase domain is found in all rice OsWNK sequences. The Prosite analysis confirmed the presence of protein kinase domain in the identified OsWNK.

Analysis of OsWNK gene expression patterns in different tissues provided us new insights into their role in several organs in rice. The OsWNK transcript level was monitored using qRT-PCR in different organs viz. young leaf, root, flag leaf, culm and panicle. OsWNK5 and OsWNK6 showed higher (more than 10 fold) expression in root tissues in contrast to other organs of rice plants. Moreover, OsWNK8 also showed higher transcript expression in young leaf, while OsWNK6 expression was low. The quantitative analysis of tissue specific expression revealed that most of the OsWNK exhibit higher transcript expression level in roots as compared with young leaf, flag leaf, panicle and culm (Fig. 5
                        ). Our results indicate that OsWNK might have a major role in the root formation and architecture.

To understand the OsWNK response and regulation under the abiotic stresses, qRT-PCR was performed. The OsWNK transcript accumulations were confirmed during different abiotic stresses such as salt, drought, heat and cold. Under salt stress, transcript level of OsWNK3, OsWNK5, OsWNK6 and OsWNK7 exhibited significant differential expression patterns. OsWNK9 displayed lower expression pattern during salt stress. The transcript regulation pattern indicated that OsWNK3, OsWNK5, OsWNK6 and OsWNK7 might be involved in the salt stress regulation (Fig. 6
                        A). Under drought stress, OsWNK1, OsWNK2, OsWNK6 and OsWNK8 showed higher transcript accumulation at 12h (Fig. 6B). During cold stress OsWNK6 showed higher transcript accumulation at 3h, while OsWNK1, OsWNK2, OsWNK6, OsWNK8, OsWNK9 exhibited down regulation at 12h intervals. OsWNK9 showed the down regulation pattern (Fig. 6C). In heat stress OsWNK2 was up regulated to 5.1 fold at 12 hr. OsWNK6 showed 10.5 fold up regulation at 6 h and highly up regulated to 40 fold at 12 h of heat stress. OsWNK7 and OsWNK8 showed very high (more than 15 times) up regulation pattern at 0.5 and 12h of heat stress. (Fig. 6D). The higher transcript accumulation of OsWNK6, OsWNK7, and OsWNK8 revealed their probable role during heat stress.

Rice WNK transcript expression profile compared with available Arabidopsis microarray data which provided more insight into WNK function (Supplementary information Fig. S2). In both plants, root is a major organ, where most of WNKs are highly expressed (Supplementary information Fig. S2a). OsWNK8 is highly expressed in leaf, in contrast OsWNK1, OsWNK5 and OsWNK7 showed moderate level expression. Arabidopsis AtWNK1 showed higher transcript accumulation in leaf tissue compared with other AtWNKs. The rice panicle shows higher transcript accumulation of OsWNK4 and OsWNK5. Similarly, Arabidopsis exhibit higher transcript accumulation of AtWNK2 and AtWNK4 in flower. Abiotic stress libraries were compared between rice and Arabidopsis. Rice OsWNK expression data showed higher differential regulation pattern under various abiotic stresses in comparison to Arabiodopsis (Supplementary information Fig. S2b).

The putative cis-acting elements were predicted from 1500bp upstream promoter region of OsWNKs. Sequence analysis from PlantCARE revealed that the promoter of each gene contained important putative cis-acting elements. The predicted cis-acting elements are as follows: ABA responsive element (ABRE), environmental signal response (G-box), dehydration responsive elements (MBS), heat shock element (HSEs), ethylene responsive elements (ERE), antioxidant responsive element (ARE), auxin-responsive element (TGA) and circadian regulatory elements (CAANNNNATC). The dehydration responsive element (MBS) was predicted in 6 out of 9 OsWNKs. The ABREs element was observed in upstream of all OsWNKs except OsWNK3 and OsWNK7. The heat shock element (HSEs) was observed in the promoters of OsWNK1, OsWNK7 and OsWNK9. The ERE element is distributed in the OsWNK2, OsWNK4 and OsWNK7, similarly ARE was recorded in the OsWNK1, OsWNK2, OsWNK3, OsWNK6, OsWNK8 and OsWNK9 promoter region (Fig. 7
                        ). The distribution of TGA, were predicted in the OSWNK1, OsWNK2, OsWNK4 and OsWNK5. The circadian regulatory element was predicted in the OsWNK2, OsWNK4, OsWNK5, OsWNK7 and OsWNK9 which may regulate biological circadian mechanism. An environmental signal response element (G-box) was observed in the almost all OsWNK except OsWNK3 (Fig. 7).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#


                     Arabidopsis kinome was categorized into two groups, receptor protein kinase and soluble protein kinase. Receptor protein kinase clades represented by large superfamily of receptor kinases (RLK), transmembrane leucine-rich-repeat (LRR) receptor kinases and receptor-like cytoplasmic kinases (RLCK). Soluble protein kinase includes cyclin dependent kinase (CDK), mitogen activated protein kinases (MAPK, MAPKK, MAPKKK), AGC kinases, and calcium dependant protein kinases (CDPK) (Zulawski et al., 2014). With no lysine (WNK) are soluble serine/threonine protein kinases, belong to an unique branch of the kinome. They are called so due to unusual placement of an essential catalytic lysine. With No Lysine (WNK) kinases are responsible for the human hereditary hypertensive disease called pseudo hypoaldosteronism type II (PHAII). It is involved in the WNK-OSR1/SPAK-NCC signaling cascade with oxidative stress-responsive gene 1 (OSR1), Ste20-related proline-alanine rich kinase (SPAK), and thiazide-sensitive NaCl cotransporter (NCC). The distribution of WNK is restricted to higher multicellular organism. However very few and scattered reports are available on plant WNK kinases distribution and their function in the plant kingdom.

Rice (O. sativa L.) is the most important food crop and source of food for more than half of the world population (Kumar et al., 2013). We focused on rice crop and performed genome wide analysis to identify WNK gene family in rice. In the current study, we searched various plant genome databases and predicted 155 WNK kinase genes in the plant kingdom and formed HMM profile for the identification of rice WNKs. All the WNK gene sequences were confirmed based on their kinase domain knowledge and unusual position of lysine (K) residue (Fig. 1). Subdomain I, at the NH2 terminus of the kinase domain, contains the consensus motif Gly-X-GIy-X-X-Gly- X-Val, but in WNK kinase third glycine replaced by lysine (K) residue which alter consensus motif to Gly-X-Gly-X-X-Lys-X-Val (refer Fig. 1). A glycine-rich loop in the sub-domain I of protein kinase is highly conserved motifs and proved that by replacing third glycine had minimal effects on steady-state kinetic parameters. In contrast Gly-1 and Gly-2 had major effects on both Km and kcat values which showed importance of the N-terminus glycine rich loop for catalysis (Hemmer et al., 1997). The first and second glycines of GXGXXG motif are essentially invariant, whereas the third is somewhat more variable (Hemmer et al., 1997). However subdomain II contains invariant lysine has been recognized as enzymatically active residue which helps in anchoring and orientation of ATP (Hanks and Hunter, 1995). Therefore, we can hypothesize that, during evolutionary process variable glycine might be replaced by lysine residue and formed independent WNK protein kinase group. In WNK group functional residues from two different sub-domains merge and formed single active center G-X-G-X-X-K-X-V. This is very interesting, if we explore structural level variation and new arrangement at the residue level of WNKs.

Phylogeny is important for addressing and analysis of various molecular differences, mainly in DNA/amino acid sequences, to gain insight into an organism’s evolutionary relationships (Yang and Rannala, 2012). Earlier phylogenetic analysis of AtWNK was attempted with other protein family members such as RLK, MAPKKK and MAPK. It showed that WNK family is a novel protein family and the kinase domain is similar to MAPKKKs (Nakamichi et al., 2002). First time, we attempted to construct a complete phylogenetic tree of WNK gene family members and established the evolutionary relationship among WNKs in plants. It demonstrated that all plant WNKs were clustered into 5 major different clades (Class I-V). Clade I includes unicellular red algae and green algae WNK members. Similarly clade II has members of C. reinhardtii and one member of P. patens. Almost all the WNK genes from higher plants were clustered into clade III, IV and V When we moved from simple unicellular algae to more complex dicots plant, multiple genome duplication events were recorded which might leads to higher no of WNK gene. Gene families are group of genes formed by duplication and their size reflects the number of duplicated events, called paralogues (De Grassi et al., 2008). As we know the gene duplications event might be one of the crucial evolutionary force for either neo-functionalization or sub-functionalization (De Grassi et al., 2008). However, distribution of WNK genes in the rice (9 WNK genes) is almost similar to Arabidopsis (11 WNK genes). Four different major genome duplication events were predicted for Arabidopsis over 100–200 million years ago (Vision et al., 2000; Simillion et al., 2002; Saddhe and Kumar, 2015).

The physical locations of the OsWNK genes were assigned and it is distributed on chromosomes 2, 5, 7, 11 and 12. Based on phylogenetic clustering and sequence similarity, we have observed a pair of OsWNK gene showing high level of sequence similarity. The protein sequences of OsWNK6 and OsWNK9 shared 72% sequence similarity and clustered into subclade IVB with 99% internal node bootstrap value. However OsWNK7 and OsWNK8 shared 92.6% sequence resemblance and clustered into subclade IIIA with 99% internal node bootstrap value. Based on this observation, OsWNK6 and OsWNK9 genes may be considered as paralogues of each other. On similar note, OsWNK7 and OsWNK8 are paralogues of each other, which might have evolved by duplication events. So it could be possible that OsWNK6 shows functional redundancy with OsWNK9, similarly OsWNK7 might exhibit functional redundancy with OsWNK8, which needs further confirmation by functional genomics approach.

We identified 9 members of putative WNK gene family from rice and further performed their domain analysis, gene structure and subcellular localization in silico. Putative amino acid length of OsWNK ranges from 328 to 705 AA. However, human WNK1amino acid length was reported around 2382 AA, which is three times longer than rice WNK (Verissimo and Jordon, 2001). Similarly soybean GmWNK1 encoded putatively 610 amino acid long chain (Wang et al., 2010). Here we predicted gene structure of OsWNK, which showed that varied numbers of exons and introns ranges from 2 to 9. Interestingly, we observed OsWNK6 and OsWNK9 have equal numbers of exons and introns in their genomic structure. The human WNK1 gene spans 160kb, contains 28 exons and WNK2 gene spans 136kb and contains 30 exons. WNK3 and WNK4 gene spans 165kb with 24 exons and 16kb with containing 19 exons respectively (McCormick and Ellison, 2011). An in silico subcellular localization was predicted using two different web based servers, according to LOCTREE3, all OsWNK localized to cytoplasm but mPLoc was predicted their localization in nucleus. The subcellular localization of GFP-tagged WNK2 in HeLa cells was predominantly localized in cytoplasm (Jordan, 2011). Human WNK1 was localized to cytoplasm but WNK4 showed localization to intercellular junctions and cytoplasm of kidney (Wilson et al., 2001).

Analysis of the tissues specific expression of OsWNKs provided us new insights into their role in different organs of rice. To determine the spatio-expression analysis in different tissues and organs, qRT-PCR was performed to monitor the transcript accumulation of OsWNKs in the roots, young leaves, flag leaf, culm and panicles. The OsWNK genes transcripts were recorded in the various organs and tissue of rice. The quantitative analysis of tissue specific expression revealed that most of the OsWNK exhibit higher transcript expression level in roots as compared with other organs (Fig. 5). The result demonstrated that OsWNK might have major role in the root formation and architecture. In the Arabidopsis all AtWNK (except AtWNK6) was expressed in the various organs from seedling to flowering plants (Wang et al., 2008). AtWNK8 is mainly expressed in primary root, hypocotyl, stamen and pistil (Zhang et al., 2013). Higher expression of OsWNK8 has been observed in root and young leaf predicting their possible role in the early development and cell proliferation. GmWNK1 is involved in the repression of lateral root formation in an ABA-dependent mechanism distinct from known ABA signaling pathways (Wang et al., 2010).

Rice (O. sativa L.) an important monocot crop worldwide and classified as a salt sensitive crop in their early seedling stages. Abiotic stresses including salinity, drought, cold, heat and metal toxicity, cause lower agriculture crop productivity (Kumar et al., 2013). In plant, protein kinases play important roles in regulating the stress signal transduction pathways, plant growth and development (Kumar et al., 2013). OsWNK1 responded differentially under several abiotic stresses like cold, heat, salt, drought and showed rhythmic expression pattern under diurnal and circadian conditions at the transcription level (Kumar et al., 2011). Our result showed that, under the salt stress condition transcript level of OsWNK3, OsWNK5, OsWNK6 and OsWNK7 exhibited significant differential expression patterns. OsWNK9 displayed lower expression pattern during salt stress. Similarly under drought stress, OsWNK1, OsWNK2, OsWNK6 and OsWNK8 showed significant transcript accumulation. OsWNK3, OsWNK4 and OsWNK9 exhibited down-regulation patterns under drought stress. Under cold stress OsWNK6 showed higher transcript accumulation at 3h, while OsWNK1, OsWNK2, OsWNK6, OsWNK8, OsWNK9 exhibited down regulation at 12h intervals. OsWNK3 was up regulated and showed 4 fold up regulation at 6 hr of cold stress, while OsWNK9 showed the down regulation pattern. In heat stress OsWNK2, OsWNK6, OsWNK7, and OsWNK8 showed higher transcript accumulation, revealed their significant role in heat stress. An overexpression study of GmWNK1 in Arabidopsis showed that, it modulates cellular response to osmotic stresses in plants (Wang et al., 2010). AtWNK8 and AtWNK9 are involved in the abiotic stress modulation (Zhang et al., 2013; Xie et al., 2014). The gene expression pattern and protein product in plant varies when exposed to the low temperature (Sanghera et al., 2011). The relative gene expression level of OsWNK1 in our studies was correlated with our earlier studies under cold stress (Kumar et al., 2011).

The comparative transcriptomic studies will help us to understand functional aspect of gene family between two organisms. Therefore, we compared Arabidopsis WNK gene family expression pattern with rice qRT-PCR data by constructing heatmaps (Supplementary information Fig. S2). Interestingly, rice showed 3.5 times higher tissue specific expression and 7 times higher expression under various abiotic stresses than Arabidopsis. Most of WNKs are highly expressed in the root system followed by panicle/flower, leaf and culm/stem tissues. This observation is consistent with previous WNK1 reports in rice and soybean (Wang et al., 2010; Kumar et al., 2011). According to Kumar et al. (2011) rice WNK1 was highly expressed in the panicle followed by stem, root and leaf. However, they also reported regulation of the OsWNK1 under different abiotic stress such as cold, heat, salinity and drought stress. Interestingly rice OsWNK3 showed highest upregulation pattern in all stresses, this indicate OsWNK3 might have some regulatory function during abiotic stresses. In Arabidopsis AtWNK1 is highly unregulated similarly OsWNK1 showed significant expression level under heat and drought stress. One more significant observation is the down regulation pattern of OsWNK9 under cold stress followed by salt and drought stresses. Similar observation recorded for AtWNK9, which indicates importance of WNK9 member under various abiotic stresses. Under heat stress AtWNK4 showed significant down regulation pattern, similarly in rice OsWNK4 showed down regulation pattern. Overall this comparative expression analysis will help us somehow to understand the involvement of WNK in various abiotic stresses.

To investigate cis-acting elements in the promoters that regulate gene expression at the transcriptional level are crucial for improving our basic understanding of gene regulation (Hernandez-Garcia and Finer, 2014). The cis-acting regulatory elements provide binding site for transcription factor, which synergistically regulates gene transcription. Earlier reports underscored the OsWNK regulatory function during circadian cycle and abiotic stresses. For same we predicted distribution of circadian, abiotic stress and phytohormone specific regulatory elements in promoter. WNK1 gene in Arabidopsis has been reported to be under the control of circadian rhythms, indicating a circadian associated function to the member of WNK family (Nakamichi et al., 2002). The circadian elements were recorded in the OsWNK which gives more insight into regulation of circadian cycle. In Arabidopsis there are three major classes of cis-regulatory modules within the plant circadian network: the morning (ME, GBOX), evening (EE, GATA), and midnight (PBX/TBX/SBX) modules (Filichkin et al., 2011). G-box is conserved circadian rhythm regulatory motif and mutant analysis showed that reduction the amplitude of oscillation (Spensley et al., 2009). When we scanned OsWNK for conserved circadian motif, we found that G-box dominantly present in the all OsWNK (except OsWNK3) promoter regions. However, we also predicted circadian regulatory elements (CAANNNNATC) in the 5 OsWNK (OsWNK2, 4, 5, 7 and 9) which is indicate involvement of WNK in circadian rhythm controlled expression. The circadian regulatory elements (CAANNNNATC) were identified from promoter region of various genes (example- S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase) and their expression is circadian clock controlled (Dresselhaus et al., 1996). Based on this data, we can hypothesize that all OsWNK (except OsWNK3) might have some roles in circadian regulation or might be their expression is under circadian control. This will enrich our understanding about circadian rhythm and will shed lights on new players of circadian rhythm. Similarly we also searched for abiotic stress responsive cis-elements. The promoters containing different combinations and copy number of elements (ABRE, MYB, MYC, as1, rps1 site 1-like) from stress-inducible promoters in Arabidopsis (Hou et al., 2012). Similarly, we searched for plants stress responsive cis-elements including MBS, HSE and our data supports OsWNK involvement in the abiotic stresses. Kumar et al. (2011) reported the involvement of OsWNK1 in the abiotic stresses such drought, cold and heat. The stress-responsive elements comprise the dehydration-responsive element DRE (A/GCCGAC) implicated in the regulation of cold and dehydration responses in Arabidopsis (Yamaguchi-Shinozaki and Shinozaki, 1994). The Study of class I HSP promoters showed that heat shock elements (HSEs), the cis-acting elements necessary for the heat shock response (Carranco et al., 1999). We also searched for phytohormonal regulatory elements as follows ABRE, ERE, TGA. The distribution of ABRE in all OsWNK (except OsWNK3 and OsWNK7) may suggest that, OsWNKs are involved in the abscisic acid signaling cascade. Two well known ABA-responsive cis-regulatory elements are ABRE and CE3, which are involved in stomatal closure, seed and bud dormancy, and physiological responses to cold, drought and salinity stress (Gómez-Porras et al., 2007). However previous study proved that a single copy of ABRE is not enough to induce transcription, but multiple ABREs or the combination of an ABRE with coupling element (CE) can form a minimal ABA-responsive complex (ABRC) (Gómez-Porras et al., 2007). Consistent with this data, we also predicted that, only OsWNK5, OsWNK6 and OsWNK9 have multiple ABRE regions. Similarly ethylene regulatory elements also recorded in OsWNK2, OsWNK4 and OsWNK7. This predictive study of regulatory elements in the OsWNK might provide insight into regulation of abiotic stresses, hormone and developmental patterns of different tissue in rice plant.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

In the present study, we identified 9 members of WNK in rice, that showed resemblance to Arabidopsis and human WNK. Phylogenetic analysis of all WNK was performed and categorized into five main clades and subclades. Conserved motif and domains in the deduced amino acid sequences of rice WNK strongly supported their identity as members of WNK kinase protein. Their gene expression pattern was further investigated using qRT-PCR in tissue specific and various abiotic stresses. Significant level of expression of most OsWNK was observed in root tissues but in contrast OsWNK8 was observed in flag leaf. However, OsWNKs showed differential transcript accumulation pattern under various abiotic stresses viz. salt, drought, cold and heat. The presence of various abiotic stress responsive cis-elements in the promoter region of OsWNK also predict their importance in providing basal tolerance to rice during critical conditions. Our observations may further elucidate the significance of functional analysis of rice WNK genes and towards unravel their biological roles using functional genomics approach.

The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This work is supported by financial assistance from the Science and Engineering Research Board, Department of Science and Technology (India) (SB/FT/LS-312/2012). Junior research fellowship to AAS from University Grant Commission (UGC), India is gratefully acknowledged. The authors thank Dr. Pooja Bhatnagar Mathur, ICRISAT, India for allowing us to perform qRT-PCR.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2015.09.003.

The following are Supplementary data to this article:
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

