@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Structure and evolution analysis of pollen receptor-like kinase in Zea mays and Arabidopsis thaliana
            

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           64 and 73 putative pollen RLKs chosen from maize and Arabidopsis can be divided into 8 subfamilies.


                        
                        
                           
                           Expansion of pollen RLKs were mainly caused by segmental duplication.


                        
                        
                           
                           Maize might have experienced weaker purifying selection as compare to Arabidopsis.


                        
                        
                           
                           Duplication events of Arabidopsis and maize are between 18–69 million years and 0.67–170 million years ago, respectively.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Pollen

RLKs

Phylogenetic evolution

Gene duplication

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Receptor-like kinase (RLKs) is an important member in protein kinase family which is widely involved in plant growth, development and defense responses. It is significant to analyze the kinase structure and evolution of pollen RLKs in order to study their mechanisms. In our study, 64 and 73 putative pollen RLKs were chosen from maize and Arabidopsis. Phylogenetic analysis showed that the pollen RLKs were conservative and might had existed before divergence between monocot and dicot which were mainly concentrated in RLCK-VII and LRR-III two subfamilies. Chromosomal localization and gene duplication analysis showed the expansion of pollen RLKs were mainly caused by segmental duplication. By calculating Ka/Ks value of extracellular domain, intracellular domain and kinase domain in pollen RLKs, we found that the pollen RLKs duplicated genes had mainly experienced the purifying selection, while maize might have experienced weaker purifying selection. Meanwhile, extracellular domain might have experienced stronger diversifying selection than intracellular domain in both species. Estimation of duplication time showed that the duplication events of Arabidopsis have occurred approximately between 18 and 69 million years ago, compared to 0.67–170 million years ago of maize.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

During the double fertilization process in plants, a series of activities of pollen tube are controlled by male and female tissues from stigma to female gametophyte with regulation of many proteins and signaling molecules (Chen et al., 2014; Higashiyama and Hamamura, 2008; Beale and Johnson, 2013). Receptor-like kinase (RLKs) as a big subfamily in protein kinase widely participate in various signal transduction processes, its two main functions include controlling plant growth and development; involving in plant–microbe interactions and defense responses (Shiu and Bleecker, 2001). Most RLKs consisting of a ligand-identifying and signal-accepting extracellular domain, a transmembrane domain, and an intracellular domain with kinase activity (Stone and Walker, 1995). RLKs have received the widespread attention since the first receptor-like kinase was found in maize over 20 years ago (Walker and Zhang, 1990). Subsequently, many RLKs members have been identified in other plant species (Shiu et al., 2004).

Currently, many experiments showed that RLKs can be involved directly in pollen development, pollen and stigma interactions, pollen tube growth and interaction with the guidance tissues, pollen tube and ovule interactions, as well as the pollen tube rupture in the embryo sac. For example, one lectin receptor-like kinase SGC in Arabidopsis can influence the normal development of pollen (Wan et al., 2008). PiPRK1 in Petunia inflata can specifically expressed in pollen and pollen tubes, the antisense gene could cause half transgenic pollen sterility (Mu et al., 1994; Lee et al., 1996). The pistil determinant SRK in Brassica can participate in pollen self-incompatibility (Takasaki et al., 2000; Stein et al., 1991). RKF1 expressed in Arabidopsis stamen may play a critical role in microsporogenesis, pollen maturation, or pollen–stigma interactions (Takahashi et al., 1998). AtPRK1 and AtPRK2 in Arabidopsis and LePRK1, LePRK2, LePRK3 in tomato can control pollen germination and elongation (Zhang and McCormick, 2007; Muschietti et al., 1998; Tang et al., 2002, 2004). AtPRK1 and AtPRK2 activate RopGEF1 by phosphorylation, thereby control the polar growth of pollen tube (Chang et al., 2013). While LePRK2 maybe influence the normal function of the pollen tube by regulating actin distribution (Salem et al., 2011; Xu and Huang, 2014).

In addition, certain receptor-like kinase can regulate the pollen development indirectly. For example, the leucine-rich repeat receptor-like kinases (LRR-RLKs) BAM1/BAM2 (DeYoung et al., 2006; Hord et al., 2006), EMS1/EXS (Canales et al., 2002; Zhao et al., 2002), MSP1 (Nonomura et al., 2003), SERK1/SERK2 (Albrecht et al., 2005; Colcombet et al., 2005), GhSERK (Shi et al., 2014), ER family (ER, ERL1 ERL2) (Hord et al., 2008) as well as RPK2 (Mizuno et al., 2007) play role in early anther cell differentiation process. These RLKs influence pollen development indirectly by controlling tapetum development. While, the function of some pollen RLKs has not been studied in depth, their roles in pollen development and related activities remain to be discovered. Such as pollen specific receptor-like kinase ZmPRK1 in maize, AtPRK3 and AtPRKb in Arabidopsis and others (Kim et al., 2002).

From above examples, we can know that the function of RLKs is closely related to its own structure, after the signal molecule identified by extracellular N-terminal signal peptide and bind with receptor domain. It can be transmitted into intracellular through transmembrane domains, and received by intracellular kinase domain. This open or close the downstream target proteins through phosphorylation or dephosphorylation, to start a signal cascade reaction (Malho et al., 2006). RLKs are composed of a complex signal path with upstream and downstream component, and regulate the signal response of plant by transmitting signal through phosphorylation (Antolín-Llovera et al., 2012; Dai et al., 2013).

With this kind of mechanism, pollen receptor-like kinase are extensively involved in the double fertilization process. The similarity and difference of its function, as well as the location and time of working, suggesting that each sequence must have their own characteristics on the basic of similarity. In this paper, we use the phylogenetic analysis of pollen receptor-like kinase to briefly analyze the relationship between its kinase domain structure and classification of pollen RLKs; and analyze their differences and correlations in evolutionary terms by comparative studying pollen receptor-like kinases in the dicot Arabidopsis and monocot maize.

In this study, nearly 20 years of published articles reporting pollen receptor-like kinases which can be directly involved in the process from pollen development to pollen fertilization were searched and used as base material. The BLASTp in GRAMENE (http://www.gramene.org/) and TAIR (http://www.arabidopsis.org/) was used to search for homologues sequence of pollen receptor-like kinase. After that three database websites genevestigator, AtGenExpress Visualization Tool and MaizeGDB were used to predict the expression of these candidate sequences. Finally, we choose the ones that have higher expression level in Arabidopsis and maize pollen as a follow-up research target.

Twenty pollen RLKs searched from articles and all putative maize and Arabidopsis pollen RLKs predicted were aligned using ClustalX v1.83, respectively, Phylogenetic tree was constructed using MEGA 5.0 by neighbor-joining (NJ) method. Bootstrap values have been calculated from 1000 iterations. Other parameters were set as the system default value. The kinases active-sites of known pollen RLKs were predicted by ScanProsite (http://prosite.expasy.org/scanprosite/) and the structures of RLKs were predicted by SMART (http://smart.embl-heidelberg.de/).


                        Zea mays and Arabidopsis pollen RLKs were performed on chromosomes according to their staring positions given in the GRAMENE (http://www.maizegenome.org/data_portal.html) and TAIR (http://www.arabidopsis.org/) databases. MapInspect software (http://www.plantbreeding.wur.nl/uk/software_mapinspect.html) was subsequently used for generating image of all Zea mays and Arabidopsis putative pollen RLKs gene location.

To analyze the gene duplication events, the multiple sequence alignment of the Zea mays and Arabidopsis putative pollen RLKs gene was performed by ClustalW and calculated using MEGA v5.0, respectively. Then, the gene pairs whose bootstrap value >99 were chosen, and were put on the chromosomes map.

The nonsynonymous substitution rate (Ka) and the synonymous substitution rate (Ks) were calculated for ECDs, ICDs, and kinase domains using the DnaSPv5.0 software. The ratio of nonsynonymous to synonymous nucleotide substitutions (Ka/Ks) between paralogs was analyzed to detect the mode of selection. For inferring the dates of gene duplications, only the kinase domain coding sequences were used. The Ks value was translated into duplication time in million years based on a rate of λ substitutions per synonymous site per year (Peng et al., 2012). The duplication time (T) was calculated as T
                        =Ks/2λ
                        ×10−6
                        Mya (Lynch and Conery, 2000) (λ
                        =6.5×10−9 for maize and λ
                        =1.5×10−8 for Arabidopsis) (Blanc and Wolfe, 2004; Yu et al., 2005).

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

The function of RLKs depend on ligands. However, most ligands of RLKs have not been found yet. By comparison, the ligands of LePRK1 and LePRK2 in tomato have been made comparatively deep research (Table 1
                     ). Depending on the perception and transduction of RLKs, the ligands were involved in germination and elongation of tomato pollen tube (Tang et al., 2002; Salem et al., 2012). At the same time, both male and female ligands were needed in participating in a series of physiological processes in pollen (Fig. 1
                     ).

In this study, 20 known pollen receptor like kinases (RLKs) which directly related to pollen were searched from previously published articles. These pollen RLKs were FERONIA (AEE78805), ANXUR1 (AEE74120), ANXUR2 (AED93826), LIP1 (AED92301), LIP2 (AAE73862), AtPRK1 (AAC13607), AtPRK2 (AEC06031), SGC (AEE79146), AtPRK3 (CAB86675), AtPRKb (AC012561) RKF1 (AEE31125), AtSRK (AGC55015) from Arabidopsis; PiPRK1 (AAA33715) from Petunia inflate ; LePRK1 (AAC12254), LePRK2 (AAC11253), LePRK3 (AF243040) from tomato; SRK (Q09092) from Brassica and ZmUPRK1 (AAK73111), ZmUPRK2 (AFW64201), ZmPRK1 (AAK28346) from maize.

These 20 reported pollen RLKs were used as BLASTp queries, the expression of all obtained sequences were predicted by three databases (genevestigator; AtGenExpress Visualization Tool and MaizeGDB). Finally, we got 64 putative pollen RLKs gene in maize and 73 putative pollen RLKs gene in Arabidopsis which can express at a higher level in pollen tissues. Then the staring positions on chromosomes of these genes were given in GRAMENE (http://www.maizegenome.org/data_portal.html) and TAIR (http://www.arabidopsis.org/) databases, the results shown in Fig. 2
                        .

Gene duplication is the main reason for evolution (Sankoff, 2001). After experienced several genome duplication event, the diversity of each species become richer. Based on the starting position of each gene on the chromosomes, the 64 maize putative pollen RLKs genes were found to be randomly distributed on chromosomes 1–10 (Fig. 2A). But the distribution was uneven, chromosome 5 and chromosome 10 contained the least number of maize pollen RLKs genes, both of them contained only 2 genes, while the number of genes on other chromosomes was more evenly distributed. Similarly, the 73 Arabidopsis pollen RLKs genes also showed uneven density distribution, and most of them were located at the beginning and the endings of chromosomes (Fig. 2B). The AtSRK was not mapped on any chromosome due to lack of information.


                        Holub (2001) defined the gene cluster as a chromosome region which contains two or more genes within 200KB. In our study, clusters can be found both in maize and Arabidopsis, while clusters in Arabidopsis are quite obvious, 22 genes were located in 10 clusters on the 5 chromosomes. By contrast, only 3 clusters were present on maize chromosome 4. On the other hand, based on the phylogenetic analysis and the chromosomal locations of the pollen RLKs genes, 12 segmental duplication events (24 genes) and 11 segmental duplication events (22 genes) were found located in pollen RLKs genes in maize and Arabidopsis, respectively (Fig. 2). These segmental duplication events occurred on all chromosomes in these two species except chromosomes 10 in maize. The pollen RLKs might exist before divergence between monocot and dicot. The number of pollen RLKs in maize were not match its huge genome number, which might be due to the gene chip technology in maize which was not perfect or gene conservative and slow during evolutionary process.

Gene duplication which can be divided into tandem and segmental duplications is one of the common mechanisms throughout the evolutionary process of genomes (Leister, 2004). According to the physical map location of the pollen RLKs, 12 and 11 gene pairs from maize and Arabidopsis involved gene duplication were identified, and all of them belongs to segmental duplications, indicating that segmental duplications seems to be the main mechanism in promoting pollen RLKs family lineage expansion.

A neighbor-joining (NJ) tree was constructed based on the alignment of the kinase sequences of the 20 pollen RLKs (Fig. 3
                        A). It was found that some sequences which have similar functions were not clustered strictly together like, PiPRK, ZmUPRK1 and ZmUPRK2. It was suggested that the function of PiPRK may not be single during pollen development. In addition to regulating pollen development, PiPRK might also play role in pollen germination and elongation. While ZmUPRK1 and ZmUPRK2 might have different mechanisms from other RLKs in promoting pollen tube elongation. RKF1 and SRK which belongs to different subfamilies were clustered together, indicating that they might have similarities in function. It was worth noting that the phylogenetic tree also showed obvious kinship and this kind of classification was closely related to the kinase active-site. The sequences whose active-site was Asp were clustered, and ones whose active-site was Asn and His were clustered (Fig. 3B). The structures of kinase domain were predicted by SMART (Fig. 3C), and many RLKs subfamilies were involved in pollen development. The RLKs which contain extracellular domain, a transmembrane domain and intracellular domain and the ones which contain only intracellular domain (cytoplasmic kinase, RLCK) were included. It reflects that it was feasible to search nearly all pollen RLKs using these 20 pollen RLKs.

The clustering results were consistent with kinase active-sites, indicating that the active site of the kinase plays an important role during functioning. LePRK3 might had different function with LePRK1 and LePRK2, though they were in the same family (Kim et al., 2002), this conclusion was consistent with our findings (Fig. 2B). Meanwhile, RKF1 and SRK which belong to different subfamilies were clustered together, indicating that maybe they have same functions which confirms the prediction of Takahashi et al. (1998) that RKF1 might be involved in stigma-pollen recognition.

In order to understand the differences and similarities about evolutionary relationships between monocots (Zea mays) and dicots (Arabidopsis), the kinase domains were used to align for constructing phylogenetic tree (Fig. 4
                        ). According to the phylogenetic analysis, pollen RLKs were divided into 8 groups which including 18 subfamilies. Among them, RLCK-VII and LRR-III include the largest gene numbers. Meanwhile, maize (blue line) and Arabidopsis (pink line) were not clustered separately, indicating that pollen RLKs in maize and Arabidopsis was quite conservative, probably came from the same ancestor. This indicated that pollen RLKs existed before divergence between monocot and dicot.

To investigate and comparatively analyze the differences in selective constraints, the best matches of pollen RLKs from both maize and Arabidopsis were identified. An alignment was generated for each pair. The synonymous and nonsynonymous substitution rates (Ka and Ks) for the extracellular domains (ECD), intracellular domains (ICD), and kinase domains of each pair from maize and Arabidopsis were calculated. The kinase domain sequences were used to estimate duplication time.

Generally, the ratio of Ka/Ks>1 indicates accelerated evolution with positive selection, the ratio=1 indicates neutral selection, while the ratio<1 indicates negative or purifying selection (Juretic et al., 2005). In this study, the majority of gene pairs in three domains from maize and Arabidopsis were under purifying selection, and the Ka/Ks ratios for most of them being even less than 0.4, suggesting strong purifying selection (Fig. 5
                        A). Only three duplicated pairs seem to be under positive selection. All of these results suggested that functions of the pollen RLKs genes did not diverge much along with the genome evolution after the duplication events.

The Ka/Ks ratios of ICD, ECD and kinase domain from maize and Arabidopsis were calculated in order to understand the different evolution characteristics. The Ka/Ks ratios of maize genes were higher than Arabidopsis genes in all these three domains, indicating that the purifying selection of maize was more moderate (Fig. 5). Interestingly, the frequency distribution of ECDs was significantly different from those of ICDs and kinase domains, and the Ka/Ks ratios of ECDs was the highest. This result was in accordance with findings of Shiu et al. (2004). That means the ECDs evolved faster during evolution or relaxed purifying selection. Compared with ICDs, the duplicated pairs with Ka/Ks ratio>1 were generally in the ECDs, indicating that parts of the extracellular regions of some pollen RLKs might have experienced positive selection.

The kinase domains were used to estimate the duplication time, the Ks value of each gene pairs were used to calculate the duplication dates. The duplication events of Arabidopsis have occurred approximately between 18 and 69 million years ago (Mya), while the span for duplication time of maize was quite large, between 0.67 and 170 million years ago.

Evolutionary analysis about ICDs, ECDs, and kinase domain of pollen RLKs showed that the Ka/Ks ratio of monocot maize was higher than dicots Arabidopsis, indicating that maize might have experienced weaker purifying selection. Whether in maize or Arabidopsis, Ka/Ks values of extracellular domain were higher than intracellular domain. It also highlights the possibility that only certain residues of the ECDs were under positive selection, these findings were consistent with the point that the ECDs of pollen RLKs might have experienced stronger diversifying selection for recognizing various extracellular signals. By contrast, the ICDs might have been under stronger purifying selection because of functional constraints in transducing signals to downstream components faithfully (Shiu et al., 2004).

Estimation of duplication time in maize and Arabidopsis pollen RLKs showed that the duplication of maize genome was more distant, indicating that some genes duplication may occurred before divergence between monocot and dicot (Sanderson, 1997; Chaw et al., 2004). These genes were preserved and duplication events still occur after the separation between monocot and dicot. The function of several members of the pollen RLKs have been studied deeply, while the majority of pollen RLKs still remain to study further.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

In conclusion, all of these pollen RLKs can be divided into 8 subfamilies, and mainly concentrated in RLCK-VII and LRR-III two subfamilies in monocots and dicots. Further analysis showed that monocots have weaker selection as compared to dicots. Segmental duplications are the main causes of expansion of pollen RLKs. The event duplication time was also studied which showed evolutionary history of these RLKs. The results of this study are very helpful in studying further molecular evolution and detailed mechanism of RLKs.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

