@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Cryptic tRNAs in chaetognath mitochondrial genomes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Chaetognath mitogenomes exhibit more than one tRNA-like sequence as previously suggested.


                        
                        
                           
                           
                              16S rRNA genes appear as chaetognath tRNA nurseries.


                        
                        
                           
                           TRNA pairs seem templated by sense-antisense strands as previously suggested for multifunctional ribosomal-like protogenomes.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

tRNA

Chaetognatha

Cryptic tRNA

Overlap coding

tRNA misloading

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The chaetognaths constitute a small and enigmatic phylum of little marine invertebrates. Both nuclear and mitochondrial genomes have numerous originalities, some phylum-specific. Until recently, their mitogenomes seemed containing only one tRNA gene (trnMet), but a recent study found in two chaetognath mitogenomes two and four tRNA genes. Moreover, apparently two conspecific mitogenomes have different tRNA gene numbers (one and two). Reanalyses by tRNAscan-SE and ARWEN softwares of the five available complete chaetognath mitogenomes suggest numerous additional tRNA genes from different types. Their total number never reaches the 22 found in most other invertebrates using that genetic code. Predicted error compensation between codon-anticodon mismatch and tRNA misacylation suggests translational activity by tRNAs predicted solely according to secondary structure for tRNAs predicted by tRNAscan-SE, not ARWEN. Numbers of predicted stop-suppressor (antitermination) tRNAs coevolve with predicted overlapping, frameshifted protein coding genes including stop codons. Sequence alignments in secondary structure prediction with non-chaetognath tRNAs suggest that the most likely functional tRNAs are in intergenic regions, as regular mt-tRNAs. Due to usually short intergenic regions, generally tRNA sequences partially overlap with flanking genes. Some tRNA pairs seem templated by sense-antisense strands. Moreover, 16S rRNA genes, but not 12S rRNAs, appear as tRNA nurseries, as previously suggested for multifunctional ribosomal-like protogenomes.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Chaetognaths belong to a small exclusively marine phylum (Casanova et al., 2012). Around 125 species are known with representatives in almost all marine habitats (Thuesen, 2007). Both in number and biomass, they are one of the major components of the zooplankton (Casanova et al., 2012). Chaetognaths are generally considered dominant predators of small zooplankton, but analyses of several aspects of their feeding behavior suggest that they are primarily osmotrophic animals (Casanova et al., 2012). Moreover, chaetognaths were probably widespread and diverse in the earliest Cambrian (Vannier et al., 2007).

Chaetognath nuclear genomes have many original features, some shared with other taxa whereas others are, still to date, phylum-specific. Phylogeny evidenced that the cytoplasmic and muscular chaetognath actin paralogs clustered with the cytoplasmic insect actins and muscular vertebrate actins, respectively (Barthélémy et al., 2006). Analogously, both vertebrate and arthropod canonical repeats have been found in chaetognath telomeric-like transcripts (Barthélémy et al., 2008a). As chaetognaths exhibit a mixture of protostome and deuterostome features (Helfenbein et al., 2004), this could suggest that they would have emerged very early, when the separation between protostomes and deuterostomes was not yet clear. The genomes of chaetognaths exhibit both paralogous ribosomal RNA genes (Telford and Holland, 1997; Papillon et al., 2006; Barthélémy et al., 2007a,b, 2008b) and ribosomal protein genes (Barthélémy et al., 2007c; Marlétaz et al., 2008). Conservation of extremely divergent paralogous sequences suggests a low rate of gene conversion (Barthélémy et al., 2006). Generally in nuclear genomes, despite numerous paralogous copies of a rRNA gene type (as 18S), by the action of mechanisms similar to concerted evolution, all rRNA genes exhibit a low level of variation. However, in some taxa, phylogenetic analyses show that sequences of a type of gene is subdivided in two or more distinct groups, named classes (Barthélémy et al., 2007a). Moreover, the rRNA genes belonging to different classes exhibit differential expressions (see Barthélémy et al. (2007a,b, 2008b), first finding in a metazoan, the chaetognath Spadella cephaloptera), suggesting an ubiquitous role of one rRNA class (housekeeping genes) and tissue-specific implications for the other one, or probably two other class(es) (Barthélémy et al., 2008b). The expression of Ribin, a protein involved in the pathway that adapts ribosomal transcription to physiological changes may be coupled to those of a tissue-specific class of rRNA genes (Barthélémy et al., 2010). The high presence of paralogous genes in chaetognath species dispersed throughout the phylum tree suggests that the event responsible for this molecular state may be traced back to the origin of the phylum (Telford and Holland, 1997; Barthélémy et al., 2006; Papillon et al., 2006). This original event can be the result of either several partial genome duplications which occurred early in the lineage (Marlétaz et al., 2008), a whole genome duplication (WGD) (Marlétaz et al., 2008) or an allopolyploidic event (genome combination after species hybridization) which could provide a better explanation for all the gathered evidence (Barthélémy et al., 2006, 2007c), both followed by extensive genomic region losses. Moreover, in S. cephaloptera, a very high level of structural heterogeneity of nuclear regions has been observed which could be mainly caused by the polymorphic insertion of genetic mobile elements, principally retrotransposons s.l. (Marlétaz et al., 2010) whose expression has been evidenced for some of them (Barthélémy et al., 2008a).

The chaetognath mitochondrial (mito) genomes exhibit also several molecular singularities. 1. In comparison to the typical gene content of metazoan mitogenomes, both atp6 and atp8 (ATPase subunits 6 and 8) protein-coding genes are absent − among the more than 1000 complete sequences of metazoan mitochondrial genomes that have been compiled to date, only those of the phylum Chaetognatha have lost their atp6 gene (Gissi et al., 2008). 2. Chaetognath mitogenomes are the smallest circular mitochondrial molecules encoding at least two rRNA and 11 proteins known to date (Helfenbein et al., 2004; Papillon et al., 2004; Miyamoto et al., 2010; Marlétaz et al., 2015; Shen et al., 2015). 3. An extreme mitochondrial sequence divergence or mitochondrial nucleotide diversity has been found within natural populations of two chaetognath species, Sagitta elegans and S. cephaloptera, but not in a third species, Sagitta setosa, which is however considered as closely related to S. elegans and sampled at the same location (Marlétaz et al., 2015). This could be the highest intraspecific diversity reported in animals. Moreover, S. elegans mitochondrial lineages not only exhibit extreme molecular divergence, but also gene order rearrangements (Marlétaz et al., 2015); however, several subspecies with fairly significant morphological differences could occur in the catching area (Fraser, 1952). 4. It was admitted that chaetognath mitogenomes bear one tRNA gene (trnMet) (Helfenbein et al., 2004; Faure and Casanova, 2006; Miyamoto et al., 2010) rather than the 22 found in most other invertebrates that employ the same genetic code (Gissi et al., 2008). A recent study invalidated the view that all chaetognath mitogenomes have a single tRNA gene. Indeed, two chaetognath mitogenomes recently sequenced contain two or four tRNA genes (Shen et al., 2015). Moreover, two complete mitogenomes belonging to the same species have been sequenced but mentioned under two different synonymous names (Sagitta nagae, 
                     Alvariño, 1967 (Miyamoto et al., 2010) and Zonosagitta nagae, 
                     Alvariño, 1967 (Shen et al., 2015)), and interestingly, according to the authors, they do not contain the same number of tRNA genes (one or two respectively). However, they were not sampled in the same area.

Regarding the surprising and contradictory data concerning the number of tRNA genes in chaetognath mitogenomes, we reanalysed available chaetognath mitogenomes aiming at detecting tRNA genes based on predicted secondary structure properties, without considering (in a first step) primary sequence homology, in line with analyses suggesting occurrences of previously undetected tRNAs in vertebrate mitogenomes, corresponding to the antisense sequence of sense tRNA genes (Seligmann 2010a,b, 2011a,b). Candidate tRNA genes are then analyzed considering different properties, including primary sequence homology, to confirm the sequence’s tRNA status suggested by secondary structure analysis. These analyses follow principles developed for regular mitochondrial tRNAs, which indicate associations between codon-anticodon mismatches and corresponding tRNA misacylation (Seligmann, 2010c, 2011c, 2012a). This phenomenon minimizes amino acid misinsertions, because codon-anticodon mismatches compensate for tRNA misacylations when the mismatched codon codes for the misacylated amino acid. Observing a similar phenomenon for the predicted cryptic tRNAs in chaetognath mitochondria would indicate that the recognition patterns on the predicted candidate tRNA’s sequence adapted to recognition by tRNA synthetases so as to minimize amino acid misinsertion, despite misacylations, and given codon-anticodon mismatches. Detecting such patterns for candidate mt-tRNAs in chaetognaths would be a good confirmation that these have translational activity. This reanalysis of available chaetognath mitogenomes could be a fruitful contribution for the knowledge of tRNA gene composition of mitogenomes.

This study analyses only complete mitogenomes available in GenBank and only one genome per species; hence we excluded one sequence of Sagitta crassa, one of Z. nagae (Accession numbers (acc. n°): FJ236469 and KF051939 respectively) (Shen et al., 2015), five sequences of S. cephaloptera (acc. n° KP899748-KP899752), thirty seven sequences of S. elegans (acc. n° KP899765-KP899801) and twelve sequences of S. setosa (acc. n° KP899753-KP899764) (Marlétaz et al., 2015). Sequences of Z. nagae from Shen et al. (2015) have not been analyzed because one specimen of Z. nagae had been previously sequenced (Miyamoto et al., 2010). Those of S. crassa from Shen et al. (2015) and those from Marlétaz et al. (2015) are not yet available in GenBank.

Therefore, analyses concern five mitogenomes belonging to five different species: Paraspadella gotoi (acc. n° NC_006083; Helfenbein et al., 2004), three species formerly grouped within the Sagitta genus, Z. nagae, Decipisagitta decipiens and Sagitta enflata (acc. n° NC_013810, acc. n° NC_013811 and acc. n° NC_013814 respectively; Miyamoto et al., 2010), and S. cephaloptera (acc. n° NC_006386; Papillon et al., 2004). In the first four sequences, only the trnMet gene has been reported by the authors. In S. cephaloptera all the tRNA genes were originally reported as lost (Papillon et al., 2004) and only the trnMet gene was subsequently identified (Faure and Casanova, 2006) but it is not yet annotated in the mitoDNA entry.

Mitogenomes templating for tRNAs were detected by tRNAscan-SE 1.21 (Lowe and Eddy, 1997) (http://selab.janelia.org/tRNAscan-SE/) and for comparison by ARWEN (Laslett and Canbaeck, 2008). The tRNAscan-SE software predicts anticodon identities and cloverleaf secondary structure (estimated by the structural component of COVE in tRNAscan-SE outputs, setting the COVE cutoff to −20). We customized the “Cove score cutoff”, to increase the likelihood of detecting tRNAs, considering tRNAs with COVE >−20. This approach is non-standard and explains detection of usually undetected candidate tRNA genes. We used the organellar tRNAs (mitochondrion/chloroplast) prediction model, defining cognate amino acids according to the invertebrate mitochondrial genetic code. Additional extensions to tRNAscan-SE allow detection of unusual tRNA homologues, tRNA-derived repetitive elements and tRNA pseudogenes which is particularly useful in analyses of chaetognath mitogenomes as the tRNA-like sequences could be unconventional. tRNAscan-SE provides scores for the structural component of tRNAs and allows to manually determine the software's sensitivity in tRNA detection. Moreover, other softwares are generally specially designed for mammalian mitochondrial tRNAs (Laslett and Canbaeck, 2008), while tRNAscan-SE (as ARWEN) is not, and therefore does not detect tRNAs lacking the D-arm (such as mitochondrial tRNASer(AGY)). Whatever method is used to detect tRNAs, it is important that all genomes are screened using the same method. Usual analyses based on tRNAscan-SE predict tRNA presence on the base of the COVE score, which is the sum of two likelihood ratios, one based on primary structure, the other on secondary structure (cloverleaf). Our procedure detects numerous candidate tRNAs whose primary structure COVE is very low (hence with apparently low or no homology with known tRNAs), but with positive secondary structure scores, suggesting plausible tRNA translational function. Moreover, the tRNAscan-SE software also predicts the intron-containing tRNA genes and indicates intron positions.

Putative tRNA genes have been matched to available DNA sequences by BLASTn searches (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi) (Dumontier and Hogue, 2002). This enabled us to find GenBank sequences homologous with chaetognath tRNAs as predicted by tRNAscan-SE. Multiple sequence alignments were made by clustalW software (www.ebi.ac.uk/clustalw) (Thompson et al., 1994); the alignments were manually refined at positions where clear misalignments were produced by the algorithm, i.e., they are verified for the conservation of important features and sites principally in 2D alignment. The tRNA secondary structures for chaetognath sequences and for those issuing from non chaetognaths were predicted using tRNAscan-SE and mitotRNAdb (Jühling et al., 2009; http://trnadb.bioinf.uni-leipzig.de/) softwares respectively.

The predictions of candidate tRNAs are solely based on secondary structure properties. We aim at strengthening these predictions based on independent tRNA properties. In that respect, the property that tRNA cognate and non-cognate aminoacylation corresponds with codon-anticodon match/mismatch properties (Seligmann, 2010c) can be evaluated based on bioinformatic analyses and would indicate translational function. We use methods described by Seligmann (2011c, 2012a). Stabilities of codon-anticodon matches and mismatches are estimated using the online software DINAMelt (Markham and Zuker, 2005, 2008), which estimates whether codon-anticodon pairs form duplexes, and if, the free energy of the structure. Tendencies for tRNA amino-acylations by cognate and non-cognate amino acids are estimated by the likelihood ratios output by the software TFAM (http://tfam.ucmerced.edu/, Taquist et al., 2007). This software aligns candidate tRNA sequences with reference compilations of tRNAs with known, experimentally tested cognate. Its output indicates alignment scores between the candidate tRNA and each of the reference tRNA types, assuming that amino-acylation is proportional to the alignment likelihood ratio. TFAM has three reference models, eukaryote, bacterial and archaeal, we use only the bacterial mode here. Error compensation of tRNA misacylation by codon-anticodon mismatch is estimated by two estimates: a) the z-standardized difference between mean TFAM scores for amino acids whose codons form duplexes with the tRNA’s anticodon, and the mean for amino acids whose codons do not hybridize with the tRNA’s anticodon, and b) by the Pearson correlation coefficient r between TFAM scores and free energies of codon anticodon duplexes, matching amino acids and codons-anticodons, only for codons forming duplexes with the tRNA’s anticodon. The more positive z, and the more negative r, respectively, the greater error compensation, an indicator that predicted misacylation of the candidate sequence adapted for translation.

The z-standardized difference is original to this study, it relates to the presence/absence of codon-anticodon duplex formations in relation to estimated aminoacylation, while Pearson correlations r detail the association only for amino acids for which at least one of their codons hybridizes with the anticodon of the focal, candidate tRNA sequence, as used previously (Seligmann, 2011c, 2012a).

Some mitochondrial tRNAs predicted by methods similar to those used here have predicted anticodons matching stop codons (Seligmann, 2010a). Their presence coevolves with amounts of predicted overlap coding within mitochondrial protein coding genes, whose translation requires amino acid insertions at stops (Seligmann, 2011d, 2012b,c), suggesting that these tRNAs translate overlapping genes after frameshifts (Faure et al., 2011). Overlapping genes are predicted as in previous publications (Seligmann, 2011d, 2012a,b, 2012c): the five presumably non-coding frames of each mitochondrial gene of the five chaetognath mitogenomes are translated and the hypothetical peptides blasted against GenBank proteins. Hits indicate predicted overlapping genes, expected to coevolve with suppressor tRNAs.

Re-annotation work has been carried out for the five chaetognath mitogenomes. Each region containing a protein gene with around 200 nucleotides upstream and a downstream sequence until the first stop codon has been translated in the same ORF than the authors of the mtDNA sequence. Both in the upstream and 5′ region of the published protein gene, methionine and isoleucine codons have been identified. Each of the predicted protein sequences were sequentially analyzed by searches using protein BLAST. The deduced protein sequences were re-annotated based on comparisons with homologous protein sequences issuing from (a) other chaetognath mitogenomes and (b) genes from other animal species.

Moreover, in order to confirm absences of the usually mitogenome-encoded genes atp6 and atp8 in chaetognath mitogenomes, we designed two BLAST-based approaches. Foremost, the six frames (three for each strand) of the five complete mitogenomes were translated according to the invertebrate mitochondrial genetic code, inserting ‘x’ at stops. This ensures to detect sequences potentially coding for the absent genes undetected by regular analyses because of the presence(s) of stop codons within regions coding for these proteins. The first approach consists in BLAST analyses of these six long hypothetical peptides, versus GenBank’s proteins, restricting the search to two taxonomic groups, chaetognaths, and one of the members of the putative sister group (nematodes) (Shen et al., 2015). Secondly, these results obtained were completed by alignment searches between these 6 long peptides, and a homologue of the protein undetected in chaetognath from a nematode mitogenome (Koerneria sudhausi, accession number: NC_029233).

@&#RESULTS@&#

Complete sequences of all available chaetognath mitogenomes were analyzed with the tRNA detection program tRNAscan-SE. No selenocysteine tRNA (UCA) or pseudogene were predicted, whereas a relatively low number (from 0 to 3 per mitogenome) of both possible suppressor tRNAs (anticodons CUA, UUA) and tRNAs with undetermined/unknown isotypes were predicted. Numerous putative tRNA sequences assigned to coding codons were predicted in each genome (Table 1a
                        ). Mitogenomes include from 13 to 26 putative tRNA genes decoding part of all 20 amino acids. The percentage of putative tRNA sequences decoding codons predicted in intragenic regions and bearing an intron versus total analogous sequences with or without intron varied strongly among species (from 14.3 to 68.4%). Only two tRNA sequences containing an intron have been found in intergenic regions. Table 1a also evidences that even when taking in account all predicted tRNAs, some tRNA types lack. For example, in the P. gotoi mitogenome, despite detecting 26 tRNA genes, 9 predicted tRNA types are missing, several among the detected tRNAs recognize the same codon. Among the five chaetognath mitogenomes analyzed, only two have the same protein- and rRNA-encoding gene order (D. decipiens and Z. nagae). Their tRNA-like gene contents also differ (Table 1a).

The same analysis using ARWEN software shows that mitogenomes include from 4 to 9 putative tRNA genes decoding part of all 20 amino acids (Table 1b
                        ) only.

However, this software has enabled us to find 16 new tRNA sequences among 32 detected. Ten of these new sequences correspond to types of tRNAs undetected by tRNAscan software of which six are located in intergenic régions (tRNAThr(TGT) in S. cephaloptera; tRNASer1(TCT) in P. gotoi; tRNALys(TTT) in S. enflata; tRNACys(ACA) and tRNAPro(TGG) in D. decipiens; tRNAGln(TTG) in Z. nagae). Moreover, in contrast to tRNAscan software, ARWEN detects several sequences bearing the same anticodon only for tRNAThr(TGT) in the mitogenome of Z. nagae (2 sequences bearing the same anticodon TGT are intergenic, 1 is intragenic and located in the 16S gene). The ratio of intergenic and intragenic tRNA sequences detected is inversed with ARWEN software. Indeed, ARWEN detects more intergenic sequences than tRNAscan. However, a chi-square test shows that tRNA abundances in intra- and intergenic regions, according to tRNAscan-SE and ARWEN, can not be statistically differentiated (P=0.26). Nevertheless, the two softwares show that at least 50% of intragenic tRNAs are within the 16S gene (Fig. 1
                        ).

ARWEN-based results suggest that further undetected tRNAs might occur.

Tendencies for aminoacylation are estimated by TFAM (http://tfam.ucmerced.edu/, Taquist et al., 2007). They consist of alignment likelihood ratios between the input candidate tRNA sequence, and reference tRNAs with experimentally verified, known cognate. The cognate of the tRNA type with the highest likelihood is considered the most likely aminoacylated to the focal, candidate tRNA. This method is based on recognition patterns (by tRNA synthetases) on the tRNA’s complete sequence, and is independent of cognate prediction from anticodons detected according to the tRNA’s predicted cloverleaf structure. Statistical convergence between predicted cognate, according to TFAM and according to anticodon loop structure is considered as confirming evidence that sequences template for functional tRNAs (Seligmann, 2010b). We ranked TFAM likelihoods and corresponding amino acids, for each candidate tRNA (best likelihood, rank ‘1’), and counted numbers of tRNAs where the rank of the anticodon-predicted cognate is lower than 10 (Table S1 in Supplementary material). Unless stated otherwise, analyses below relate only to tRNAs detected by tRNAscan-SE.

Among the 13 predicted tRNAs in Z. nagae, the amino acids corresponding to anticodons have rank <10 in seven tRNAs. Among these, at the level of the single tRNA, the specific rank of the anticodon-predicted cognate is closer to ‘1’ than expected by chance according to the binomial distribution at P<0.05 for 6 among 13 candidate tRNAs (one tailed tests), with one exact match. The same analysis for S. cephaloptera, excluding predicted antiterminator tRNAs, yields 8 candidate tRNAs among 14 with rank <10, among which 6 with P<0.05. For D. decipiens, seven among 10 candidate tRNAs have predicted cognate with rank <10, among which 4 with P<0.05 according to a binomial distribution (one exact match). For P. gotoi, excluding the antiterminator tRNA, the rank is <10 for seven among 14 tRNAs, with P<0.05 for six tRNAs (three exact matches). For S. enflata, excluding the antiterminator tRNA, among nine candidate tRNAs, 8 among 9 tRNAs have rank <10, statistically significant at P<0.05 in six cases (two exact matches). This means that 37 among 60 candidate tRNAs (61.67%) have a TFAM-predicted cognate with rank <10, which is a statistically significant majority according to a sign test based on the binomial distribution (P=0.0231, one tailed test). A total of seven exact matches among 60 candidate tRNAs (11.67%) is far more than expected according to a binomial distribution for 60 trials (2.86×10−5 are expected). Hence TFAM alignment analyses overall confirm the cognate amino acid predicted on the basis of the predicted cloverleaf structure’s anticodon.

Also 60% of tRNAs detected by ARWEN have a TFAM-predicted cognate with rank <10, which is not a statistically significant majority at P<0.05 (one tailed sign test), probably because fewer tRNAs were detected.

We estimated error compensation between candidate tRNA misacylation and codon-anticodon mismatch by calculating the association between codon-anticodon duplex free energy and TFAM scores for amino acids corresponding to the codon, using two independent measures. The first method compares the mean of TFAM scores obtained for amino acids whose codons form duplexes with the tRNA’s anticodon, with the mean TFAM score of those codons not hybridizing with that anticodon (Table S1 in Supplementary materials). Mean TFAM scores of the former should be greater than the latter if error compensation occurs. Unless stated otherwise, results relate to tRNAs detected by tRNAscan-SE.

For Z. nagae, the difference between CDs is positive (CD is the difference between the means, divided by the sum of the standard deviations of the corresponding TFAM scores), as expected if error compensation occurs, for 11 among 13 candidate tRNAs, a statistically significant majority of cases according to a one tailed sign test using the binomial distribution (P=0.0056). In S. cephaloptera, this difference is positive in exactly half of the 16 candidate tRNAs. For S. decipiens, the difference between CDs is positive in 8 among 10 tRNAs, (P=0.0273). For P. gotoi, the difference is positive in 12 among 15 tRNAs (P=0.0088). For S. enflata, the difference is positive in 7 among 10 tRNAs (P=0.0859). In total, the difference is positive for 46 among 64 tRNAs (71.9 percent), pooling all species (P=0.00015). This means that for the statistically significant majority of tRNAs detected by tRNAscan-SE, the TFAM scores for amino acids whose codons hybridize with the tRNA’s anticodon are higher than TFAM scores of codons not hybridizing with that anticodon. Hence the tRNA is more likely aminoacylated with amino acids that correspond to codons that can form duplexes with the tRNA’s anticodon, than with amino acids whose codons do not form such duplexes.

Similar analyses for tRNAs detected by ARWEN yield positive CDs in 62.9% of cases, which is not a statistically significant majority (P=0.062, one tailed sign test).

The second approach analyses only variation among codons forming duplexes with the tRNA’s anticodon, in the free energies of these duplexes, and their correlation with corresponding TFAM scores, expecting negative correlations when error compensation occurs, as shown in Fig. 2
                            for a candidate tRNA with anticodon decoding valine. Unless stated explicitly otherwise, results relate to tRNAs detected by tRNAscan-SE.

Pearson correlation coefficients r are <0 in 10/13 cases for Z. nagae, 11/16 for S. cephaloptera, 6/10 for D. decipiens, 11/15 for P. gotoi and 5/10 for S. enflata. This is a statistically significant majority of the cases according to a one tailed sign test for Z. nagae (P=0.023) and P. gotoi (P=0.021). These 43 among 60 negative correlations (71.67%) are a statistically significantly majority according to a one tailed sign test (P=0.00027). The Pearson correlation coefficient r is statistically significant at P<0.05 (one tailed test) for 6 candidate tRNAs in each S. cephaloptera and P. gotoi, hence 20% of all 60 candidate tRNAs (2.86×10−5 are expected). These results indicate a strong tendency for error compensation between predicted candidate tRNA misacylation and codon-anticodon mismatches. This suggests that candidate tRNAs adapted for translational accuracy by error compensation. For tRNAs detected by ARWEN, r is negative in 48%, which does not differ from 50% expected if there is no bias.

Hence analyses according to all three independent TFAM-based criteria suggest for tRNAs detected by tRNAscan-SE translational activity, at least overall. Results are not conclusive for tRNAs detected by ARWEN. This is probably due to smaller sample sizes (fewer tRNAs are detected by ARWEN than tRNAscan-SE), as results are comparable for the two first criteria (e.g. CD). However, for correlation analyses between codon-anticodon duplex stabilities and TFAM-based estimates of aminoacylation, results can not be differentiated from chance, and this does not seem to be due to sample biases in this case. This means that ARWEN, by detecting fewer tRNAs, is not filtering out false positives, the opposite seems the case. This does not mean that ARWEN is less effective than tRNAscan-SE for detecting classical tRNAs. Its hierarchical algorithm, searching first for potential anticodon stem-loop hairpins, then potential up-, and then down-stream stem-loop hairpins potentially matching the tRNA’s sidearms, is well designed for detecting classical tRNAs. However, tRNAscan-SE, based on a more generalized model of detection (Jühling et al., 2012a) and the possibility to adjust manually detection cut-offs, is probably more adequate for detecting tRNA candidates with translational activity, but differing from classical tRNA models, as is, by definition, the case for chaetognath mitochondria, where classical analyses barely detect tRNAs. The issue deserves more in depth analyses by team(s) with more adequate backgrounds.

We detected two antiterminator tRNAs UUA in S. cephaloptera and one in P. gotoi, one antiterminator tRNA CUA in Sagitta enflata, none in D. decipiens and Z. nagae.

Previous analyses of mammal and Drosophila mitochondrial tRNAs show that codon usage coevolves also with anticodons in tRNA sidearms, suggesting translational activity by these sidearms (Seligmann 2013b, 2014), perhaps in the form of amino-acylated stem-loop hairpins (Yu et al., 2008) which resemble reduced mitochondrial tRNAs in Enoplea (Jühling et al., 2012a,b; Wende et al., 2014). Fragments of mitochondrial tRNAs corresponding to sidearms have been detected (Hirose et al., 2015). Two additional potential suppressor anticodons occur in tRNA sidearms of each D. decipiens and S. enflata. Considering these, numbers of predicted suppressor anticodons coevolve in chaetognath mitogenomes with numbers of predicted codons involved in overlap coding (Spearman rank correlation coefficient rs=0.975, one tailed P=0.002, Fig. 3
                           ). Numbers of predicted codons involved in overlap coding are the sum of all amino acids in alignments between proteins existing in GenBank and hypothetical peptides translated from the five non-coding frames of the protein coding genes of each chaetognath mitogenome, along criteria used previously (Seligmann, 2011d, 2012b,c). The coevolution between anticodons matching stops and estimated overlap coding indicates that overlap coding occurs also in chaetognath mitochondria, in addition to vertebrates and Drosophila (Faure et al., 2011; Seligmann, 2011d, 2012b,c), and that the predicted chaetognath mitochondrial suppressor tRNAs are functional. Note that a disproportionate number of suppressor tRNAs detected in the chaetognath mitogenomes are janologs. The term janolog (originated from the twofaced Roman deity Jano) has been proposed for naming genes (or deducing proteins or RNA) positioned on the complementary strands of the same area of a DNA duplex (Faure et al., 2011). This corresponds to sense-antisense templating of tRNAs as in Seligmann (2010a,b).

Above analyses of TFAM scores indicate that candidate tRNAs tend to be amino-acylated by predicted cognate amino acids, and indicate error compensation between misacylation and codon-anticodon mismatches. Hence overall, candidate tRNAs can be considered as functional in translation. Here we focus on properties of candidate tRNAs from intragenic regions (Table 3). There are almost always seven nucleotides in anticodon-loops, the canonical anticodon loop size. Globally, the ratio between anticodons which are consistent with the wobble or super-wobble rules versus those which do not respect the latter are rather in favor of sequences without introns even if there may be differences according to mitogenome. Frequently, supposed tRNA sequences bearing the same anticodon occur in the same mitogenome, for example, three sequences in both S. cephaloptera (containing the UAC(Val) anticodon) and in Z. nagae (with the UGU(Thr) anticodon), in these two cases, two of the three sequences do not contain introns (Tables 1a, 1b and 2). Moreover, the sequences without intron bearing the same anticodon do not exhibit great sequence homologies (examples in Fig. 4
                        ); indeed, in primary sequence alignments, the anticodons are not at the same position and the conserved nucleotides are in great part due to bias from AT-rich sequences suggesting that they are not derived from the same ancestral sequence. Interestingly, among all the genes, most of the tRNA sequences found in intragenic regions are positioned in 16S rRNA genes (Table 2
                        
                        ). Generally, except for putative tRNA genes found in 16S rRNA genes (examples in Fig. S1, alignments 1.13 and 1.14 in Supplementary materials), predicted tRNA sequences do not align according to BLAST with GenBank entries or with mitotRNAdb database. These homologies between candidate tRNAs with identical anticodons strengthen the hypothesis that these sequences have tRNA function.

Whole mitogenome re-annotation works have been carried out as an attempt to update the chaetognath mitogenome information because preliminary studies suggested a possible relationship between the presence of a tRNA gene in an intergenic region and the size of the latter.

These re-annotation analyses suggest five new annotations (Fig. S2 in Supplementary materials). Four concern intergenic regions between two protein genes and one the region between the 16S rRNA gene and a protein gene. In four cases, the putative intergenic region is lengthened, suggesting that the first ATA or ATG codons of an ORF could not be always the physiological start codon. Moreover, with one exception, our analyses suggest that an ATA or ATT codon might be replaced by an ATG codon. In addition, according to the re-annotation analysis, a long overlapping region in the D. decipiens mitogenome could be reduced to −1 nucleotide or no overlap if the complete stop codon is created by polyadenylation. Note that in GenBank the product of the cox1 gene of Z. nagae (NC_013810) was mentioned as “cytochrome c oxidase subunit III”.

To date, all analyses conclude that genes encoding atp6 and atp8 are absent in chaetognath mitogenomes. Moreover, the discovery of new tRNA genes should encourage new investigations in order to try to detect possible atp6 and atp8 genes in these genomes. We searched for these two genes, using BLAST analyses of the five chaetognath mitogenomes translated in long hypothetical peptides in the six frames versus GenBank’s nematode proteins. This method detects 41 among the 55 (74.6%) protein coding genes already described in the chaetognath mitogenomes available in GenBank. In a second step, we effectuated alignment searches between these 6 chaetognath long peptides, and a homologue of the proteins undetected in chaetognath from a nematode mitogenome (K. sudhausi). This detects in 12 among the 14 (85.7%) remaining cases the protein not detected by the first method. For atp6 and atp8, none of these methods ever detects in any of the five chaetognath mitogenomes any alignments (Table S2 in Supplementary materials). These analyses suggest that atp6 and atp8 genes are missing in these five chaetognath mitogenomes.

Only two tRNA genes predicted in an intergenic region contain an intron, putatively encoding the tRNATyr(AUA) and the tRNAPhe(AAA) in P. gotoi and S. enflata mitogenomes, respectively. They are not consistent with the wobble rule. These sequences have not been taken into account in the analyses. Moreover, a possible tRNAGln(UUG) found in the P. gotoi mitogenome has an anticodon-loop of 8 nucleotides whereas a tRNALeu2(UAA) found in the Z. nagae mitogenome has an anticodon-loop of 5 nucleotides and lacks the T-arm. Several data of putative tRNA genes found in intergenic regions (excluding those mentioned above) are presented in Table 3. All these predicted tRNAs are consistent with the wobble or super-wobble rules. Only the trnMet gene occurs in all five mitogenomes and at the same intergenic position. Most of the predicted tRNA genes were in intergenic regions of which the two flanking genes have the same transcriptional orientation. This globally corresponds to the pattern of transcription found in chaetognath mitogenomes. Two tRNA genes with the same anticodon have been found in the same species (P. gotoi: tRNAGln(TTG) and Z. nagae: tRNATrp(UCA)). However, in the first case, one tRNA sequence is non canonical (anticodon-loop nucleotide count differs from seven) suggesting that only one sequence could be functional (but note that expanded codons occur in mitogenomes (Seligmann 2012d, 2013b, 2014, 2015, 2016a,b; Seligmann and Labra, 2013)). Only in one case, two different tRNA types are predicted (S. enflata and Z. nagae: tRNALeu1(UAG) versus P. gotoi: tRNASer2(UGA)) on the same strand of an intergenic region (+cox2 +nd1); the nomenclature of intergenic regions is as follows, the names of the two flanking genes preceded by a sign positive “+” or negative “−” depending on the direction of genes in the sequence of the mitochondrial genomic sequence available in GenBank. In three other cases, the same tRNA gene type is predicted in different intergenic regions: 1/tRNALeu2(TAA) in +16S +cox1 (complementary) intergenic region (i.r.) of Z. nagae and in +12S −nd4 i.r. of D. decipiens; 2/tRNALeu1(UAG) in +cox2 +nd1 i.r. of both S. enflata and Z. nagae and in +nd1 +nd3 i.r. of S. cephaloptera; 3/tRNATrp(UCA) in +cox2 +nd1 (complementary) i.r. of P. gotoi, in +nd1 +nd3 (complementary) i.r. and in -nd6 −nd5 i.r. of Z. nagae).

Despite discrepancies, the aligned sequences of tRNA genes usually showed a higher degree of similarity in the bottom half of their secondary structure, comprising the D-arm, the anticodon-arm and the variable loop than in the top half of the cloverleaf secondary structure. This latter region functions mainly in RNA extremity processing reactions (Maizels and Weiner, 1999) whereas, the bottom half region plays a role in codon translation (Mabuchi et al., 2004). As already suggested by Miyamoto et al. (2010) for tRNAMet, most of the chaetognath tRNAs could have retained, at least, this last function. None of the predicted tRNA sequences overlap with each other on the same strand, but, janologous sense-antisense tRNA-like sequence pairs are predicted in some cases: in the +16S +cox1 i.r. of the Z. nagae mitogenome the tRNAThr(UGU) and the tRNALeu2(UAA) (the latter has an unconventional structure), and in the +cox2 +nd1 i.r. of the P. gotoi mitogenome tRNASer2(UGA) and tRNATrp(UCA). Alignments of janologous tRNA sequences, due to reverse complementarity of the two strands of DNA, exhibit several similar pairings within their common region, but differences may appear as a result of so-called non-canonical GU pairing, with two hydrogen bonds (Nagaswamy et al., 2000; Madariaga et al., 2005), which occurs fairly often in RNA (c.f. for example in Fig. S1, alignment 1.4c in Supplementary materials). Various bioinformatic analyses predict that mitogenomes usually contain tRNA janologs (Seligmann, 2010a,b; 2011a,b,d, 2012b–d; 2013a,b, 2014; Seligmann and Labra, 2013).

Presence of putative tRNA genes seems in part correlated to the length of intergenic regions. Indeed, they are absent when the intergenic region is negative (meaning overlap between neighbouring genes); there are overlapping protein-coding genes in four among five analyzed chaetognath mitogenomes (S. cephaloptera (−2bp), Z. nagae (−1bp), D. decipiens (−43bp or −1pb, see re-annotation analysis above) and S. enflata (−38bp)). When the intergenic regions are absent or too short (≤28bp), tRNA gene sequences were rarely predicted (Table 3). However, these results data must be viewed with caution, indeed, relatively frequently annotations of mtDNA sequences can be either wrong or incomplete (Boore, 2006). Being given the topic of this article, we chose to take into consideration only the data provided by the authors who had submitted the sequences in banks even though there could be some doubts about the position of the physiological stop (principally when a stop codon is created by polyadenylation) and start codons. Indeed, in mitogenomes, immature stop codons (T- or TA-) and several alternative start codons (as ATN) occur, making annotations very difficult. For example, in the chaetognath mtDNA genomes analyzed here, according to the authors of the sequences, besides the ATG and ATA start codons, three ATT start codons have been reported (Shen et al., 2015). For the five chaetognath mitogenomes analyzed, there are 16 and 21 intergenic regions shorter than 15 and 28bp, respectively, among a total of 44 (taking into account only pairs of protein-coding genes and excluding flanking sequences of the long non coding region of S. enflata). Our re-annotation analyses suggest that five positions of start codons could be modified (Fig. S1 in Supplementary materials) but without in vitro translation experiments, alternative proposals will remain speculative.

A conserved major gene arrangement (cox2-nd1-nd3-nd2-cox3-12S) is shared by all known chaetognath mitogenomes to the exception of a lineage of S. elegans (Marlétaz et al., 2015), but even within this region, we found great discrepancy in tRNA gene contents. As already mentioned, only the trnMet gene occurs in the cox3-12S intergenic region of all analyzed mitogenomes. This tRNA gene is also present at the same position in the mitogenome of S. crassa (Shen et al., 2015). In the latter mitogenome, three other tRNA genes were found by Shen et al. (2015) using tRNAscan- SE 1.21, a trnAsp gene in the 16S-cox1 intergenic region versus a trnThr gene on the same strand in both S. enflata and Z. nagae, a trnLeu1 gene in the cox2-nd1 intergenic region similarly to S. enflata and Z. nagae and a trnLys gene in the nd3-nd2 intergenic region similarly to S. cephaloptera, D. decipiens and Z. nagae mitogenomes. Surprisingly, in the cox1-cox2 intergenic region, we detected no tRNA gene in the Z. nagae mitogenome collected in the Sagami Bay (Japan) in the western North Pacific (Miyamoto et al., 2010) whereas in those of the same species from the Yellow Sea (Shen et al., 2015), a tRNAGln has been found, similarly to P. gotoi.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The central and vital roles of tRNA in life make identification and annotation of tRNA genes very important. In this study, two bioinformatics tools which allow identification of tRNA were used, a comparative of advantages and disadvantages of them can be found, for example, in Lang et al. (2012). In chaetognath mitogenomes, tRNAscan-SE detects more tRNA genes than ARWEN; however, this does not suggest that the latter has lower sensitivity because false positives and pseudogenes can not be excluded. Before fastidious biochemical identifications, bioinformatics tools, as TFAM, usefully provide data concerning the potential functionnality of candidate tRNAs. It is important to note that TFAM-related tests for tRNA function are totally independent of homology-based detection of tRNAs. Hence error compensation of tRNA misacylation by codon-anticodon mismatch can be high, whether at CD and/or TFAM levels, also for tRNAs for which no homology with existing tRNAs could be detected. This function-based confirmation of tRNAs, independently of homology, could detect groups of functional tRNAs that have origins independent of classical tRNAs. This could be in agreement with Di Giulio’s (2013) hypothesis of polyphyletic origins of tRNAs. It is important to note that TFAM-based analyses suggest that overall, candidate mt chaetognath tRNAs are valid tRNAs.

The anticodons of some among the predicted tRNAs presumably match stop codons. Such tRNAs have already been described for vertebrate and Drosophila mitogenomes (Seligmann, 2010a, 2011d, 2012b,c). They coevolve with estimates of stop codons included in predicted overlapping genes (Faure et al., 2011; Seligmann, 2011b), including overlap coding in mitochondrial ribosomal RNA genes (Seligmann, 2013a). This coevolution between codon usage and tRNA is known for regular tRNAs, and corresponds presumably to the optimization of the translational machinery (e.g. Bulmer, 1987; Higgs and Ran, 2008; Michely et al., 2013). Hence detecting a similar pattern for predicted suppressor tRNAs in chaetognath mitochondria strengthens the evidence in favor of translational activity by predicted tRNAs described here (Fig. 3), and confirms previous analyses for primates, Drosophila and turtles (Faure et al., 2011; Seligmann, 2011d, 2012b,c). Besides/in addition to import of cytosolic tRNAs, the existence of further undetected functional tRNAs, unrelated to known tRNAs, seems a likely hypothesis for completing the missing mt chaetognath tRNA repertoire.

More classical homology analyses confirm the status of some detected candidate tRNAs. In chaetognath mitogenomes, most putative tRNA sequences which exhibit relatively strong alignments with non-chaetognath tRNAs are predicted in intragenic regions, not in flanking sequences of protein- and rRNA-encoding genes. However, these two tRNA groups do not seem very different in TFAM-related properties. They differ in structural COVE, with greater tendencies to form cloverleaf secondary structures in intergenic than intragenic candidate tRNAs. This difference is explained by differences, among intragenic candidate tRNAs, between rRNA-embedded and other intragenic candidate tRNAs, with the former having mean structural COVE similar to intergenic candidate tRNAs (18.235±9.86, 22; and 18.656±8.188, 17, respectively (means followed by standard deviations and sample sizes, no statistically significant difference according to a two-tailed Mann Whitney U test, P=0.895)), versus 10.81±9.743, 24 for intragenic, non-ribosomal candidate tRNAs, which differ significantly from other candidate tRNAs in terms of structural COVE (two tailed Mann Whitney test, P=0.005). Differences between intra- and intergenic candidate tRNAs could have the following reasons. 1/To date, group I introns have been found in organelles of lower eukaryotes and higher plants, and in nuclear genomes of a wide spectrum of lower eukaryotes, where they are exclusively found within functional rRNA genes (Hedberg and Johansen, 2013), whereas group II introns have been only found in organelles of plants, fungi and rare animals (Trichoplax, a basal non-bilaterian metazoan, and Nephtys
                     , an annelid worm). However, the single intron found in Nephtys sp. probably results from a recent horizontal gene transfer from a bacterial or viral vector (Vallès et al., 2008). 2/Several types of disrupted tRNA genes have been reported in Archaea and only in primitive Eukarya, these include multiple intron- containing tRNA genes, split tRNA genes, and permuted tRNA genes (Fujishima and Kanai, 2014); in addition, there are no tRNA genes harboring eukaryote-archaea type introns in mitochondria and chloroplasts (Yoshihisa, 2014). 3/To our knowledge, no tRNA genes have been found in (mitochondrial) protein-coding regions. However, if these might be present and functional, this could be problematic in obtaining complete mRNA transcripts. Hence predicted intragenic tRNAs might not have been considered in previous studies. 4/Taking into account all putative predicted tRNA sequences, there is a high redundancy (i.e. many isoacceptor tRNAs) and mitogenomes still lack tRNA types. 5/transcription of putative tRNA genes fully integrated within protein-coding genes would suggest the existence of novel but still unknown biochemical mechanisms crucial for the expression of the totality of the genes (Doublet et al., 2015). The most probable hypothesis would suggest that only tRNA genes found in intergenic regions or optionally in the 16S genes may be functional. Indeed, tRNA genes found in 16S rRNA genes and which do not contain an intron are generally consistent with the wobble or super-wobble rules, they exhibit conserved regions with non-chaetognath sequences and their transcription is less problematic than those of sequences present in protein-coding genes. Our independent analyses strengthen the hypothesis that the entire set of tRNAs for all twenty amino acids are encoded in both complementary strands of the 16S and 23S rRNAs genes of Escherichia coli K12 (Root-Bernstein and Root-Bernstein, 2015, 2016). In chaetognath mitogenomes, 2–5 putative tRNA genes without intron and consistent with the wobble or super-wobble rules have been detected in 16S rRNA genes. Contrarily to bacterial data, these sequences are principally on the strand templating the 16S rRNA. Only two tRNA-like sequences (with intron) were found in the small sub-unit ribosomal (12S) rRNA gene. Because of their length and the high levels of secondary structure formation of their products, rRNAs could exhibit at least partly cloverleaf-like two-dimensional structures, but the high discrepancy in abundances of tRNA-like sequences in 16S versus 12S rRNA genes can not be explained by the difference of length between these two genes. In chaetognath mitogenomes, if tRNA sequences in the 16S rRNA genes are not functional; these rRNA genes could at least constitute a kind of tRNA genes nursery, with tRNAs secondarily integrated at other (mito)genomic locations. Contrarily, only one tRNA-like sequence has been detected in the long non-coding region (of ca. 1000bp) from the S. enflata mitogenome.

In chaetognath mitogenomes, the intergenic spaces are very short. Their length varied from −43 to 101bp. For example, according to Papillon et al. (2004), in S. cephaloptera, the mean number of nucleotides intervening between each pair of protein coding genes is around 30bp. A typical tRNA has a cloverleaf-like secondary structure, consisting of acceptor stem, D-arm, anticodon arm, a variable region, and T-arm, with an average length of 73 nucleotides (Wende et al., 2014). In several mitochondrial genomes, however, tRNA genes have reduced D- or T-arms or even completely lack one of these elements. All mitochondrial tRNA genes in some Enoplea (nematodes) lack both the D- and the T-arm, with lengths of only 42 nucleotides (Wende et al., 2014). This suggests that if tRNA genes are present in intergenic regions of chaetognath mitogenomes and even if both the D- and the T-arm lack, they generally must overlap at least with one of the flanking genes. All the relatively conserved chaetognath trnMet genes overlap with the cox3 flanking gene, and they also probably overlap with the 5′ extremity of the 12S rRNA genes.

In the hypothesis that only tRNA genes found in intergenic (protein or rRNA coding) regions of chaetognath mitogenomes could be functional, the only possibility for having the entire set of tRNAs for all the twenty amino acids is that for each intergenic region, the two strands could encode tRNAs. Indeed, there are 13 intergenic regions and in our analyses, only one tRNA gene has been detected on the same DNA strand as one intergenic region. However, janologous tRNAs induce several different biases in sequence composition. Moreover, in this analysis only few janologous tRNA-like sequences have been found. However, the mitochondrial DNA of the backyard pillbug Armadillidium vulgare presents a particularly highly compact genome with strong size reduction, so several partially overlapping tRNA genes have been found and expression of both a pair of tRNA genes in either direct or opposite orientation has been evidenced (Doublet et al., 2015).

Several of the predicted chaetognath tRNA molecules do not exhibit the typical cloverleaf structure; however, post-transcriptional modifications only characterized in few sequences; Suzuki et al. (2011) were found to trigger stabilization of the cloverleaf fold. For example, it has been recently shown that in an isopod (crustacean) mitogenome, the inferred tRNA secondary structure of a tRNA primary transcript deduced from the genomic sequence presents six mismatches in the acceptor stem, which is unexpected for a functional tRNA and that the biogenesis of this tRNA requires repair at both the 5′- and 3′-ends (Doublet et al., 2015). Moreover, this tRNA gene overlaps with both the 3′ end of a protein-coding gene and with the sequence of another tRNA gene. In addition, in some cases mitochondrial tRNA genes that have incomplete 3′ ends are completed post-transcriptionally by polyadenylation (Yokobori and Pääbo, 1995). So, post-transcriptional maturations of chaetognath putative products of non canonical tRNA sequences are conceivable. However, examples of representation of chaetognath mt-tRNAs (principally tRNAMet) sharing an almost canonical four-arm cloverleaf structure might exist (Faure and Casanova, 2006; Miyamoto et al., 2010; Shen et al., 2015).

Translation of chaetognath mitochondrial mRNAs requires 22 tRNA types. Both the 20 canonical amino acids and the 62 coding codons are present in the chaetognath mitochondrial proteins and genes taken as a whole respectively (Helfenbein et al., 2004; Papillon et al., 2004; Miyamoto et al., 2010). Moreover, in the invertebrate mitochondrial code, 22 tRNAs (two tRNAs each for leucine and serine, and one tRNA for each remaining amino acid) are needed for mtDNA translation of all the coding codons, each tRNA can read two to four codons in a four codon-box by expanded wobbling (Watanabe and Yokobori, 2011).

Besides the assumption of janologous tRNAs and functionality of tRNAs expressed from the 16S gene, other hypotheses may be proposed. 1/Presence of highly nonconventional mitochondrial tRNAs. 2/Mitochondrial tRNA sequences need several modifications (for example) in order to be functional and so were not detected by the software used. 3/The lacking genes could be encoded by a second DNA present in the same mitochondrion. Cases of second, or even multiple, different mtDNAs have been evidenced in some fungi, nematodes and protists (Gray et al., 2004; Marande et al., 2005). 4/The missing genes could be encoded in another type of mitochondrion (heteroplasmy), mitochondrial heteroplasmy seems to be unfavorable, but it is increasingly observed in animals (reviewed in Lane, 2012). 5/Lacking tRNAs are probably nucleus-encoded and imported from the cytosol (reviews by Sieber et al., 2011; Schneider, 2011). There are examples of nuclear tRNA imports into the mitochondrion in diverse taxonomic groups (Gray et al., 2004; Salinas et al., 2012). In nuclear genomes there are several nuclear mitochondrial DNAs now referred to as NUMTs and there are also multiple sequences that are highly similar to mitochondrial tRNAs (tRNA-lookalikes); for example, they are prevalent in primates (Telonis et al., 2015).

Our analyses of chaetognath mitogenomes by both tRNAScan-Se and ARWEN differ from previous ones for the same mitogenomes that detect a single tRNA. Concerning tRNAScan-Se, the difference lies in decreasing the cutoff of the ‘COVE' index used for detection, and considering only its structural component. Hence our hits do not imply primary structure (sequence) homology with known tRNAs, only matching by secondary structure similarity to the cloverleaf structure. This approach assumes that very distant (or unrelated) sequences may form similar structures (and hence have similar functions), despite very dissimilar primary sequences, for example, recent analyses based on these principles suggest common ancestry between rRNA and retroviruses (Seligmann and Raoult, 2016).

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The view that all chaetognath mitogenomes have a single tRNA gene has been already invalidated by Shen et al. (2015). This study shows evidence that all the chaetognath mitogenomes analyzed exhibit more than one tRNA-like sequence. Even when assuming that all candidate tRNAs (principally in intergenic regions and in 16S rRNA genes) are functional, many tRNAs are missing to reach the 22 found in most other invertebrates using that genetic code (Gissi et al., 2008). Understanding the decoding mechanism of chaetognath mitochondrial mitogenomes necessitates further studies including on nuclear-genome structure and possible import mechanisms. It must also be investigated whether the predicted mitochondrial tRNA-like sequences are matured and functional, i.e., if they contain modified bases, have 3′ terminal CCA triplets and are able to form aminoacyl-RNA, i.e. to bind an amino acid residue. Moreover, the discovery of many tRNA genes whereas several authors were convinced that there was no or only one per genome should encourage to undertake new investigations in order to try to detect possible atp6 and atp8 genes in these genomes.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

We would like to thank the referee for many very useful remarks which led to considerable improvements. We are also grateful to Eric Faure for his invaluable help in drafting this paper. The work by HS has been carried out thanks to the support of the A*MIDEX project (no ANR-11-IDEX-0001-02) funded by the “Investissements d’Avenir” French Government program, managed by the French National Research Agency (ANR).

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2016.04.007.

The following are Supplementary data to this article:
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

