@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
               CDH1/E-cadherin and solid tumors. An updated gene-disease association analysis using bioinformatics tools

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           A systematic study was carried out to gather and summarize current knowledge on CDH1/E-cadherin and solid tumors (ST) using bioinformatics resources. The DisGeNET database was exploited to survey CDH1-associated diseases. Reported mutations in specific ST were obtained by interrogating COSMIC and IntOGen tools. CDH1 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) were retrieved from the dbSNP database.


                        
                        
                           
                           DisGeNET analysis identified 609 genes annotated to ST, among which CDH1 was listed. Using CDH1 as query term, 26 disease concepts were found, 21 of which were neoplasms-related terms. Using DisGeNET ALL, 172 disease concepts were identified. Of those, 80 ST disease-related terms were subjected to manual curation and 75/80 (93.75%) associations were validated.


                        
                        
                           
                           On selected ST, 489 CDH1 somatic mutations were listed in COSMIC and IntOGen databases. Breast neoplasms had the highest CDH1-mutation rate. CDH1 was positioned among the 20 genes with highest mutation frequency and was confirmed as driver gene in breast cancer. Over 14,000 SNP for CDH1 were found in the dbSNP database.


                        
                        
                           
                           This report used DisGeNET to gather/compile current knowledge on gene-disease association for CDH1/E-cadherin and ST, data curation expanded the number of terms that relate them. An updated list of CDH1 somatic mutations was obtained with COSMIC and IntOGen databases and of SNP from dbSNP. This information can be used to further understand the role of CDH1/E-cadherin in health and disease.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#




                     CDH1




                  

Epithelial Cadherin

Solid tumors

Bioinformatics

Somatic mutations

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Cancer is a group of diseases that causes millions of deaths worldwide. Among cancers, Solid Tumors (ST) stand-out due to their high incidence and mortality rates. Disruption of cell–cell adhesion is highly relevant during tumor progression. Epithelial-cadherin (protein: E-cadherin, gene: CDH1) is a key molecule in cell–cell adhesion and an abnormal expression or/and function(s) contributes to tumor progression and is altered in ST. A systematic study was carried out to gather and summarize current knowledge on CDH1/E-cadherin and ST using bioinformatics resources. The DisGeNET database was exploited to survey CDH1-associated diseases. Reported mutations in specific ST were obtained by interrogating COSMIC and IntOGen tools. CDH1 Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNP) were retrieved from the dbSNP database.
                  DisGeNET analysis identified 609 genes annotated to ST, among which CDH1 was listed. Using CDH1 as query term, 26 disease concepts were found, 21 of which were neoplasms-related terms. Using DisGeNET ALL Databases, 172 disease concepts were identified. Of those, 80 ST disease-related terms were subjected to manual curation and 75/80 (93.75%) associations were validated. On selected ST, 489 CDH1 somatic mutations were listed in COSMIC and IntOGen databases. Breast neoplasms had the highest CDH1-mutation rate. CDH1 was positioned among the 20 genes with highest mutation frequency and was confirmed as driver gene in breast cancer. Over 14,000 SNP for CDH1 were found in the dbSNP database.
                  This report used DisGeNET to gather/compile current knowledge on gene-disease association for CDH1/E-cadherin and ST; data curation expanded the number of terms that relate them. An updated list of CDH1 somatic mutations was obtained with COSMIC and IntOGen databases and of SNP from dbSNP. This information can be used to further understand the role of CDH1/E-cadherin in health and disease.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Cancer is a group of diseases characterized by an uncontrolled cell proliferation resistance to cell death, induction of angiogenesis, activation of invasion and metastasis and growth suppressor evasiveness (Negrini et al., 2010; Hanahan and Weinberg 2011). Among different cancer types, Solid Tumors (ST) stand-out due to their high incidence and mortality rates. Over 90% of ST start in the epithelium, a tissue composed of cells interconnected by intercellular junctions, among them the adherent junctions (Cooper 2000). Disruption of cell–cell adhesion is a very relevant event during tumor progression and metastasis in ST. In the transition to malignancy, down-regulation of cell–cell adhesion molecules, cytoskeleton reorganization and signaling pathway activation that avoid adherent junction assembly accompanies an increase of proliferation and migration (Conacci-Sorrell et al., 2002; Le Bras et al., 2012; Vasioukhin 2012).

Adherent junctions participate in processes involved in keeping cellular organization. Among their functions are maintenance of cell polarity and tissue integrity, cytoskeletal dynamics and movement within epithelium proliferation, transcription, differentiation and survival (Ivanov and Naydenov, 2013; Perez-Moreno et al., 2003). They are composed of classical cadherins, a vast superfamily of membrane proteins that form mainly Ca2+-dependent homophilic interactions to maintain cell–cell contact (Angst et al., 2001; Kemler 1992; Nishimura and Takeichi, 2009; Oda and Takeichi, 2011). Epithelial cadherin (E-cadherin) is the founder member of the cadherin superfamily (Takeichi 1977). It is a Ca2+-dependent cell-adhesion molecule mainly expressed in epithelial cells, essential for development, cell differentiation and tissue homeostasis, as well as for maintenance of epithelial polarity and structural integrity (van Roy and Berx, 2008). E-cadherin localization is restricted to cell–cell contact sites, and part of the cell surface-located E-cadherin is subjected to endocytosis and recycling (Bryant and Stow, 2004; Mosesson et al., 2008). The human E-cadherin gene, named CDH1, is located on chromosome 16q22.1, spans a region of approximately 100kb, and comprises 16 exons and 15 introns (Berx et al., 1995).

The E-cadherin mature protein is a 120kDa glycoprotein organized in an extracellular domain (ectodomain) of five tandem cadherin motifs, a single transmembrane domain, and a highly conserved cytoplasmic domain. The E-cadherin extracellular domain mediates mainly homophilic cell–cell adhesions between adjacent cells (Nose et al., 1990; Ozawa et al., 1990). On the other hand, specific sequences of the E-cadherin intracellular domain participate in regulation of its adhesive activity (Ozawa and Kemler, 1998) and interact with several proteins, among them α-, β-, δ-, p120- and γ- (plakoglobin) catenins (official symbols CTNNA1, CTNNB1,CTNND2, CTNND1 and CTNNG) that form a complex link to the actin cytoskeleton, which regulates the strength of the cadherin-mediated cell adhesion, and are involved in signal transduction pathways (Nagafuchi et al., 1993; Hong et al., 2013).

The functional roles of E-cadherin anticipate that genetic and epigenetic alterations on the CDH1 gene have great implications on tumor invasion and metastasis, with a loss or reduced expression of E-cadherin, resulting in a more invasive tumor (Gall and Frampton, 2013). E-cadherin has been defined as an invasion tumor suppressor since it has been frequently found downregulated in epithelial tumors, a process that leads to cell motility and invasion. In fact, a reduced/lack of E-cadherin expression or/and loss of function contributes to cancer progression by increasing proliferation, invasion and metastasis (Berx and van Roy, 2009; Gheldof and Berx, 2013; Schneider and Kolligs, 2014; van Roy, 2014).

Disruption of E-cadherin expression and loss of its function(s) has been extensively documented in several ST. Examples are breast (Sinn et al., 2014), ovarian (Cowden Dahl et al., 2008), gastric (Schildberg et al., 2014), endometrial (Wójcik-Krowiranda et al., 2013), colorectal (Deng et al., 2014) and bladder (Bryan 2015) cancers. Several mechanisms of E-cadherin inactivation have been reported, among them are loss of heterozygosity at the 16q22.1 chromosome region (Chalmers et al., 2001), presence of inactivating mutations (Berx et al., 1998; Corso et al., 2014), CpG-island hypermethylation of the CDH1 promoter (Caldeira et al., 2006; Gall and Frampton, 2013; Kanazawa et al., 2002), gene expression silencing by binding of specific transcription factors to sequences in the CDH1 promoter (Zhang et al., 2014), and post-translational modifications (i.e. proteinase processing/phosphorylation/glycosylation) that negatively regulate E-cadherin functions (Rashid et al., 2001).

As a result of over 30 years of research since its identification, CDH1/E-cadherin has been the subject of numerous studies that led to a vast number of reports in scientific journals (over 21,000 publications using “E-cadherin” keyword, 11,000 publications using “E-cadherin AND cancer”; PubMed search on January 2015). This exceptional growth of information requires integrative approaches such as translational bioinformatics to transform the deluge of data into knowledge and, more importantly, to enable a deeper understanding of disease mechanisms and provide actionable information for the clinical practice (Altman, 2012; Sarkar et al., 2011). Publicly available comprehensive knowledge sources on disease genes are an important asset. The “big data” phenomenon in biomedical information is also observed in the scientific literature. Nowadays, the increasing size of literature repositories makes imperative the use of computational tools to identify relevant information and place it in the context of current biomedical knowledge. Several bioinformatics tools were developed to survey/gather information. Among them is DisGeNET, a knowledge platform on human diseases and their genes plugin for Cytoscape to query and analyze human gene-disease networks (Bauer-Mehren et al., 2010; Piñero et al., 2015). In some cases, data curation is done, and involves the identification, review and organization of the gathered information by a human expert to make it accessible to both other experts and computer systems, and it is particularly important to filter/prioritize information provided by automatic text-mining approaches (Howe et al., 2008). DisGeNET has been used for the analysis of mechanisms underlying adverse drug reactions (Bauer-Mehren et al., 2011; Grosdidier et al., 2014), the association between diabetes and Parkinson disease (Santiago and Potashkin, 2014), the prediction of disease associations for ncRNAs (Alaimo et al., 2014) and the analysis of disease-relevant nodes in metabolic pathways (Galhardo et al., 2013), among other studies.

Since tumor development has been related to the presence of gene mutations in numerous tissues, in particular in the case for the CDH1 gene in which mutations have been reported in several publications mainly related to breast and gastric cancers (Berx et al., 1998; Corso et al., 2013, 2014; Valente et al., 2014). During the past decades, the number of reported mutations has largely increased, mainly from high-throughput approaches using next generation sequencing technologies (Pastrello et al., 2014). This information can be found in the scientific publications, and is being systematically compiled in specific databases that gather and organize the data. Among these resources are the COSMIC (Catalogue-Of-Somatic-Mutations-In-Cancer) (Forbes et al., 2010) and the IntOGen (Integrated-Onco-Genomics) (Perez-Llamas et al., 2011; Gonzalez-Perez et al., 2013) tools to search for gene mutations.

Based on the relevance of CDH1 in human physiopathology, a systematic search was carried out to gather/summarize current knowledge on the CDH1/E-cadherin gene/protein and its role in human disease, in particular in cancer, using a selection of bioinformatic resources. The information contained in DisGeNET was exploited to gather diseases associated to CDH1, and this information was complemented with knowledge on mutations described in specific cancer samples by interrogating COSMIC and IntOGen and on SNP from dbSNP database.

Discovery platform integrating information on human diseases and their genes from expert−curated databases and the scientific literature discovered by text-mining approaches (Piñero et al., 2015). Data is organized according to their type and level of curation: CURATED (gene-disease associations from UNIPROT and CTD human databases), PREDICTED (gene-disease associations from CTD mouse and CTD rat data, RGD and MGD), LITERATURE, GAD, LHGDN and BeFree (Bravo et al., 2014, 2015), and ALL (CURATED, PREDICTED and GAD, LHGDN and BeFree). DisGeNET classifies diseases according the MeSH hierarchy and genes according to the PANTHER protein ontology. The gene-disease associations can be ranked according to the DisGeNET score and are annotated with the DisGeNET gene-disease association type ontology. DisGeNET gene-disease score takes into account the number and type of sources (level of curation, organisms) and the number of publications supporting the association. The score ranges from 0 to 1 and it is computed according to: S
                           =(W
                           UNIPROT
                           +
                           W
                           WCTDhuman)+(W
                           Mouse
                           +
                           W
                           Rat)+(W
                           GAD
                           +
                           W
                           LHGDN
                           +
                           W
                           BeFree). DisGeNET allows queries restricted to genes or diseases and identifies gene-diseases associations, type of associations and evidence that support the associations (publications). It can be accessed through the web interface (http://www.disgenet.org/web/DisGeNET/menu/dbinfo) or using a Cytoscape plugin (Bauer-Mehren et al., 2010). The current version contains 381,056 associations, between 16,666 genes and 13,172 diseases (http://www.disgenet-org/, accessed on January 2015).

Catalog of public domain data that gathers/organizes information available about somatic mutations found in various cancers, combining information manually curated from the scientific literature (PubMed) with the output derived from the “Cancer Genome Project” (Sanger Institute, United Kingdom). COSMIC searches can be performed on their online interface; further information and folders FASTA of genes can be downloaded. Genes are selected according to “Cancer Gene Census”, which incorporates genes implicated in cancer with a causal relationship (Forbes et al., 2010). COSMIC provides information about mutation position and type in a gene of interest, amino acid(s) involved and (in case of substitutions), the change that occurs with the mutation. Additionally, it provides information about mutations affecting tumor-associated genes and establishes a hierarchy of the twenty most commonly mutated genes in a specific tumor. It also provides number of cases in which a mutation was reported. Moreover, it provides Mutation Impact filters derived from the FATHMM-MKL algorithm (Functional Analysis through Hidden Markov Models). The FATHMM-MKL algorithm predicts the functional, molecular and phenotypic consequences of protein missense variants using hidden Markov models. Where FATHMM-MKL scores are ≥0.7 the mutation is classified as ‘Pathogenic’, or ‘Neutral’ if the score is ≤0.5 (Shihab et al., 2013). Additionally, it provides information on Copy Number Variation (CNV). The COSMIC web interface does not include SNP.

The 2014 COSMIC release contains a major update on cancer genomes, including over a million novel mutations from ICGC sequencing projects.

Platform to search for mutations, genes and pathways involved in tumorigenesis across 4623 cancer genomes/exomes from 13 cancer sites (mainly from the International Cancer Genome Consortium, ICGC, and The Cancer Genome Atlas, TCGA). It analyzes somatic mutations in a cohort of tumors to identify cancer driver genes and pathways, and to present results of systematic analysis from most currently available large data sets of tumor somatic mutations. Analysis is based on the assumption that cancer driver genes accumulate highly functional mutation. It currently includes Oncodrive FM, a tool that detects genes significantly biased toward the accumulation of mutations with high functional impact (FM bias), and Oncodrive CLUST, which picks up genes whose mutations tend to cluster in particular regions of the protein sequence with respect to synonymous mutations (CLUST bias). Both tools detect signals of positive selection, which appear in genes whose mutations are selected during tumor development and are therefore likely drivers (Gonzalez-Perez et al., 2013).

COSMIC and IntOGen tools were browsed to survey current information on somatic mutations in CDH1 associated to ST. The degree of similarity between the two outputs was determined by comparing the CDH1 mutations listed by the database in each tissue analyzed.

A search was done for reported Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNP) on the CDH1 gene using the dbSNP (The Single Nucleotide Polymorphism database). The NCBI Short Genetic Variations database catalogs short variations in nucleotide sequences from a wide range of organisms. These variations include single nucleotide variations, short nucleotide insertions and deletions, short tandem repeats and microsatellites. dbSNP currently classifies nucleotide sequence variations with the following types and percentage composition of the database: (i) single nucleotide substitutions, 99.77%, (ii) small insertion/deletion polymorphisms, 0.21%, (iii) invariant regions of sequence, 0.02%, (iv) microsatellite repeats, 0.001%, (v) named variants, <0.001%, and (vi) uncharacterized heterozygous assays, <0.001%. SNPs listed are somatic and germinal (Sherry et al., 1999).

The complete contents of dbSNP are available to the public at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/SNP
                        

A manual curation of CDH1/E-cadherin related diseases identified from DisGeNET All Databases sources was performed by reviewing publications supporting each CDH1-disease association. Gene-disease associations were “confirmed” when a relevant association between CDH1 and the disease had been identified (Mutation/Genetic Variation/Post-translational modification/Biomarker). Associations were “inconclusive” when the relevance of CDH1 wasn’t concluded. Finally, associations were “unconfirmed” when no association between CDH1 and the disease under study was identified. Some terms were related to more than one publication; in these cases, all the publications were reviewed, but the term was “validated” when the gene-disease association was confirmed in at least one publication.

@&#RESULTS@&#

A first analysis was conducted to gather genes annotated to the term “Solid Tumors (ST)” from the DisGeNET database, resulting in 609 genes, among which CDH1 was identified. These results are shown as a network of genes associated to the term “ST” (Fig. 1
                        , CDH1 is highlighted). CDH1 was classified as a Biomarker gene associated to ST (Source BeFree, PMID: 9581841). The supporting evidence for this association referred to a publication describing a key role of CDH1 loss or reduced expression in proliferation, invasion and metastasis of breast cancer. CDH1 expression, genetic mutation and promoter methylation was analyzed in 10 established breast cancer cell lines (Hiraguri et al., 1998).

The 609 genes associated to ST were classified according to the PANTHER Protein Classification (data not shown). CDH1/E-cadherin was classified among protein classes “Cell adhesion molecule” and “Cell junction protein”, together with other ST associated proteins (Table 1
                        A). Regarding the protein pathways involved, CDH1/E-cadherin was associated to apoptosis, cell communication, extracellular matrix organization and immune system (Table 1B).

To further explore the specific diseases associated to CDH1, DisGeNET was interrogated using CDH1 as query term. First, the search was restricted to expert curated databases (CURATED), which resulted in 26 disease concepts associated to CDH1 (grey central node, Fig. 2
                        ). Five of them were classified as non-neoplastic diseases (orange nodes Fig. 2) and 21 as neoplasms-related terms. Among these 21 terms, 4 terms were related to tumor properties (green nodes, Fig. 2), and the remaining 17 terms did correspond to specific ST (pink nodes, Fig. 2). The associations found between CDH1 and the 26 nodes were from the classes Biomarker, Genetic Variation and Therapeutic (DisGeNET gene-disease association type ontology; Fig. 3
                         and Supplementary Table 1).

Next, CDH1-associated diseases were explored in DisGeNET ALL. This source includes data automatically extracted from current literature by text-mining approaches in addition to the information from expert-curated databases. CDH1 was found associated to 172 disease concepts: 132 neoplasms-related (green, pink, purple and light-blue nodes, Fig. 4
                        ) and 40 to non-neoplastic diseases (yellow nodes, Fig. 4). From the 132 neoplasms-related concepts, 24 were tumor properties/neoplasm-related concepts (green nodes), 97 were ST (pink), 8 were neoplastic processes (purple nodes) and 3 were non-solid tumors neoplasms (light-blue nodes) (Fig. 5
                         and Supplementary Table 2). The CDH1 gene-disease association types were Biomarker, Altered Expression, Genetic Variation, Postranslational Modification and Therapeutic.

Since some associations were only retrieved by automatic text-mining approaches, a manual curation was performed to assess their relevance. Of the 172 terms found in all DisGeNET databases, 26 had already been curated by the DisGeNET team (Fig. 4). The focus was made on 80 disease terms related to ST not reported as associated to CDH1 by expert-curated databases in DisGeNET (Supplementary Table 2). A total of 286 publications were reviewed, since several associations were supported by more than one publication. As result of the analysis, the association between CDH1 and the disease was validated in 199/286 (70%) publications. In 67/286 (23%) publications, the association was “inconclusive” and in the remaining 20/286 (7%) it was “unconfirmed” (Fig. 6
                        , upper panel). Finally, 75/80 (93.75%) associations between CDH1 and ST concepts were validated (Fig. 6, lower panel). This curation effort added new disease terms related to ST to those already available in DisGeNET CURATED. These terms correspond to bladder, breast, colorectal, endometrial, liver, ovarian, pancreatic, prostatic, stomach and gastrointestinal neoplasms. In addition, it validated new CDH1-related tumor tissues, among them bile ducts, brain, oesophagus, gallbladder, kidney, head and neck tissues, larynges, lung, meninges, mouth, muscles, parathyroid and thyroid, pituitary gland, rectum, skin, tonsil, thymus.

To evaluate current knowledge on somatic mutations in CDH1 in ST, the COSMIC and IntOGen bioinformatics tools were surveyed. The evaluation was done based on the 20 disease terms obtained from the output of DisGeNET (only curated databases) between CDH1 and ST. Selected terms were: breast, endometrial, ovarian, pancreatic, prostate, stomach and urinary bladder neoplasms, as well as lobular and ductal breast carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma. Since “colorectal carcinoma”, was not listed in the COSMIC tool as such, the terms “colon” and “rectum” carcinoma found were grouped together and included in the analysis. In some cases, no results or an equivalent term corresponding to the DisGeNET output were found in the database cancer browser term.

As a result of this survey, 395 and 94 somatic mutations in CDH1 were listed for selected ST in COSMIC and IntOGen databases, respectively. A further analysis of the COSMIC output revealed breast neoplasms as the ST with highest rate of CDH1 mutations compared to the total mutations found (207/395). In addition, the IntOGen output confirmed that CDH1 is considered a driver gene in breast cancer (p value=7.76×10−13). Colorectal and stomach neoplasms also had a high rate of mutations in the CDH1 gene (77/395, 19.5%, 59/395, 14.9%, respectively). Neoplasms of the endometrium, bladder, ovary, prostate and squamous cell carcinomas had the lowest reported CDH1 somatic mutations (Table 2
                        ).

Substitution-missense mutations (136/354, 38.4%) were predominant, followed by deletions to shift in the reading frame (67/354, 18.9%), unknown mutations (43/354, 12.1%) and insertions with shift in the reading frame (41/354, 11.6%) (Fig. 7
                        ).

In some tumor types, CDH1 was positioned among the 20 genes with the highest mutation frequency. This was the case of breast neoplasms (3rd position out of 20). CDH1 was ranked as second mutation carrier gene in lobular breast carcinomas (2nd of 20) and eleventh in ductal breast carcinoma. It was also found in the “top 20” in stomach (2nd of 20) and colorectal neoplasms (colon: 17th of 20, rectum: 19th of 20).

For some histological subtypes, CDH1 mutations varied according to the organ in which the tumor originated. In squamous cell carcinomas, CDH1 mutations were found in lung cancer, upper aero-digestive tract and urinary tract, but not in cervix, endometrium, stomach, intestine, esophagus, among others. Table 3
                         displays the search results on identified CDH1 mutations in selected ST, total number of mutations found, mutation type, citation (PMID) and COSMIC link to find the full output of somatic mutations are indicated. While most of the mutations in CDH1 were specific for each type of tumor, some mutations were shared by two or more ST in 5% of the cases. The mutation impact is included (Table 4
                        ). In addition to these results, data on CNV was retrieved from the COSMIC database and listed in Table 5
                        .

To further explore changes in the CDH1 sequence, a survey was conducted using the dbSNP database to obtain the number of reported SNPs for this gene. As a result of this evaluation, a total of 14,566 SNP were found. Using clinical significance filters, 222 SNPs were classified as benign (21 results), likely benign (17 results), likely pathogenic (4 results), pathogenic (20 results), uncertain significance (124 results), untested (9 results) and other (27 results) (data not shown). Less than 10% were assigned as of germinal origin.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The growth of biomedical information in the last decades has been a positive force toward the development/implementation of integrated flexible text-mining systems. Computational methods for mining of biomedical literature are becoming indispensable to manage this flux of information. Bioinformatics tools have proven useful to browse in an organized and systematic fashion, available information in several biomedical databases to better understand biological processes (Harmston et al., 2010; Rebholz-Schuhmann et al., 2012). In addition, they have shown to increase manual literature searches for associations between genes/proteins to study human diseases (Goh and Choi, 2012; Kann, 2010). Zhu et al. (2013) reported a substantial growth in the number of publications obtained from PubMed using “text-mining” as the query word in the title or abstract since 2000.

Among human pathologies, cancer is known to cause millions of deaths worldwide (Ferlay et al., 2015). Of all cancers, ST are the subject of studies aimed at improving diagnosis/treatment (Ascierto et al., 2014; Neal and Sledge, 2014). Several genes/proteins and mechanisms involved in this pathology have been identified, however it is still a disease far from being understood and effectively treated.

Researchers have already taken advantage of the text-mining technologies to discover novel knowledge to support biomedical research in cancer (Ahmed et al., 2011). Beck et al. (2014) reported advantages and limitations of applying bioinformatics tools to study epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in lung cancer, and Banwait and Bastola (2015) discussed the role of bioinformatics in studying miRNAs in the context of human cancer.

Specifically regarding the tumor suppressor gene CDH1/E-cadherin, a large contribution of experimental data and scientific reports has greatly helped cancer prevention, diagnosis and treatment. However, data is overwhelming and increased worldwide in the last decade. Bioinformatics tools have recently highlighted E-cadherin as an important molecule in breast (Shargh et al., 2014) and gastric (Liu and Chu, 2014) cancer.

In the current study, the information offered by some of the state-of-the-art resources on human diseases and cancer (namely DisGeNET, COSMIC and IntOGen, dbSNP) were exploited to assess current knowledge on the relationship between CDH1 and ST. Using DisGeNET, CDH1/E-cadherin and other genes associated to ST were identified; in addition, information about the relationship between CDH1/E-cadherin and ST was obtained, identifying a list of terms of disease-related properties as well as of specific diseases, and determining the association type between CDH1 and each specific term.

Since a large amount of extracted data is predominantly from non-curated databases, a manual curation was done to assess the relevance of the information automatically extracted by text-mining. This evaluation resulted in a high percentage of validated associations, expanding the current CDH1-related disease terms in DisGeNET-curated databases. Moreover, these results represent an independent evaluation on the text-mining approach used to extract gene-disease associations by DisGeNET, at least for this specific use.

In addition to the studies summarized above, the result of a survey of annotated somatic mutations and SNP (germline, somatic, unknown) was included in this report. The advance of NGS technology has rapidly changed the approach to understanding cancer genomics (Forbes et al., 2010). These data contributes to our understanding of cancer causation and development, providing the foundation for prevention and treatment (Pleasance et al., 2010). In the present study, COSMIC and IntOGen databases were utilized to survey somatic CDH1 mutations in several cancer types and over 350 mutations were identified in a group of ST. CNV data retrieved from COSMIC also revealed either gain or loss of CDH1 copy number. Moreover, dbSNP listed over 14,000 SNP on CDH1.

The present report is the first showing the use of DisGeNET as a valuable tool to survey the gene-disease association between CDH1/E-cadherin and ST. Its use helped to find, extract, compile and mine the information available from the literature and categorize these data for the gene encoding the cell–cell adhesion protein. Data curation done expanded the number of terms that relate the disease-association between CDH1 and ST. The survey of COSMIC and IntOGen databases rendered an updated list of somatic mutations reported for CDH1 in several ST. Moreover, the survey done on dbSNP revealed a large amount of SNP reported for CDH1, some of which would have clinical impact. In any case, since it is well accepted that complex diseases such as cancer are multigenic, further investigations on CDH1-related genes participating in the progression of ST is warranted. DisGeNET has proven to be a useful bridge between basic research data and computational tasks, and this information can be used subsequently as a “starting point” for future bioinformatics analysis such as network analysis to identify gene-disease modules and novel biomarkers, pathways and therapeutic targets valuable for the development of cancer diagnosis, prognosis and treatment strategies. Such approaches will offer to the researcher complementary strategies to understand current and new findings about CDH1/E-cadherin in health and disease.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

Studies related to the preparation of this manuscript were supported by grants from the National Agency to Promote Science and Technology (Agencia Nacional de Promoción de Ciencia y Tecnología, ANPCyT, PICT-SU-2012#1072), National Institute of Cancer (Instituto Nacional del Cáncer, INC, 2014-2015) and Roemmers Foundation (Fundación Roemmers, 2011-2013) to M.H.V.L.

L.I.F received support from Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Fondo Europeo de Desarrollo Regional (PI13/00082). The Research Programme on Biomedical Informatics (GRIB) is a node of the Spanish National Institute of Bioinformatics (INB).

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2015.10.002.

The following are Supplementary data to this article:
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

