@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Understanding the lid movements of LolA in Escherichia coli using molecular dynamics simulation and in silico point mutation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Molecular dynamic analysis of open to close conformation for two LolA derivatives, LolA(R43L) and MsL43R.


                        
                        
                           
                           In silico point mutation of Leu43 to Arg43 induced conformational changes leading complete closed conformation of protein.


                        
                        
                           
                           Conformational changes from open to close observed for the first time in absence of lipoprotein of LolA.


                        
                        
                           
                           In addition to Arg43, residue Asn45 identified to play a central role in stability of protein by hydrogen bond formation.


                        
                        
                           
                           Closure of hydrophobic cavity takes place at two levels: closing of lid at the interface and loops at the entrance.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Molecular dynamics

Lid movements

LolA

Lipoproteins

GROMACS




                     Escherichia coli




                  

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The Lol system in Escherichia coli is involved in localization of lipoproteins and hence is essential for growth of the organism. LolA is a periplasmic chaperone that binds to outer-membrane specific lipoproteins and transports them from inner membrane to outer membrane through LolB. The hydrophobic lipid-binding cavity of LolA consists of α-helices which act as a lid in regulating the transfer of lipoproteins from LolA to LolB. The current study aims to investigate the structural changes observed in LolA during the transition from open to closed conformation in the absence of lipoprotein. Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations were carried out for two LolA crystal structures; LolA(R43L), and in silico mutated MsL43R for a simulation time of 50ns in water environment. We have performed an in silico point mutation of leucine to arginine in MsL43R to evaluate the importance of arginine to induce structural changes and impact the stability of protein structure. A complete dynamic analysis of open to closed conformation reveals the existence of two distinct levels; closing of lid and closing of entrance of hydrophobic cavity. Our analysis reveals that the structural flexibility of LolA is an important factor for its role as a periplasmic chaperone.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Gram-negative bacterial cells consist of four compartments; cytoplasm, inner (cytoplasmic) membrane, periplasmic space and outer membrane. In Escherichia coli, lipoproteins that are constituents of the outer membrane are synthesized in the cytoplasm and then transported towards the outer membrane through Lol (localization of lipoproteins) system of proteins (Okuda and Tokuda, 2011; Narita et al., 2004; Tokuda and Matsuyama, 2004). Lol system of proteins essentially contains five proteins namely LolA, LolB, LolC, LolD and LolE (Narita et al., 2004; Lto et al., 2007; Nakada et al., 2007). Lipoprotein transfer to outer membrane occurs through a series of steps; the LolCDE complex which is present in inner membrane binds to lipoprotein and transfers it to a periplasmic chaperone LolA by an ATP dependent process (Matsuyama et al., 1995; Davidson et al., 2008). LolA transports the lipoprotein across the periplasmic space to the outer membrane protein LolB and this transfer has been shown to be an ATP independent process (Tokuda and Matsuyama, 2004; Taniguchi et al., 2005.

LolA is a soluble protein known to be functional in its monomeric form. In the Lol system of proteins, several crystal structures of LolA have been identified and solved by various groups (Okuda and Tokuda, 2011; Takeda et al., 2003a,b; Tokuda, 2009). Among all the crystallographic representations of LolA available in PDB, we have chosen an open conformation comprising a monoclinic form, LolA(R43L) as our starting crystal structure. An in-silico point mutation of leucine to arginine at position 43 has been performed on LolA(R43L) to attain a new conformational form MsL43R. This choice of an open monoclinic form was driven by our motivation to elucidate the dynamics of closure to reach the wild type closed conformation (PDB ID-1ua8).

Earlier crystallographic studies have established that LolA exists as a closed conformation in its native unbound form. Crystallographic and NMR studies have also postulated that the LolA structure undergoes a transformation from open to closed conformation consequent to the binding and release of lipoproteins respectively (Oguchi et al., 2008). The structure of LolA from E. coli is characterized by a novel fold, containing eleven antiparallel β-strands forming an incomplete β-barrel and two loops covering the barrel (Tokuda, 2009). The lid comprises three α helices α1, α2 and α3 attached to the concave side of the β-strands. The β-barrel, α-helices and the loops are known to form a hydrophobic cavity, which consists of aromatic residues clustering around the entrance (Takeda et al., 2003a,b). These residues are conserved throughout all the conformational changes observed in LolA and are also known to be present in LolA homologues of other Gram negative bacteria (Takeda et al., 2003a,b; Oguchi et al., 2008; Okuda et al., 2008). The convex side of the β-barrel is fully exposed to solvent environment, whereas the concave side is partially exposed. Therefore, this concave side of the protein is speculated to be a binding site for the lipoprotein (Okuda and Tokuda, 2009).

Previous studies have established that the three α-helices act as “lids” for the cavity and they undergo opening and closing upon the binding and release of lipoproteins (Watanabe et al., 2005; Takeda et al., 2003a,b). Miyamoto et al. (2001) showed that replacement of Arg43 to Leu43 disrupted the transfer of lipoproteins to LolB. The importance of Arg43 in the transportation of lipoprotein and subsequent closing of lid covering the hydrophobic cavity was addressed by biochemical and crystallographic studies. Hydrogen bond formation of Arg43 with residues residing in α1 and α2 helices seem to play an important role in the mechanism of lid closure (Watanabe et al., 2005; Takeda et al., 2003a,b; Remans et al., 2010). Structural analysis performed by Tokuda et al. on a mutated structure where Arg43 residue was mutated to Leu43 showed that the molecule can exist in both open and closed conformation, while the open conformation is the most predominant form (Oguchi et al., 2008). It was also shown that LolA exhibits higher flexibility than LolB, which is an outer membrane bound protein (Nakada et al., 2009).

Despite the fact that crystal structures of the closed and open conformations of LolA are well characterized, the complete dynamic studies of protein movements are still lacking. In order to understand the importance of closing of interface by the α2 helix (lid) and closing of entrance of the hydrophobic cavity, amino acid residues expected to be involved in these structures are the focus of our analysis. In the present molecular dynamics study, an in silico point mutation of leucine to arginine at position 43 has been performed to investigate the conformational changes occurring in LolA to elucidate the closing mechanism of the protein. To our knowledge, this is the first detailed computational study which aims to review the dynamic properties of LolA by long MD simulation of an in-silico mutant MsL43R and starting crystal structure LolA(R43L). The novelty of this work resides in the fact that dynamics of open to closed conformation has been studied in the absence of lipoprotein in water environment. This work provides insights about the novel conformations and binding sites on the surface of the protein which will further help in more effective structure based drug design.

Our starting crystal structure for molecular dynamics simulation was an open conformation of LolA(R43L) which is a mutant structure crystallized by Oguchi et al. (2008). The structure of LolA(R43L) was taken from Protein Data Bank (PDB:2ZPD) as shown in Fig. 1a (Berman et al., 2000). This LolA derivative was obtained by replacing Arg43 with Leu43 in the native form of LolA. The structure was resolved at 1.85Å and consists of one hundred and eighty three amino acid residues. Takeda et al. (2003a,b) proved that the crystal structure of the molecule is a monomer with 3 α-helices and 11 antiparallel β-strands.

In order to elucidate the closing mechanism of LolA, we have performed an in silico mutation to replace Leu43 with Arg43 using SPDBV (Steward, 2001) on crystal structure LolA(R43L). Crystallographic water molecules and hetero atoms were removed from the structures using the software Chimera (Pettersen et al., 2004). This in silico mutated structure will henceforth be referred to as “MsL43R” as shown in Fig. 1b. These two structures, in silico mutated MsL43R and open crystal structure LolA(R43L) were subjected to MD simulation for 50ns in water to mimic a periplasmic environment.

MD simulations were carried out with two structures MsL43R and LolA(R43L) using GROMACS 3.1 (Lindahl et al., 2001) run on an Apple G5 cluster. G43a1 GROMOS force field was chosen for the simulation. Four Na+ ions were added as counter ions to neutralize the charges in the system. LolA was solvated in water and centered in a cubic box containing water molecules. The box dimensions for LolA were 60nm×60nm×60nm with 26108 SPC water molecules. This system was subjected to energy minimization for 500 steps by using steepest descent algorithm. The minimized system was equilibrated for a short MD run (200ps) with position restraints until the potential energy converged and stabilized at 300K. The MD simulation was performed with periodic boundary conditions set to the XYZ coordinates to ensure that the atoms stayed inside the simulation box. Berendsen temperature coupling was turned on with temperature set to 300K. The leap-frog algorithm was used for integrating Newton's equation in MD simulation. LINCS constraints were used on protein covalent bonds to maintain constant bond lengths (Hess et al., 1997). Finally, the equilibrated systems were subjected to MD simulations for 50ns at 300K and all atoms were permitted to move freely.

The simulation trajectories were analyzed using tools from the GROMACS package and were viewed using PyMOL software (Delano, 2002). The RMSD was calculated using g_rms. The radius of gyration (Rg) of the protein was calculated using g_gyrate. RMSF graph was generated using Xmgrace plotting software (
                           http://plasma-gate.weizmann.ac.il/Grace/
                        ). Accessible surface areas were calculated using WHAT IF web server (Vriend, 1990). Non covalent interactions were calculated by PIC SERVER (Tina et al., 2007).

@&#RESULTS@&#

To understand the mechanism by which the open conformation can revert back to the wild type (closed) conformation by replacing Leu43 with Arg43, molecular dynamics simulations for 50ns were successfully performed on two structures of LolA, in silico mutated MsL43R and the starting crystal structure LolA(R43L). Standard GROMACS routines were employed in the analysis of root mean square deviation (RMSD), root mean square fluctuations (RMSF), radius of gyration (Rg), conformational changes of LolA, hydrophobic interaction and hydrogen bonding.

In order to elucidate the stability of protein structure in the timescale of simulation, an analysis of backbone atom deviation in comparison to original crystal conformation was performed. Time evolution Root Mean Square Deviations (RMSD) for MsL43R and LolA(R43L) have been calculated as shown in Fig. 2
                        . In MsL43R, the equilibration time was observed to be at 2ns followed by an increase to reach an initial plateau around 0.7nm till 12ns. RMSD starts to increase again around 20ns and stabilizes at 30ns. The average value of RMSD for MsL43R is around 0.66nm and the protein was found to remain stable till the end of 50ns. In comparison, the crystal structure LolA(R43L) also shows equilibration around 2ns. The protein exhibits a partial stabilization in first plateau around 5ns. A step by step increase has been observed till 20ns reaching a stable value 0.78nm. The average value of RMSD for this crystal structure is at 0.75nm. The time taken for stabilization has been observed to vary for these two crystal structures. These results indicate that protein structures have undergone significant changes at different time intervals to reach a stable conformation. Further analysis will focus on conformational changes observed in both these structures during the simulation period.

Analysis of radius of gyration (Rg) of a protein helps to understand the compactness of the protein. During the simulation of MsL43R, a gradual decrease in Rg was observed until a value of 1.47nm around 5ns followed by slight increase to reach a compact structure around 30ns. Movements in the secondary structure might contribute to variations in Rg and may influence the time taken to attain a compact structure. In LolA(R43L), initially Rg decreased and then increased by 1.75nm, reaching a compact conformation at 20ns. It is evident that both LolA(R43L) and MsL43R reach a compact conformation during the course of simulation as shown in Fig. 3
                        , although the difference in transition time may signify differences in the dynamics of these two LolA structures.

To address the flexibility of LolA structure in water, the root mean square fluctuation (RMSF) per residue was calculated from 0 to 50ns simulation studies. RMSF was plotted for MsL43R and LolA(R43L) as shown in Fig. 4
                        . Intrinsic differences were observed in the fluctuations of these structures, which could be attributed to secondary structure variations. In MsL43R, a significant increase in the fluctuation at the locations corresponding to α2 helix, loops β5–β6, β8–β9 and β12 strand were observed. Increase in fluctuation indicates that these regions are the most flexible in comparison to residues at the protein core. The above mentioned regions are supposed to be highly conserved regions in LolA protein structure (Okuda et al., 2008). Increased fluctuations are also present at the entrance of the cavity, which suggest an important role for this region in protein functionality such as binding of lipoproteins or interaction with LolB. The β12 strand is known to play a significant role in the transfer of lipoproteins from LolA to LolB. In an experimental study, where the β12 strand was excised from LolA, it was shown that the LolA was not able to transfer lipoproteins to LolB (Watanabe et al., 2005; Okuda et al., 2008). The flexibility of LolA(R43L) is not as predominant as observed in MsL43R, which reveals that the mutated residue Arg43 has a significant influence on the fluctuation of secondary structure.

Overall, the increased fluctuations observed in the conserved regions reveal that the periplasmic chaperon LolA, is an extremely flexible protein structure.

Conformational changes have been observed by analysis of domain movements as a function of simulation time for both protein structures. Several snapshots were obtained from trajectories during 0–50ns simulation. The snapshots of two structures at 0ns, 2ns, 10ns, 30ns and 50ns are shown in Fig. 5
                        . Domain movements are characterized by calculating the displacement of secondary structure by superimposing of initial conformation with simulated conformations at the aforementioned time periods. In MsL43R, conformational changes were associated with movements of the α2 helix, loops (β8–β9), (β5–β6) and β12 strand. The conformational changes are observed to begin at 2ns, where the lid moved towards center of the hydrophobic cavity. At 10ns, the slight movement of β5–β6 towards the cavity caused a displacement of 7.1Å. The α2 helix remained stable by attaining closed conformation without further movement as it was surrounded by the residues of the β-strands. At 20ns, the loops connecting the β-strands at the entrance of hydrophobic cavity were found to be most flexible. Loops (β5–β6) and (β8–β9) showed a maximum movement by 5.9Å and 10.5Å towards the cavity at 30ns. The protein attains compactness as loops and strands move closer together and stable conformation can be noticed until the end of simulation at 50ns as shown in Fig. 5a. In LolA(R43L), the domain analysis reveal that α2 helix shows initial movement towards the concave side of the β-sheet around 2ns, but it was driven back to the convex side causing an partial opening of hydrophobic cavity. The α2 helix movement is followed by the movement of loops (β8–β9), (β3–β4) and (β5–β6) heading towards center of hydrophobic cavity. It is evident that the movement of α2 helix towards the concave side of the β-barrel was restricted, resulting in a semi closed conformation at 10ns. During the simulation at 20ns, there was an additional increase in movement of β8–β9 loop towards the β5–β6 resulting in partial shielding of the entrance of the cavity. Despite the fact that α2 helix remained away from the center of cavity, a contraction of the protein was induced by loop movements of (β5–β6), (β8–β9) and β12 strand present in the entrance of hydrophobic cavity as shown in Fig. 5b. During the remaining simulation period, the protein remained stable and β8–β9 loop exhibited the maximum deviation of 18.5Å towards loop β3–β4 in comparison to other loops at the entrance. MsL43R has attained a stable and complete closure at 30ns when compared to LolA(R43L). This closed conformation of MsL43R resembles that of the closed conformation observed in the wild type. In essence, the movement of α2 helix, loops β8–β9, β5–β6 and C-terminal at the entrance of the hydrophobic cavity caused the observed changes in core RMSD and RMSF. A reduction in size is observed in both protein structures and this may be a reflection of secondary structure variations under the influence of water environment.

@&#DISCUSSIONS@&#

Dynamic studies on two structural forms have revealed the existence of multiple conformations during the course of the simulation. Despite the overall starting structures being similar, significant structural differences were observed during the transformation from open to closed conformation. This work provides significant insights into the dynamics of lid closing as well as the importance of entrance of the hydrophobic cavity. To elucidate the closing mechanism, further analysis will be focused on the hydrophobic cavity.

In the secondary structure of LolA, the inner aromatic residues of the β-barrel and α-helices constitute a hollow hydrophobic cavity. The side chains of aromatic residues surround the hydrophobic cavity and shield it from the solvent environment. This cavity has been reported to be the binding site of the acyl chain of a lipoprotein (Oguchi et al., 2008).

According to Tokuda et al., the three α helices; α1, α2 and α3 form the “lid” of the protein and are hydrophobic in nature. Among these helices, α2 helix seems to play an important role in closing of the hydrophobic cavity. The position of α helices acts as an indicator to reveal the opening or closing of the cavity. To elucidate the α2 helix movement in our MD simulation, we have calculated the Cα displacement for the residue Phe90 by superimposition of initial crystal structure and the final simulated structure for MsL43R and LolA(R43L).

In MsL43R, α2 helix exhibited a displacement of 6.2Å towards the concave side of the β-barrel and this displacement occurs very early in the simulation and remains in this stable conformation until the end. This movement corresponds to the closure of the hydrophobic cavity as shown in Fig. 6a. It is evident that α2 helix movement observed in MsL43R led to a closed conformation which resembles the crystal structure wild type conformation of LolA as shown in Supplement Fig. S1a. In the initial stage of LolA(R43L) as shown in Fig. 6b, the closing of α2 helix by 5.0Å seems to be towards the concave side of β-barrel resembling the closed crystal structure. During the simulation, residue Phe90 in the α2 helix exhibits a displacement of 7Å away from cavity (see Fig. 6c). The displacement towards the hydrophobic cavity is not favored and this restriction was due to the hydrophobic interaction between the Phe90 and residues present in the β3 strand. It is evident that the α2 helix has not reached a closed conformation and the final conformation does not resemble the wild type closed structure as shown in Supplement Fig. S1b. Thus the α2 helix in MsL43R brings about a complete closure of the cavity, which closely resembles the WT closed conformation, which was not observed in LolA(R43L).

Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2013.06.005.

See Supp. Fig. S1 as supplementary file.
                           
                              
                                 Cartoon representation of α2 helix movement in comparison to wild type: (a) MsL43R, final simulated structure (50ns) (red) superimposed on native wild type crystal structure (closed form-cyan). (b) LolA(R43L), final simulated structure (50ns) (red) superimposed on native wild type crystal structure (closed form-cyan). Figure was prepared with PyMOL [http://www.pymol.org].
                              
                              
                           
                        
                     

In open crystal structure, the hydrophobic cavity is surrounded by side chains of aromatic residues which include Phe20, Phe47, Trp49, Phe90, Trp101, Phe127, and Tyr152 as shown in Fig. 7a. The entire hydrophobic cavity is exposed to the solvent environment without the shielding effects of aromatic residues.

A detailed analysis of the conformational changes along the MD trajectory revealed that the closing movement of MsL43R is characterized by movement of residue Phe90 towards the residues Phe47, Trp49, Phe140 in the β3 and β10 strands as shown in Fig. 7b. Significant hydrophobic interaction was observed between Phe90 and all other surrounding residues Phe127, Phe140, Tyr152, Trp49 and Phe47. It is evident that residue Phe90 has significantly moved towards the center of the hydrophobic cavity, accompanied by the complete movement of its side chain towards the aromatic residues forming a cluster around the entrance. Thus side chains of aromatic residues are contributing to the shielding and stabilization of closure of the hydrophobic cavity shown in Fig. 7b.

In LolA(R43L), the residue Phe90 in the α2 helix seems to reside away from the center of the hydrophobic cavity. However, the side chains of Phe90 interact only with residue Phe47. Here the major displacement is found to be that of Phe127 towards Phe140, Trp49 located in β9 and β3 strand maintaining a stable conformation till end of the 50ns as shown in Fig. 7c. The Phe90 side chains moving away from cavity is driven by a hydrophobic interaction with Phe47 in the β3-strand thereby letting the Phe127 to interact with the Phe140 and Trp49. These aromatic interactions are responsible for the crystal structure to attain a semi-closure conformation by partial sealing of hydrophobic cavity. Overall, the most significant changes occur during the conformational transition for residues belonging to α2 helix, β8–β9, β3–β4, β5–β6 and β12 strands. Minor changes were also seen in the other strands facing the cavity.

The MD trajectories were analyzed to identify the loop regions associated with lid movement. Four common loop movements were identified during the simulation and they are found to be present at the entrance of the hydrophobic cavity. In MsL43R, the pronounced movement has been shown by the loop between strands β1–β2, β5–β6, β8–β9 and β12 which results in significant shielding of the entrance of hydrophobic cavity. These loops are in general, highly mobile during the entire simulation. However in LolA(R43L), only the loop between strands β8–β9 showed a major movement towards β5 in comparison to other loops, which results in partial shielding of the hydrophobic cavity. During the course of simulation, these residues exhibit significant rearrangement by shielding the entrance which acts as a surface lid, thus controlling the accessibility of the lipoprotein to the binding cavity.

The conformational rearrangements involved in the protein structures along the simulation also convey an intense transformation in the protein. These changes observed between the open and closed conformations have been quantified by analyzing the solvent accessible surface area. To study the effect of solvent on hydrophobic cavity, the solvent accessible surface area was calculated for all the conserved residues forming the cavity. In order to ascertain whether the structures have attained a closed conformation, average accessible surface area (ASA) of the residues (Ala2, Ala3, Leu6, Leu10, Val13, Phe20, Phe47, Trp49, Leu59, Pro89, Phe90, Met91, Leu92, Ile93, Ala94, Trp101, Tyr104, Ile106, Phe127, Phe140, and Tyr152) was plotted against the time of simulation as shown in Fig. 8
                        . A periodic increase and decrease in ASA is observed in MsL43R at 5ns, 15ns, 20ns and 30ns. A significant reduction of average ASA in the hydrophobic cavity from 30ns to 50ns has been observed till the end of simulation from 8Å2 to 4.5Å2. The total hydrophobic area is shielded effectively from the solvent environment and this could be attributed to closing of hydrophobic cavity. In LolA(R43L), the ASA does not exhibit large changes in magnitude as seen in MsL43R, with the major change occurring around 25ns (7Å2 to 8Å2). This increase is due to the hydrophobic cavity being exposed to the solvent. The lack of significant change in ASA from beginning to end of simulation reveals that LolA(R43L) remains in semi-closed conformation. The aforementioned residues of hydrophobic cavity are not fully shielded and therefore partial exposure of the interface to the solvent environment was observed. This hydrophobic effect seems to drive conformational changes in the protein.

In transition from open to close conformation of LolA structures, the α2 helix comes in contact with β-strands and structure stabilization occurs by the hydrogen bonding. In the initial stage of MD simulation in MsL43R as shown in Fig. 9a, the arginine in position 43 co-ordinates with N-terminal end of the α2 helix through hydrogen bonding. Due to the conformational change, the side chains of the Arg43 are oriented towards solvent environment and this orientation may be due to cis peptide bond between Arg43 and Pro44. Although the Arg43 side chains are exposed to solvent, the N-terminal end of the α2 helix is coordinated to Asn45 by hydrogen bond as shown in Fig. 9b. The β2–β3 loop regions containing Arg43 have been experimentally recognized to act as important site for forming hydrogen bonds. In our simulation studies, an analysis of the network around the hydrophobic cavity reveals that both Arg43 and Asn45 located in β2–β3 loop are involved in forming hydrogen bonds with the α2 helix resulting in a closed conformation.

Crystallographic analysis reveal that LolA(R43L) exists in both open and closed forms, one of which is identical to that of wild type LolA (Oguchi et al., 2008). Since LolA(R43L) also exists in the closed form, residues other than Arg43 may be responsible for a closed conformation. In LolAR43L, the side chains of Leu43 with no polar atoms cannot fix the helices through hydrogen bonding. According to our simulation, closing of the α2 helix is initiated by the movement of Phe90 towards concave side of the β-strand. The open to close conformation of α2 helix which resembles the wild type conformation is achieved by the residue Asn45, which forms hydrogen bond with the N-terminal end of the α2 helix. This closed conformation is achieved only in the initial stage (<5ns) of the simulation as shown in Fig. 9c. Further, the C-terminal end of the α-2 helix moved away from the center of cavity towards the side by residing towards C-terminal end of the β3-strand forming a hydrophobic interaction with Phe47 resulting in a semi closed conformation. Stabilization of this conformation is achieved by the hydrogen bond formation between the Asn45 and the residue in α2 helix. This semi-closed conformation remains stable till the end of the simulation as shown in Fig. 9d.

The closing and stabilization of entrance of the cavity is initiated by the movement of the α2 helix. Due to the rearrangement of aromatic residues at the interface level, the β-strands are pulled towards the center of the cavity resulting in narrowing of entrance. Residues present in the surrounding loops come in contact with neighboring residues present in the entrance. This resultant closed conformation is stabilized by hydrogen bond formation and hydrophobic interactions. In our in-silico mutated structure of MsL43R, hydrophobic residues present in the entrance act as a surface lid and shield the cavity from the solvent. The rearrangement of aromatic residues at the interface causes the hydrophobic residues at the entrance to come in close proximity with each other such as Leu124 towards Phe68 and Val32 as shown in Fig. 10a. The loops present in entrance are also stabilized by the hydrogen bond formation between residue Asn121 in the β8–β9 strand and residue Glu74 in the β5–β6 strand. Simultaneously, the side chains of Glu144 in the β10–β11 also forms hydrogen bonding with the backbone of Gln33 in the β1–β2 strand and stabilization of closed conformation of the loop has been accomplished as shown in Fig. 10b. In the crystal structure of LolA(R43L), hydrophobic residues in the entrance also come close to each other as seen in Ala119 moving towards Phe68 as shown in Fig. 10c. In addition, the formation of hydrogen bond in the loop between β8–β9 and β6-strand was also noticed in the entrance. The side chains of Glu75 forms hydrogen bond with Ser120, while Asn179 in β12 strand forms another hydrogen bond with Lys125 in loop β8–β9, resulting in a partial shielding of the entrance of the cavity as observed in Fig. 10d. The gating of loops present in the entrance is stabilized by the conserved residues which are also known to be responsible for the protein–protein interaction. The complete protein stabilization is attained by closure of entrance of the cavity as observed in the RMSD and Radius of Gyration.

From our analysis of the trajectories, it is evident that the closure of the hydrophobic cavity is initiated by the α2 helix movements and a subsequent contraction of entrance of the cavity. Thus, we infer that the closure of hydrophobic cavity occurs at two levels: localized lid movements at the interface between α2 and β-strands resulting in closing of lid (level I); accompanied by loop movements resulting in closing of entrance (level II) of the hydrophobic cavity as shown in Fig. 11
                        .

The importance of level I and level II closing of hydrophobic cavity can be understood by considering the functional nature of LolA. It is well established that LolA is responsible for the release of lipoprotein from LolCDE complex and this process is initiated by opening of the hydrophobic cavity (Okuda and Tokuda, 2009). Based on our simulation studies, we have observed a structural transition from open to close of the entrance of the hydrophobic cavity for both MsL43R and LolA(R43L). On closer observation, it is evident that opening of entrance of the hydrophobic cavity (level II) plays a major role in capture of lipoprotein, as earlier studies have shown that both Wild type and mutated LolA(R43L) are successful in lipoprotein complex formation. Subsequent opening of α-2 helix (level I) at the center of hydrophobic cavity may be responsible for the insertion of the acyl group of lipoprotein. Thus, MsL43R and LolA(R43L) structures in our simulation studies might undergo lipoprotein complex formation as evidenced by our protein docking studies (data not shown). Peptidoglycan associated lipoprotein (PAL) was employed as a model to prove that MsL43R forms a LolA–PAL lipoprotein complex as shown in supporting Fig. S2.

Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2013.06.005.

See Supp. Fig. S2 as supplementary file.
                           
                              
                                 Cartoon representation of the structure of the LolA–PAL complex obtained through protein–protein docking: LolA is colored blue, while PAL is colored purple. Red sphere representation corresponds to the amino acid residues involved in interaction at the LolA–PAL binding interface.
                              
                              
                           
                        
                     

After this stage, the LolA–lipoprotein complex traverses the periplasmic space and reaches the outer membrane bound LolB (Okuda and Tokuda, 2009). Tokuda et al. have proved that the presence of Arg43 plays a major role is transferring the lipoprotein to LolB. In our studies, we have observed that the arginine free LolA(R43L) does not exhibit level I lid closure. We believe that this particular lack of movement of α2 helix may contribute towards the inability of LolA(R43L) to transfer the lipoprotein to LolB. In the case of in-silico point mutated MsL43R, the presence of arginine ensures the closing of α2 helix, which results in the transfer of lipoprotein. Thus we speculate that the conformational changes due to lid movements at the interface and loop movements in the entrance of the cavity are responsible for determining the type of interaction between lipoprotein and hydrophobic cavity.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

Molecular dynamics simulations of periplasmic chaperone LolA was performed on two structures, LolA(R43L) and in silico mutated MsL43R for 50ns in water environment. In this work, conformational changes were found to occur within a short time signifying the flexibility of the entire soluble protein structure. In order to understand the mechanism of “open to close” transition, an in-silico mutation was performed on LolA(R43L) by replacing residue Leu43 by Arg43 in the β3-strand of the hydrophobic cavity.

Earlier studies have hypothesized that opening and closing of LolA occur in the presence of lipoprotein; however, the closing conformational changes observed in our study have their origin in hydrophobic interactions and occur in the absence of a lipoprotein. We have shown that the residue Phe90 in the α2 helix interacts with aromatic residues sealing the hydrophobic cavity and plays a pivotal role in closing of lid. On the other hand, the entrance of the hydrophobic cavity also undergoes major displacement in the presence of water due to loop movements causing a decrease in solvent accessible surface area. The conserved residues present in the lid and the entrance of hydrophobic cavity are involved in closing of the cavity and are identical to the ones described in previous experimental study (Takeda et al., 2003a,b). We propose that the closure of hydrophobic cavity takes place at two levels: closing of the lid found at the interface of β-strands and α-helices and closing of loops found in entrance of the hydrophobic cavity.

The present work also highlights the importance of non-covalent interactions that typically characterize the movement and stability of protein. Aromatic interactions in level I enable the proteins to undergo transition towards the closed conformation. In both level I and level II, hydrophobic interactions and hydrogen bonds are responsible for the structural stabilization. In addition to Arg43, the residue Asn45 has been identified to play an important role in the stability of the protein via hydrogen bond formation. We conclude that both levels of closing of hydrophobic cavity have been observed in MsL43R in a simulated periplasmic environment (Water). In LolA(R43L), only level II closing is observed in a consistent manner resulting in a semi closed conformation. This study reveals that conformational change is associated with the α2 helix and the loop movements which were identified to be highly mobile throughout the simulation and are responsible for the complete closure of the protein. We believe that the conserved flexible regions observed during our dynamic analysis are also important regions for protein–protein interactions and identification of drug binding sites.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

PG and SA acknowledge the DST and DBT Government of India through grants/DBT (BT/PR10097/NNT/28/101/2007)/COE (BT/01/COE/07/2001)/NN (SR/S5/NM-37/2005)/PM thanks the DBT for a fellowship.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

