@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#The aspartate aminotransferase-like domain of Firmicutes MocR transcriptional regulators

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           C-terminal domains of Firmicutes MocR cluster into three clades.


                        
                        
                           
                           Evolutionary analysis indicates conserved structural features.


                        
                        
                           
                           Each Firmicutes MocR clade is characterized by specific conserved residues.


                        
                        
                           
                           MocR effector binding site shares many features with PLP fold type-I enzymes.


                        
                        
                           
                           Differences with PLP enzymes may explain lack of catalytic activity


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

MocR

Pyridoxal-5′-phosphate

Fold type-I

Bioinformatics

Evolution

Bacterial transcriptional regulation

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Bacterial MocR transcriptional regulators possess an N-terminal DNA-binding domain containing a conserved helix-turn-helix module and an effector-binding and/or oligomerization domain at the C-terminus, homologous to fold type-I pyridoxal 5′-phosphate (PLP) enzymes. Since a comprehensive structural analysis of the MocR regulators is still missing, a comparisons of Firmicutes MocR sequences was undertook to contribute to the understanding of the structural characteristics of the C-terminal domain of these proteins, and to shed light on the structural and functional relationship with fold type-I PLP enzymes. Results of this work suggest the presence of at least three subgroups within the MocR sequences and provide a guide for rational site-directed mutagenesis studies aimed at deciphering the structure-function relationships in this new protein family.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The GntR family of bacterial transcriptional regulators has been recently described (Haydon and Guest, 1991) and named after the repressor of the gluconate operon in Bacillus subtilis. GntR regulators possess an N-terminal domain containing a conserved helix-turn-helix (HTH) module able to recognize specific DNA motifs and a C-terminal effector-binding and/or oligomerization domain (Eb/O). According to current models, binding of the effector molecule to the Eb/O domain would induce a conformational change that influences the DNA-binding properties of the HTH domain. Within the GntR family, the structure of the C-terminus domain is heterogeneous and, depending on its nature, several subfamilies can be identified (Hoskisson and Rigali, 2009). The MocR subfamily is particularly interesting because it is distinguished by a domain homologous to fold type-I pyridoxal 5′-phosphate (PLP) enzymes (Paiardini et al., 2004; Percudani and Peracchi, 2009; Schneider et al., 2000). The type-I archetypal protein is aspartate aminotransferase (AAT), the first PLP-dependent enzyme of fold type-I whose three-dimensional structure has been elucidated (Kirsch et al., 1984). AAT-like PLP-enzymes were until recently deemed to exist mainly as stand-alone homodimers or as higher order complexes. It is now emerging, after scrutiny of genomic sequence data from prokaryotes, that fold type-I proteins can be found also in multidomain contexts such as nonribosomal peptide synthetases (Milano et al., 2013). The MocR regulators themselves represent a multidomain framework hosting AAT-like modules.

MocR regulators are widespread among eubacteria genomes, although with heterogeneity (Bramucci et al., 2011; Hoskisson and Rigali, 2009): apparently, they are rare or even absent in bacteria phyla characterized by compact genomes (size of about 1.0–2.0Mb) such as Chlamydiae and Mollicutes, while in other species are present with a variable number of paralogous genes. For example, one MocR-like protein has been found only in the Mollicutes bacterium HR1 (genome size 1.88Mb) out of 52 Mollicutes complete proteomes tested. Likewise, a single MocR regulator has been found in the bacterium Opitutus terrae (genome size 5.9Mb) out of 20 Chlamydiae complete proteomes scrutinized (Bramucci et al., 2011). Only a few members of the MocR family have been structurally and functionally characterized: for example, GabR that regulates the utilization of γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) in B. subtilis (Belitsky, 2004) and PdxR from Listeria monocytogenes and Corynebacterium glutamicum, involved in the regulation of PLP biosynthesis (Belitsky, 2014; Jochmann et al., 2011). Recently, the crystallographic structure of the GabR protein, deposited in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) with the codes 4MGR, 4N0B, and 4TV7 (Edayathumangalam et al., 2013; Okuda et al., 2015), confirmed the presence of a fold type-I domain at the C-terminus of the regulator and opened new perspectives in deciphering the mechanism of action of MocRs. GabR is a domain swap homodimer in which the HTH domain of one subunit interacts with the PLP-binding domain of the other subunit; this is possible thanks to a very long linker that connects the two domains.

Currently, a comprehensive structural analysis of the MocR family is missing. The aim of this work was to give a contribution to the understanding of the structural characteristics of the AAT-like domain of these regulators, and to shed light on its structural and functional relationship with PLP-dependent enzymes. For ease of data analysis, our work has been restricted to the Firmicutes phylum. Our results also provide a rational guide for site-directed mutagenesis studies aimed at deciphering the structure–function relationships in these new and intriguing family of regulators.

Complete Firmicutes proteomes were retrieved from the UniProt database release 2013–11 (UniProt, 2014). Putative MocR sequences were identified using the software HMMER 3.0 (Finn et al., 2011) while the required seed multiple alignment was calculated with the program MUSCLE version 3.8 (Bramucci et al., 2011; Edgar, 2004). Data analysis was assisted by in-house written Perl, Python and Bash scripts. The retrieved putative MocR sequences were compared to the models of the Pfam (Protein families) database 27.0 (Finn et al., 2014). The AAT-like domains were extracted from the parent sequences according to the Pfam assignment (code PF00155). Redundancy was removed with the program BlastClust release 2.1.2 (Altschul et al., 1990) using 50% sequence identity cutoff. NCBI CDD (Conserved Domain Database version 3.10) search website tools (Marchler-Bauer et al., 2003) were used to confirm correct assignment of AAT-like fold to the selected domains. Alignment editing and visualization relied on Jalview editor version 2.8 (Waterhouse et al., 2009). Logos were calculated with the WebLogo server (Crooks et al., 2004). Nucleotide sequences coding for the selected MocR proteins were extracted from GenBank release 198 (Benson et al., 2013).

Protein sequence alignments were analyzed with the software MEGA version 6.0 (Tamura et al., 2013). Maximum likelihood (ML) phylogenetic reconstruction using Whelan and Goldman (Whelan and Goldman, 2001) substitution model and elimination of positions with less than 90% site coverage in the input multiple alignment, were utilized. Final tree was tested with 1000 random bootstrap replicates (Felsenstein, 1988). The nucleotide sequence alignment obtained with MUSCLE (Edgar, 2004) was manually edited with BioEdit software version 7.2.5 (Ciccozzi et al., 2011). ModelTest version 3.7 (Posada and Buckley, 2004) was used to select the simplest evolutionary model that best fitted the sequence data. The phylogenetic signal in a data set of aligned DNA or amino acid sequences can be investigated with the likelihood mapping method by analyzing groups of four sequences, randomly chosen, called quartets (Strimmer and von Haeseler, 1997). Likelihood mapping analyses were performed with the program TREE-PUZZLE version 5.2 (Schmidt et al., 2002) for the nucleic data set by analyzing 10,000 random quartets. ML phylogenetic tree was estimated with the software PhyML version 3.0 (Guindon et al., 2010) with the evolutionary model previously selected with ModelTest. The statistical robustness and reliability of the branching order within the phylogenetic tree was confirmed with the bootstrap analysis (bootstrap values >70%). MEGA version 6.0 (Tamura et al., 2013) was used to calculate the genetic distances among and within different clades on both the nucleotide and the amino acid alignment (Tamura Nei model for the nucleic dataset and the Poisson model for the amino acidic dataset). Trees were rendered with the program FigTree version 1.4 (http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/software/figtree/).

Analysis and mapping of residue conservation onto the three dimensional structure of B. subtilis GabR, have been carried out with the Consurf server (Ashkenazy et al., 2010) and the PyMol graphic software version 1.6 (Schroedinger, 2015). Homology modelling of selected MocR sequences has been carried out with the software Modeller version 9.14 (Sali and Blundell, 1993) and the PyMOL plugin PyMOD (Bramucci et al., 2012).

@&#RESULTS@&#

The alignment of the 117 AAT-like domains selected from the initial set of 699 sequences is displayed in Supplementary Fig. 1. The corresponding tree is reported in Fig. 1
                         while the “nucleotidic” tree is displayed in Supplementary Fig. 2.

The phylogenetic noise of the nucleotidic and amino acidic data set was investigated by means of likelihood mapping. The percentage of dots falling in the central area of the triangles was about 11% for both nucleotidic and aminoacidic data sets, confirming that they contained a sufficient phylogenetic signal (data not shown).

Both trees suggest the presence of three clades (clades 1, 2 and 3) supported by significant bootstrap values. Each clade contains orthologous and paralogous AAT-like domains (Fig. 1). The nucleotide genetic distance (calculated as number of base substitutions per site from averaging over all sequence pairs between clades) between clades 1, 2 and 3 showed that clade 1 was more distant from clade 3 than clade 2 (1.5 vs 1.4). The within nucleotide genetic distance showed that clade 2 is more heterogeneous than others (1.1). Amino acid distances also confirmed the nucleotide results.

The protein tree has been recalculated with inclusion of a set of type-I PLP enzymes from bacteria and archaea sources (Supplementary Table 1). The enzymes were chosen as the most similar to the AAT-like MocR domains from a PDB search using a query Hidden Markov Model (HMM) of the 117 aligned sequences. The sequence search tool available in the Pfam database assigns the MocR AAT-like domain to the family PF00155 (Aminotran_1_2). In the same database another domain family is denoted as Aminotran_MocR (PF12897). However, the HMM profile calculated using the 117 AAT-like domains represents more specifically the MocR AAT-like domains since both PF00155 and PF12897 profiles contain mostly AAT-like domains of stand-alone enzymes. The tree (Supplementary Fig. 3) suggests that the MocR domains are more closely related to two enzymes from archaeal source, namely the human kynurenine aminotransferase II homologue from Pyrococcus horikoshii (PDB code 1×0M) and multiple substrate aminotransferase from Thermococcus profundus (PDB code 1WST), and to α-aminoadipate aminotransferase from the eubacterium Thermus thermophilus (PDB code 2EGY). The other enzymes form a separate subgroup within the tree (Supplementary Fig. 3).

The MocR multiple alignment has been analyzed with the ConSurf server (Ashkenazy et al., 2010) to estimate the residue evolutionary conservation. ConSurf calculates a normalized conservation score for each alignment position in a scale ranging from 1 (most variable) to 10 (most conserved). Score mapping onto the surface of the AAT-like domain of the GabR structure is reported in Fig. 2
                        . The most conserved areas are located at the subunit interface, at the PLP-binding site and at the interface with the HTH domain from the other subunit.

Residues belonging to the two top ConSurf conservation classes involved in interactions at the subunit interface are displayed in Fig. 3
                        A. Residue numbering throughout the text refers to the GabR sequence (Supplementary Fig. 1). Ala179 and Val183 pack against their symmetry-related counterparts from the other subunit and form a hydrophobic nucleus that stabilizes monomer interaction. Interface Ser344 is conserved though no interaction to other residues is predicted. The conserved Arg155 is involved in a salt-bridge with the partner residue Glu101 of the linker region connecting the HTH and the AAT-like domains of the other subunit. Although Glu101 is apparently not conserved, a Glu often occurs in equivalent linker regions of homologous MocRs (data not shown). Pro316 stabilizes the loop containing the PLP-binding Lys312 and packs against Leu142 of the other subunit. This residue is not conserved. Residues Gln182 and Arg319 are at the subunit interface and contribute to the “wall” of the cofactor phosphate binding site. In the holo GabR (4N0B) Gln182 and Arg319 side chains are interconnected by H-bonds while in the apo form (4MGR) Gln182 establishes an H-bond to the non-conserved Asp339 of the other subunit. Since the three residues (Gln182, Arg319, Asp339) involved in such interaction are conserved or replaced by residues with H-bond capability in homologous MocRs (Supplementary Fig. 1), it may be speculated that such interactions possesses a functional relevance in the conformational transition presumably taking place in the MocR AAT domain upon effector binding.

The PLP binding pocket is the most conserved portion of the MocR AAT-like domain (Fig. 3B). The phosphate binding pocket walls include the conserved residues Arg319 and Gln182 along with Gly180, Thr309 and Ser311. The pyridine ring is sandwiched between Tyr205 and Tyr281. The phenolic side of the pyridine ring packs against Phe250. Overall, these three residues form an “aromatic box” that envelops the cofactor ring. The nitrogen of the pyridine ring interacts with the carboxylic group of Asp279 characterizing, with the Lys312 involved in the formation of the internal aldimine, most of the PLP-dependent enzyme of type-I. Asp279 is included in the conserved sequence Hy-Hy-Glu278-Asp279-Asp280 (Hy means hydrophobic residue) characteristic of the MocR AAT-like domains (Supplementary Fig. 1). Other residues contribute to the PLP cleft such as Pro251, Thr245, Gln249, and Glu201 (Fig. 3B).

The surface portion of the GabR AAT-like domain interacting with the HTH domain of the other subunit is not extensively conserved. Only Arg260, Arg261 and Pro257 form a conserved patch (Fig. 3C). Arg260 is predicted to interact to the non-conserved side chains of Asp225 and Gln263. In proximity of the interface to the HTH domain, another conserved area (Supplementary Fig. 4) formed by the side chains of the residues Pro203, Gln249, Pro251 and Ser252 can be observed.

Inspection of the multiple sequence alignment and Logos (Supplementary Fig. 5) pointed out several clade-specific residues, namely sequence positions occupied by a particular residue in most of the regulators belonging to one of the clades defined by the phylogenetic tree (Fig. 1). Logos were calculated for the sequences aligned within each of the three clades. Comparison of the resulting three Logos pointed out the sequence positions differing among the clades.

In particular, clade 1 that contains GabR is characterized by several residues (Fig. 4
                        ). The PLP-stacking Tyr281 is conserved while (Supplementary Fig. 1) it is replaced by residues such as Pro-Ile-Ala-Val in the other clades. Phe250 is often replaced by Asn in clades 2 and 3, as well as in the free-standing PLP-dependent enzymes included in the alignment. Close to the active site, the conserved His248 and Asp282 interact with each other. These residues are often replaced by hydrophobic residues (such as Phe) in clades 2 and 3 (Supplementary Fig. 1). In clade 1, the surface helix at positions 362-372 is enriched in basic residues: in particular, Lys occurs in positions 362 and 366 more frequently than in the other clades, where it is replaced by hydrophobic residues (Supplementary Fig. 1 and 5). The characterizing positions 166 and 286 are in proximity of this helix. Position 166 is occupied by an Arg interacting with the conserved Asp280 and Tyr306 side chains (only in the GabR apo-form). Position 286 is occupied by Thr only in GabR while in most cases it displays an Arg. GabR Ile446, packing against Phe250, is replaced by Arg in clades 2 and 3. In these clades, the Arg interacts with the Asn substituting for Phe250. Noteworthy, in several fold type-I enzymes this couple Arg-Asn is conserved.

Clade 2 (Fig. 1) is mainly characterized by the sites 335 and 339. This first position, occurring at the C-terminal of a short α-helix in contact with the HTH linker, has a Lys. The other has a conserved Asp (Supplementary Fig. 1 and 5). In apo GabR, Asp339 forms a salt bridge with Gln182 of the other subunit.

Clade 3 displays several characterizing positions. The solvent exposed position 197 is populated by Arg or Lys. The conserved Pro203 is replaced by large hydrophobic residues. A Phe occupies position 284 that, in the other clades, has a conserved Glu/Asp residue. Gly replaces the large hydrophobic residues occurring at position 242 located at the N-terminal of a short β-strand. Exposed positions 367 and 465 display conserved Arg/Lys residues. Several deletions localized in the region 381-398 corresponding to the C-terminal portion of an α-helix connected to a short β-strand are characteristic of this clade.

Homology modelling of representative members of the clades 2 and 3 has been carried out using the structural template GabR. The MocR AAT-domains sharing the highest sequence similarity to GabR are: J7J3C3 from Desulfosporosinus meridiei in clade 2 (28% sequence identity) and A2RKD5 from Lactococcus lactis subsp. cremoris in clade 3 (22% identity). However, the low sequence identity between the template and the target sequences prevents the use of the resulting models for detailed analyses. Rather, only a comparison of the putative active site has been carried out that confirmed the presence of a few structural variations possibly reflecting different effector specificity. Sequence alignments used for homology modeling are reported in Supplementary Fig. 6 and the structural superposition of the predicted active sites is displayed in Supplementary Fig. 7.

Scrutiny of the model active site superposition confirms that GabR is characterized by an “aromatic box” surrounding the PLP ring formed by two Tyr residues (positions 205 and 281) stacking with the cofactor pyridine, and Phe250 interacting at its phenolic side. Instead, in clades 2 and 3, Tyr281 and Phe250 are not conserved (Supplementary Fig. 1). In particular, Tyr281 is replaced by Pro in J7J3C3 and by Ile in A2RKD5 while Phe250 is substituted by Asn in both cases. Likewise, Ile446 of GabR is replaced frequently by Arg in the other two clades (Supplementary Figs. 1 and 7). His114 is replaced by Leu and Gly in J7J3C3 and A2RKD5, respectively (Supplementary Fig. 7).

Comparison of the GabR active site with α-aminoadipate aminotransferase from T. thermophilus (PDB code 2EGY), the most similar sequence among the type-I enzymes tested, and Escherichia coli AAT (PDB code 1ARS), one of the best characterized PLP enzymes, suggests interesting observations (Supplementary Fig. 8 and 9). Several residues interacting with the cofactor phosphate group are conserved: GabR Arg319 and Ser311 corresponding to Arg266 and Ser257 of E. coli AAT, respectively; GabR Asp279 (E. coli AAT Asp222) interacting with the pyridine nitrogen atom; the Lys residue forming the internal aldimine with PLP (GabR Lys312 and AAT Lys258). However, GabR active site lacks a residue equivalent to Tyr70 of 2EGY, which H-bonds to the cofactor phosphate group of the other subunit. This residue and its H-bond to the PLP phosphate oxygen are conserved in all examined PLP enzymes except 1DGD (Supplementary Table 1), where it is replaced by a Thr residue. This Tyr residue appears to be conserved only in about 60% of the MocR sequences. In fact, it is replaced by Met145 in GabR and in the remaining MocRs it is substituted by residues such as Leu-Pro-Gly or can even be deleted (Supplementary Fig. 1). Other residues not belonging to the active site are shared between 2EGY and GabR: Glu201, Arg261, Gly278, Tyr306 (according to the numbering system of Supplementary Fig. 1), also conserved in the other clades, and Gln183 (corresponding to GabR Val183) and Asp339 (Supplementary Fig. 1) specifically conserved in clade 2 MocRs.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The AAT-like domains of Firmicutes MocRs are rather divergent except for very specific areas of functional relevance: the “active” site, the subunit interface and small portions of the surface possibly involved in DNA or protein interactions. This observation suggests that emergence of the ancestor of MocR subfamily was a primordial event.

Genes coding for MocR regulators are widespread in bacterial genomes and often present in multiple paralogous copies (Bramucci et al., 2011; Hoskisson and Rigali, 2009). Therefore, MocRs are involved in the regulation of different metabolic pathways and should be specialized in recognizing specific effector molecules. Phylogenetic analysis suggests that at least three subgroups or clades can be identified within the Firmicutes MocRs. The occurrence of clade-specific residues supports the MocR functional diversification. However, no association could be established yet between clade and function. Clade 1 appears characterized by two major structural traits. First, the “aromatic box” at the active site, formed by two Tyr residues (positions 205 and 281) stacking with the cofactor pyridine ring, and Phe250 interacting at its phenolic side. The presence of the Phe residue may alter PLP reactivity and affinity through perturbation of the protonation state of the 3′-phenolic hydroxyl group (Richard et al., 2011). Phe250 is in hydrophobic contact with Ile446. In the other clades, position 446 is occupied by an Arg interacting with the Asn replacing the Phe250 (Supplementary Fig. 7). No significant enzyme activity has been detected in GabR (Belitsky, 2004) although the protein is able to bind GABA (Edayathumangalam et al., 2013). Second, proteins belonging to clade 1 display a surface patch (positions 362–375) rich of basic residues localized on an exposed α-helix (Edayathumangalam et al., 2013) which may suggests the presence of a DNA or protein interaction site (Supplementary Fig. 1 and 4). Specific basic residue may concur to the formation of alternative DNA or protein interaction sites in clades 2 and 3: positions 335 and 446 in clade 2 and 197, 366, 446 in clade 3. MocRs of clades 2 and 3 show a conserved Arg446 residue equivalent to the AAT Arg386 which binds the substrate α-carboxylic group (McPhalen et al., 1992). The MocR of the two clades may be able to bind α-amino acids and possibly may retain residual enzymatic activity.

MocR proteins represent an interesting example of evolution of transcriptional regulators through recruitment of a DNA-binding domain by an enzyme that had presumably lost its catalytic activity (Durante-Rodriguez et al., 2013; Hoskisson and Rigali, 2009). Sequence comparison to PLP-dependent enzymes of type-I suggests that the MocR AAT domain is related to type-I enzymes from thermophilic archaeal and bacterial sources, namely the human kynurenine aminotransferase II homologue from P. horikoshii (1×0M), the multiple substrate aminotransferase from T. profundus (1WST) and the α-aminoadipate aminotransferase from T. thermophilus (2EGY). In fact, these enzymes cluster with clade 2 while the other type-I PLP dependent enzymes here considered (Supplementary Table 1) apparently form a separate clade (Supplementary Fig. 3). Sequences of the type-I PLP enzymes clustering with clade 2 display indeed a few positions specifically conserved in the MocR AAT domains: Glu201, Arg261, Gly278, Tyr306 (according to the numbering system of Supplementary Fig. 1) Other residues are shared only with clade 2 MocR: Gln183 (corresponding to GabR Val183) and Asp339 (Supplementary Fig. 1). Moreover, it should be mentioned that at least α-aminoadipate aminotransferase from T. thermophilus was shown to be characterized by multiple substrate specificity (Tomita et al., 2009) which can suggest that this enzyme provided a suitable scaffold from which protein domains able to bind different effector molecules could evolve. It can be therefore conjectured that either horizontal transfer (Garcia-Vallve et al., 2000) or gene duplication of an ancestral gene coding for a type-I enzyme, followed by the fusion with the ancient HTH domain (Aravind et al., 2005), initiated the evolution of the MocR family. This picture is compatible with a recent survey suggesting that thermophilic Archaea are the most ancient form of cellular life (Nasir et al., 2014) and, therefore, may represent the original source of the ancestral AAT-like enzyme. However, no MocR-like regulators are found in the Archaea genomes available (results not shown). Comparison between GabR and the related PLP-enzymes suggests conservation of key feature of active sites (Supplementary Figs. 6 and 7). This supports the notion that most MocRs maintain the ability to bind PLP or other B6 vitamers, as in GabR (Belitsky, 2004) and PdxR (Belitsky, 2014; Jochmann et al., 2011). There are however differences: the Lys residue forming the internal aldimine with PLP (GabR Lys312 and AAT Lys258) is not conserved (Supplementary Fig. 1). For instance, it is missing in PdxR from C. glutamicum (Jochmann et al., 2011), yet it is able to bind the effector PLP. In general, it may be argued that effector specificity has been acquired through fine structural remodeling of the active site. It should also be mentioned that many PLP-dependent enzymes display conformational changes upon cofactor and/or substrate binding (Angelaccio et al., 2014; Giardina et al., 2011; McPhalen et al., 1992). The ability to undergo conformational transitions may have been exploited by the evolution in a transcriptional regulator able to respond to effector binding with a conformation-driven change in DNA specific affinity.

In conclusion, MocRs are an interesting system, since they take part in bacterial metabolisms with biotechnological and biomedical relevance and represent an example of how enzymes remodeled their function to acquire a novel role in transcriptional regulation. Many of the hypotheses put forward by the present work can be experimentally tested by site-directed mutagenesis.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This research has been partially funded by a grant from Sapienza, University of Rome, for the year 2013. TM was supported by a grant (“assegno di ricerca”) from Sapienza University of Rome and Dipartimento di Scienze Biochimiche “A. Rossi Fanelli”. Authors thank Prof. Sebastiana Angelaccio for critically reading the manuscript.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2015.05.003.

The following are Supplementary data to this article:
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

