@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Gene expression regulation of the PF00480 or PF14340 domain proteins suggests their involvement in sulfur metabolism

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We predict the involvement of poorly characterized proteins in sulfur metabolism.


                        
                        
                           
                           The cysteine-dependent regulation was predicted for many genes.


                        
                        
                           
                           The regulon contains subunits of the transporters of sulfur-containing compounds.


                        
                        
                           
                           The regulated genes might have been horizontally transferred.


                        
                        
                           
                           The results considerably extend studies of classic and Rho-dependent attenuations.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Mycobacteria

Sulfur metabolism

Sulfur-containing compounds transport

Cysteine

Rho-dependent transcription attenuation

Classic transcription attenuation

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The paper studies proteins with domains PF00480 or PF14340, as well as some other poorly characterized proteins, encoded by genes associated with leader peptide genes containing a tract of cysteine codons. Such proteins are hypothetically regulated with cysteine-dependent transcription attenuation, namely the Rho-dependent or classic transcription attenuation. Cysteine is an important structural amino acid in various proteins and is required for synthesis of many sulfur-containing compounds, such as methionine, thiamine, glutathione, taurine and the lipoic acid. Earlier a few species of mycobacteria were predicted by the authors to have cysteine-dependent regulation of operons containing the cysK gene. In Escherichia coli this regulation is absent, and the same operon is regulated by the CysB transcription activator. The paper also studies Rho-dependent and classic transcription regulations in all annotated genes of mycobacteria available in GenBank and their orthologs in Actinomycetales. We predict regulations for many genes involved in sulfur metabolism and transport of sulfur-containing compounds; these regulations differ considerably among species. On the basis of predictions, we assign a putative role to proteins encoded by the regulated genes with unknown function, and also describe the structure of corresponding regulons, predict the lack of such regulations for many genes. Thus, all proteins with the uncharacterized Pfam domains PF14340 and PF00480, as well as some others, are predicted to be involved in sulfur metabolism. We also surmise the affinity of some transporters to sulfur-containing compounds. The obtained results considerably extend earlier large-scale studies of Rho-dependent and classic transcription attenuations.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

We study putative proteins encoded by genes associated with leader peptide genes containing a tract of cysteine codons, among them proteins with the PF00480 (ROK) and PF14340 (DUF4395) domains. We hypothesize that gene expression of such proteins is regulated with cysteine-dependent transcription attenuation, namely the Rho-dependent or classic transcription attenuation. Cysteine is an important structural amino acid in various proteins and is required for synthesis of many sulfur-containing compounds, such as methionine, thiamine, glutathione, taurine and the lipoic acid.

Studies of the Rho-dependent and classic attenuation regulations mediated by the concentration of tryptophan date back to the pioneer works by C. Yanofsky (Konan and Yanofsky, 2000; Yanofsky, 1981). These regulations are characterized by an open reading frame of the leader peptide gene (further referred to as the leader gene) that possesses a short tract of regulatory codons. The regulation mechanism is based on the transcription and translation coupling, a common phenomenon in prokaryotes.

In the case of classic attenuation the leader gene is separated from a downstream structural gene (or an operon) by a relatively short spacer region, which transcript sequence forms one or several terminator hairpins and often contains very short poly(U) (U-rich) regions positionally associated with the hairpins’ 3′-shoulders. A complex of a terminator and its neighboring poly(U) is called the intrinsic terminator. The formation of the terminator hairpins is regulated by other (one or several) hairpins located upstream and called antiterminators, or by the ribosome attached to leader gene's codons.

The study (Yanofsky, 1981) established a mechanism of classic attenuation regulation based on the mutually exclusive formation of overlapping terminator and antiterminator on mRNA sequence (transcription attenuation sensu Yanofsky). We proposed alternatives of this mechanism that often involve the formation of pseudoknots, triplexes, and additional hairpins. For each alternative, large-scale predictions were obtained with biological data (Lopatovskaia et al., 2010). In particular, classic attenuation mediated by concentrations of tryptophan, phenylalanine, histidine, threonine or ramified amino acids is predicted in large-scale analyses using bioinformatic tools (Lopatovskaia et al., 2010; Seliverstov et al., 2005); further references are provided in the cited works.

In the case of Rho-dependent attenuation regulation, the stop codon of the leader gene is associated with a short {C,U}-rich site called the Rho binding site, which is specifically recognized by the Rho factor. A pyrimidine-rich region may be considered as a putative Rho binding site, which however does not suffice to draw further conclusion. For the Rho factor, the ATPase activity was measured for different nucleotide compositions of mRNA (Kim and Patel, 1999). It was shown to be 3–4-fold higher with poly(C) compared to poly(U), and tens of thousands times lower if no mRNA is available. This and some other indirect evidence did not so far bring more clarity to the definition of the Rho binding site.

Rho-dependent transcription attenuation was first described for expression regulation of the tryptophanase gene tna in Escherichia coli (Konan and Yanofsky, 2000). This case remains the best studied to date. Another example (Richardson, 2002), a Rho binding site located closely to the start codon in the coding region of the lac operon in E. coli. For a few species of mycobacteria we earlier predicted the cysteine-mediated Rho-dependent transcription attenuation of the operons containing the cysK gene (Seliverstov et al., 2005). Note that E. coli lacks this regulation, and the same operon is regulated with an alternative mechanism mediated by the CysB transcription activator. The Rho transcription factor is known to be present in all mycobacteria, with the exception of Mycobacterium africanum GM041182.

Under the excess of a regulating amino acid the operon is active, because the Rho binding site is shielded by a ribosome. When the amino acid is in deficiency (e.g., during starvation), ribosomes do not occupy the Rho binding site on mRNA, and it becomes available to the Rho factor that terminates transcription even when the 5′-end of the structural operon has already been transcribed. Functioning of this mechanism can cause the opposite (decreasing instead of increasing) correlation depending on the distance between the regulatory codons and the Rho binding site. The Rho factor can also interact with riboswitches (Hollands et al., 2012). Elsewhere (Konan and Yanofsky, 2000; Yanofsky, 1981; Heery and Dunican, 1993; Lin et al., 1998), mentioned types of the regulations are corroborated experimentally.

In the case of classic transcription attenuation (Lopatovskaia et al., 2010; Seliverstov et al., 2005), the increase of amynoacyl-tRNA concentration is associated with the decrease of transcription continuation frequency caused by the RNA polymerase passing the putative transcription termination site of the structural gene (usually a U-rich tract within the regulatory region). This frequency is called the transcription level and is measured in unit fractions (or in percent) as 1−
                     p(c), where c is the amynoacyl-tRNA concentration, and p(c) – the frequency of transcription termination (DNA·RNA-duplex dissociation) usually occurring on a U-rich tract. In regulations of catabolism, transport, etc., the transcription level increases with the increase of amynoacyl-tRNA concentration. The dependency p(c) is estimated according to a model of classic attenuation (Lyubetsky et al., 2006, 2007; Rubanov and Lyubetsky, 2007). This model is systematically applied herein to predict regulation on the basis of a noticeable change of the structural gene transcription level 1−
                     p(c).

Proteobacteria lack cysteine-dependent transcription attenuation (Lopatovskaia et al., 2010) and possess other regulation types (Kredich, 1992; Lynch et al., 1994). The regulation of sulfur metabolism substantially differs across proteobacterial lineages. In E. coli, certain pathways, including that of cysteine synthesis, are regulated by the CysB protein from the LysR family, which binds DNA close to the promoter. In proteobacteria Salmonella typhimurium, E. coli and Klebsiella aerogenes the transcription of the operons cysPTWAM, cysK, cysJIH, cysDNC, sbp, and the l-cysteine transport system is also activated by the CysB protein (Kredich, 1992; Lynch et al., 1994). In these proteobacteria, self-repression of transcription is described for the gene cysB. The CysB·DNA binding is sensitive to concentration of the O-acetylserine cysteine precursor but is not sensitive to that of sulfuric compounds. In E. coli and other γ-proteobacteria the methionine synthesis is known to be regulated by the MetJ factor, which suppresses transcription upon binding to S-adenosylmethionine (Saint-Girons et al., 1984; Augustus and Spicer, 2011). In some Gram-positive bacteria, including Bacillus subtilis, Clostridium acetobutylicum, and Staphylococcus aureus, the regulation of sulfur metabolism is mediated by the S-box riboswitch (Grundy and Henkin, 1998).

The Rho protein is a homohexamer. Each of its subunits contains two domains, one binding mRNA, and the other being an ATPase. Among the six identical subunits of the hexamer only two possess the ATPase activity due to the molecule's asymmetry and assembly-dependent conformational properties of adjacent subunits. In in vitro experiments the Rho protein binds a 78(C)-long region.

Remember that at the initial stage of cysteine synthesis the serine hydroxyl is acetylated by the cysE-encoded serine acetyltransferase. At the next stage, O-acetylserine reacts with hydrogen sulfide to form the cysteine. This reaction is catalyzed by the cysK-encoded cysteine synthase.

Cysteine is a donor of sulfur in taurine synthesis. In mycobacteria, genes tauC and tauA involved in the taurine transport system likely belong to the same operon, as their separating spacer is only about 10nt long (with the exception of Mycobacterium massiliense str. GO 06).

Transcriptional repression of plastid genes cysT and cysA involved in sulfate transport was proposed in the Viridiplantae (Lyubetsky et al., 2013). In this case, a single-box repressor binding conserved motif with the consensus TAAWATGATT was found close to the promoters in many species of algae.

Both cysK and cysE genes usually belong to the same operon, which in Mycobacterium avium and Mycobacterium leprae also contains proteins with unknown function.

The ROK (Repressor, ORF, Kinase) domain PF00480 belongs to a diverse family of proteins that unites transcription factors (repressors xylR in B. subtilis, Lactobacillus pentosus, Staphylococcus xylosus, and nagC in E. coli that possess a helix-turn-helix DNA-binding motif absent from other members of the family), sugar kinases and uncharacterized proteins (Titgemeyer et al., 1994).

The Pfam domain PF14340 (DUF4395) of unknown function is frequently found across bacteria and eukaryotes. It possesses two conserved cysteic residues likely to be functionally important. The role of PF00480 and PF14340 proteins remained unclear.

Protein functions can be predicted on the basis of their regulation mechanisms. With this notion, we discuss the putative involvement of proteins in sulfur metabolism in Actinomycetales. To detect regulations, we performed a large-scale search for putative leader genes containing poly(Cys) regions in all currently available genomes of the Mycobacteriaceae (species of Mycobacterium and Amycolicicoccus subflavus) and Actinomycetales. Among many leader genes detected, the majority is associated with structural genes involved in sulfur metabolism, and some – with genes encoding less characterized proteins, including proteins with Pfam domains PF14340 and PF00480. The length of poly(Cys) tracts in leader genes reaches 8 (e.g., upstream of the protein YP_006570365.1
                        1
                     
                     
                        1
                        Hereafter, sequence/protein accession numbers refer to GenBank.
                      gene in Mycobacterium smegmatis str. MC2 155), and 4 upstream of the PF00480-domain protein genes.

@&#METHODS@&#

The search for leader genes was conducted with an original computer program, which conceptual description is provided below. The search was constrained to 5′-leader regions of genes annotated in GenBank (as per 2013) to detect open reading frames (ORFs) that usually do not overlap with the regulated gene (although they do overlap in some cases, Seliverstov et al., 2005, and so the overlap is allowed). If a leader gene was found in several mycobacterial species, orthologs of other structural genes in the Actinomycetales were included in the analysis.

The PF00480 and PF14340 domains were identified according to the Pfam database (Finn et al., 2010). Annotations were verified with PROSITE (Sigrist et al., 2010). Protein alignment was performed with Clustal 2.0.3 (Thompson et al., 1997). Phylogenetic trees were constructed with the MEGA5 software using the neighbor-joining algorithm (Tamura et al., 2011). Additional materials to this paper are available and referred to as Appendices hereafter.

Whenever a leader gene is found (ref. to Appendix 1), modeling of attenuation regulation was done to detect classic attenuation according to the earlier described method (Lyubetsky et al., 2007). The method description, the corresponding mathematical model and the computer program mentioned in the Background are freely available on the Web site (Model of RNA, 2014). All positive model predictions are given in Table 1
                      and further detailed in Section 3; negative predictions are exemplified in selected cases only.

In modeling, we used the average elongation rates of 45nt/s for the ribosome, and 40nt/s for the RNA polymerase (Lyubetsky et al., 2006, 2007; Rubanov and Lyubetsky, 2007). All U-rich regions were considered within the range of 100nt from the leader gene stop codon. The maximum allowed length of the helix loop was 90nt; the U-rich region parameters were as follows: minimum number of U entries – 3nt, maximum distance between adjacent poly(U)s – 2nt. For statistical confidence, the results were averaged over 1000 modeling trajectories.

We proposed an algorithm to detect leader genes upstream structural genes. The algorithm recognizes a leader gene as an ORF with a predefined amino acid composition; this ORF must have a high local density of regulatory codons. The codon density is defined as follows. All codons in the current ORF are visited and change the counter value initially set to zero. If a codon encodes a regulatory amino acid, the counter increases by 1.0, and otherwise reduces by 0.5. The density of the entire ORF is its maximum counter value. The algorithm detects short ORFs (potential leader genes) with a high density of pre-defined regulatory codons upstream of annotated genes.

The algorithm parameters are listed below (used values shown in parentheses):
                           
                              (1)
                              minimum leader region length (100nt), shorter intergenic regions are ignored;

maximum leader region length (1400nt), for longer intergenic regions only the 1400nt range upstream from the gene start is considered;

minimum structural gene length (200nt), shorter genes are ignored;

maximum structural gene length (10,000nt), longer genes are ignored;

minimum ORF length (five codons), shorter ORFs are ignored;

minimum allowed density of regulatory codons for the entire ORF (3.0);

the sets of regulatory amino acids, start and stop codons of the leader gene.

The algorithm starts with extracting non-coding leader regions on both DNA strands that meet the conditions (1)–(4). Each extracted leader region is searched for ORFs, and the density of specified regulatory amino acids is computed for such ORFs. The algorithm outputs ORFs (of candidate leader genes) that satisfy the specified parameters. If several leader genes with the same density are found for a structural gene, the shortest one is selected.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The search for leader genes and Rho-dependent or classic attenuations was conducted for all annotated genes of mycobacteria (the genus Mycobacteriaceae) and their orthologs in other actinomycetes (the order Actinomycetales). The found regulations are grouped according to the gene products: cysteine synthases, thiosulfate sulfurtransferases, PF00480(ROK)-domain proteins, PF14340(DUF4395)-domain proteins, taurine transport, other genes. Negative predictions are generally not shown. The “other proteins” group contains miscellaneous homologous proteins, with the exception of the last paragraph. Phylogenetic analyses of the Rho protein and its binding sites are provided thereafter.

The discrimination between Rho-dependent and classic attenuations in our modeling is not straightforward. When one of the alternative regulations was to be selected, the well substantiated model of classic attenuation was applied. Classic attenuation was assumed if so predicted and if no suitable pyrimidine-rich region was found. Rho-dependent regulation was assumed otherwise.

Many cysteine synthase associated leader genes are found in the actinomycetes listed in Appendix 1. The stop codon of the leader gene adjoins or overlaps with the putative Rho factor binding site, a degenerate repeat of a pyrimidine-rich region. In Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Mycobacterium bovis, M. africanum, and Mycobacterium canettii the leader genes are separated from the cysteine synthase gene cysK by another gene of the same operon, which contributes to the earlier observation (Seliverstov et al., 2005). The cysK1 gene in M. tuberculosis KZN 605 contains a frame shift, while the leader gene is preserved.

The modeling predicts possible classic attenuation for the cysteine synthase genes only in Jonesia denitrificans DSM 20603 and Propionibacterium freudenreichii subsp. shermanii CIRM-BIA1; in these cases only a slight increase of the transcription level is predicted for higher concentrations of cysteine (ref. to Table 1).

In M. tuberculosis, M. bovis, M. africanum, and M. canettii the leader genes with Cys codon tracts are located upstream the sse (cysA2) genes that encode the thiosulfate sulfurtransferase. A leader gene containing six consecutive Cys codons is also found upstream the thiosulfate sulfurtransferase gene in M. massiliense str. GO 06 (YP_006520168.1). The regulation mechanism is unclear: the Rho binding site is not detected, nor is the terminator hairpin with a neighboring poly(Cys) tract. Modeling also does not predict classic attenuation (ref. to Table 1).

Among actinomycetes, the leader genes upstream cysA2 are predicted in the species listed in Appendix 1.

In most cases, modeling shows no classic attenuation, with the exception of Gordonia polyisoprenivorans VH2, which was predicted to slightly decrease the transcription level under elevated cysteine concentrations (Table 1). This decrease is well explained by the role of thiosulfate sulfurtransferase in cysteine synthesis. However, classic attenuation is not found in closely related G. bronchialis DSM 43247 and G. sp. KTR9.

PF00480(ROK)-domain protein genes preceded by leader genes were found in the actinomycetes listed in Appendix 1. In the protein YP_006565684.1 from M. smegmatis str. MC2_155 the PF00480 domain is detected between residues 128–280 with the expect value of 8.3×10−10.

The joint alignment of the 5′-leader region and partial PF00480-domain encoding sequences from mycobacteria Mycobacterium gilvum, Mycobacterium rhodesiae, M. smegmatis, Mycobacterium vanbaalenii (Fig. 1
                        ) demonstrates conservativity of the leader gene between its Cys and stop codons, a short region after the stop codon, and the region after the leader gene start codon that encodes a long helix in the transcript mRNA. Conversely, the sequence upstream of the Cys codons is little conserved. This observation well agrees with functional importance of the Cys codons and helix structures encoded downstream. The corresponding regions in M. sp. MOTT36Y and M. avium align well but possess a lower similarity with other mycobacteria.

The modeling detects classic attenuation in many species (ref. to Table 1). The transcription level increases with cysteine concentration in M. sp. JLS, KMS, MCS, MOTT36Y, Mycobacterium chubuense, M. gilvum, M. massiliense, M. smegmatis. The exceptions are M. avium, M. vanbaalenii that lack the Rho binding site and exhibit a monotonously decreasing dependency between the transcription level and concentrations of cysteinyl-tRNA; and Mycobacterium abscessus, M. rhodesiae that show no evident correlation. In the latter cases, the C-rich regions flanking the leader gene stop codon represent putative Rho binding sites, which suggests the presence of Rho-dependent attenuation.

In M. smegmatis and M. massiliense the intrinsic terminators are located in low conserved regions surrounded by higher conserved sequences. In these cases, a classic attenuation without antiterminator is expected. Indeed, specific modeling strongly suggests classic regulation in M. smegmatis (Fig. 2a), where the termination is almost not observed under high cysteine concentrations because the terminator hairpin is disintegrated by the ribosome. Under low cysteine contents the terminator almost always assembles, although the hairpin bulges reduce the termination frequency in the model. The transcription level against cysteine concentration is monotonously decreasing (Fig. 2a). Modeling suggests that termination can be triggered by three different hairpins assembling upstream the poly(U) region. The mRNA secondary structures formed between the ribosome and polymerase under zero cysteinyl-tRNA concentration trigger either termination (T) or continuation of transcription (A), as shown in Fig. 3 (Appendix 2). One of the terminator hairpins closest to the poly(U) is depicted in Fig. 4 (Appendix 2).

The same modeling was performed for M. massiliense. Mutual arrangement of the leader gene and the U-rich terminator region is shown in Fig. 5 (Appendix 2). In this case, the curve of the transcription level against cysteine concentration is also approximately monotonous, Fig. 2b. One of the putative terminator hairpins closest to the U-rich region is depicted in Fig. 6 (Appendix 2).

Among other actinomycetes, the modeled gene transcription level decreases with the increase of cysteine concentration in G. bronchialis DSM 43247 and G. polyisoprenivorans VH2 (similarly to mycobacteria), does not change in Gordonia sp. KTR9, Nocardia cyriacigeorgica GUH-2, S. avermitilis MA-4680, T. paurometabola DSM 20162, and slightly increases in Nocardia brasiliensis ATCC 700358 (Table 1). Classic attenuation regulation is predicted in these cases.

In mycobacteria, the PF14340(DUF4395)-domain protein genes are always associated with leader genes. Such associations are found in the actinomycetes listed in Appendix 1. In these cases, the leader gene stop codon is always preceded by a C-rich region, the putative Rho factor binding site on the transcript mRNA. In modeling classic attenuation, the transcription level is in most cases almost independent of cysteine concentration. This departure of mycobacteria from other actinomycetes may be explained by the existence of Rho-dependent regulation of these genes in mycobacteria.

The exceptions are M. vanbaalenii and M. smegmatis, where a decrease is observed. In M. smegmatis the predicted transcription level is 83% under zero cysteine content and drops to 64% under its higher concentrations (Table 1).

The transcription level is predicted to increase with cysteine concentration in N. brasiliensis ATCC 700358 (the increase in transcription level of the structural gene is 26%), N. cyriacigeorgica GUH-2 (20%), Nocardia farcinica IFM 10152 (29%), P. freudenreichii subsp. shermanii CIRM-BIA1 (41%), Rhodococcus equi 103S (21%), Rhodococcus erythropolis PR4 (36%), and Rhodococcus opacus B4 (24%). Rhodococcus jostii RHA1 showed no correlation (Table 1). Therefore, the classic attenuation is assumed.

Proteins found to be associated in mycobacterial genomes (listed in Appendix 1) with leader genes possessing four consecutive Cys codons belong to the two TauC transport systems, the transport of taurine (TauC, TauA) and related compounds (taurocholate, sulfonates, sulfate esters).

In M. abscessus the Cys codons are distanced from the leader gene stop codon. In other species, on the contrary, the leader genes possess Cys codons in the 3′-terminus. In M. rhodesiae the region downstream the stop codon is enriched with uracil, in M. smegmatis – with cytosine. Other species do not exhibit similar enrichment patterns.

Leader genes and 5′-leader regions of mRNA in mycobacteria are depicted in Fig. 7 (Appendix 2). Proteins homologous to TauC are found in M. gilvum PYR-GCK (YP_001131997.1) and M. vanbaalenii PYR-1 (YP_950978.1), although these are not associated with leader genes containing poly(Cys) tracts.

In M. massiliense a leader gene with four consecutive Cys codons is associated with the TauA protein (YP_006520902.1), a putative taurine-binding periplasmic factor not homologous to TauC. Another 4-(Cys) containing leader gene is found upstream the transmembrane subunit of the ABC transporter (YP_004491913.1) in A. subflavus DQS3-9A1, which affinity to taurine is however unknown. Classic attenuation is eliminated due to the lack of intrinsic terminators. Rho-dependent attenuation may be hypothesized in these cases.

In actinomycetes, leader genes upstream tauC are predicted in the species listed in Appendix 1. Classic attenuation was predicted with confidence only for Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis 1/06-A. The transcription level decreases with the increase of cysteine concentration (ref. to Table 1), which agrees well with a reduced role of transport when taurine is produced in cytoplasm under the excess of cysteine.

Leader genes with 5-(Cys) tracts are associated with the two proteins that are 138 residues long and differ by a single serine-to-asparagine substitution at position 86 in two mycobacterial species: Mycobacterium marinum M (YP_001851915.1), Mycobacterium ulcerans Agy99 (YP_905462.1). Hereafter, the notation contains the species and the strain, the protein accession number, and the maximum size of the poly(Cys) tract.

Leader genes associated with transposases possess 5 Cys codons in M. ulcerans Agy99 (YP_906498.1), 4 in M. gilvum Spyr1 (YP_004077019.1), 4 in M. gilvum Spyr1 (YP_004078569.1). In M. ulcerans this protein is a transposase required for the insertion of the mobile element IS2404.

Leader genes with several Cys codons are found upstream from genes of the tetR transcription factor family in the actinomycetes listed in Appendix 1. Modeling shows (Table 1) a pronounced increase of the transcription level with cysteine concentration in G. bronchialis DSM 43247, Arthrobacter phenanthrenivorans Sphe3, N. brasiliensis ATCC 700358, and Callithamnion variabile DSM 44702. In R. equi 103S and Probionibacterium propionicum F0230a a slight decrease is observed for the protein YP_006510480.1 gene. Classic attenuation is predicted in all species, except for Corynebacterium diphtheriae PW8, 31A, BH8, HC02.

In M. massiliense str. GO 06, the ssb gene encoding the protein YP_006522383.1 with a ss-DNA binding domain was found to be associated with the leader gene containing a 5-(Cys) tract. Rarely the leader genes are associated with lipL (esterase), pstP (serine/threonine phosphatase), proA (gamma-glutamyl phosphate reductase involved in proline synthesis), and some other less characterized genes. Their regulation mechanism remains unclear. The lack of the terminator hairpin excludes classic attenuation, which presence is also not shown in modeling.

The phylogenetic relationship of the Rho proteins in actinomycetes is shown in Appendix 3.

This transcription factor was known to be omnipresent in mycobacteria, with the exception of M. africanum GM041182 (NC_015758.1). Protein alignment of the Rho sequence from M. bovis and its predicted homolog from M. africanum shows highly conserved regions at the C-terminus (residues 217–602) and N-terminus (a shorter region between residues 1–114), ref. to Fig. 9 in Appendix 2. A 100aa-long internal region of the M. bovis protein is lost in M. africanum. This observation suggests that the Rho protein of M. africanum modified closer to the N-terminus may still retain function, while its gene is considered a pseudogene in the current annotation. Alternatively, the Rho protein of M. africanum may consist of two different subunits translated independently in two different frames.

In M. tuberculosis, M. bovis, and M. canettii the Rho proteins are very similar, albeit being diverged from those in other mycobacteria, which is also evident from corresponding phylogenies. M. leprae, M. ulcerans, and M. marinum as well express diverged patterns.

The alignment and LOGO profiles of the 5′-untranslated mRNA regions close to the leader gene stop codon demonstrate their high conservativity, especially for cysA2, cysK and PF00480 (ROK) (Fig. 9 in Appendix 2). The sites depicted in Fig. 9 possess pyrimidine-rich regions, the putative Rho binding sites. This observation conforms well with our presumption that these sites play an important role in regulation, although their high divergence does not allow to precisely delimit the Rho binding sites upstream the corresponding genes.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

Our analysis allowed to predict the involvement of proteins with the poorly characterized PF00480 (ROK) and PF14340 (DUF4395) domains, as well as other proteins listed above, in sulfur metabolism. The cysteine-dependent regulation was predicted for many genes. These results are obtained for all annotated genes of mycobacteria available in GenBank and their orthologs from other Actinomycetales.

The regulon contains subunits of the transporters of taurine and other sulfur-containing compounds, like taurocholate, sulfonates, sulfate esters. The presence of transposases in the regulons of M. gilvum and M. ulcerans may suggest a later acquisition of the leader genes and associated regulations in the result of horizontal gene transfers between mycobacteria; in M. marinum and M. ulcerans the regulated genes might have also been horizontally transferred.

This study also predicts regulation patterns for many genes. The obtained results considerably extend earlier large-scale studies (Lopatovskaia et al., 2010; Seliverstov et al., 2005) of classic and Rho-dependent attenuations mediated by amino acids other than cysteine.

We propose a roadmap to study structural genes (operons) preceded by leader peptide-coding genes (“leader genes”). In short, the leader gene is defined as an ORF with codons encoding certain pre-defined amino acids, which play a regulatory role with respect to this operon (“regulatory codons”) and somehow relate to the operon's functionality. The connection of the leader gene with the operon is verified against certain requirements specified in Sections 2 and 3. In many cases (also in this work) the operon's function is not known a priori, and multiple amino acids are tried in turn for possible regulatory role. If the leader gene is present, the operon is regulated by a ribosome delaying at the regulatory codons during translation. This delay provides a mechanism to regulate transcription or/and translation. The regulation is mediated by secondary structures forming in the region between the leader gene and the operon, or protein factors usually binding mRNA near the first start codon of the operon. Such are cases of classic (Rho-independent) and Rho-dependent attenuation. Presence of the leader gene not only suggests the regulation mechanism but also the function of the operon. For example, the involvement of PF00480 or PF14340-domain proteins in sulfur metabolism was not clear before. Although only cysteine codons were considered in this work as regulatory, the method is equally applicable to other amino acids as well as other species. As an example of the latter, the result of searching for leader genes with poly(Cys) tracts across all sequenced actinomycetes is provided in Appendix 4.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

We thank Leonid Yu. Rusin for substantial contribution to the discussion and the manuscript preparation. We gratefully thank the anonymous reviewer for the profound and very useful review. This research is partly funded by the Ministry for Education and Science of Russia (grants 8481 and 14.740.11.1053), and the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (grant 13-04-40196-Н).

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2014.01.001.

The following are the supplementary data to this article:
                        
                           Appendix 1
                           
                              Regulated (structural) genes associated with leader genes. Each row shows the species and strain, the gene (accession number of corresponding protein is shown in brackets), for which an upstream leader gene was found. The last column shows the greatest number of consecutive Cys codons in a tract (recall that multiple such tracts can occur in the leader gene). This list complements the information given in the main paper body.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Appendix 2
                           
                              Additional figures.
                              The numbering of the figures continues the numbers in the main paper body.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Appendix 3
                           
                              The phylogenetic relationship of the Rho proteins in actinomycetes.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Appendix 4
                           
                              Leader genes with poly(Cys) tracts across all sequenced actinomycetes is provided in Appendix 4.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

