@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Automatic design and planning of scaffolding systems using building information modeling

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Temporary facilities significantly impact construction safety and productivity.


                        
                        
                           
                           A platform for BIM-based automatic temporary facility planning has been developed.


                        
                        
                           
                           Rule-based geometric reasoning and temporary facility design algorithms are shown.


                        
                        
                           
                           Case studies which tested the new scaffolding planning software were presented.


                        
                        
                           
                           Scaffolding location, design, schedule, and bills of materials were identified.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Building information modeling

Design and construction planning

Geometric reasoning for automated modeling

Rules and regulations

Safety

Temporary facilities (scaffolding systems)

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Considering their significant impact on construction projects, scaffolding as part of the temporary facilities category in construction must be thoroughly designed, planned, procured, and managed. The current practices in planning and managing scaffolding though is often manual and reactive, especially when a construction project is already underway. Widespread results are code compliance problems, inefficiency, and waste of procuring and managing material for scaffolding systems. We developed a rule-based system that automatically plans scaffolding systems for pro-active management in Building Information Modeling (BIM). The scope of the presented work is limited to traditional pipe and board scaffolding systems. A rule was prepared based on the current practice of planning and installing scaffolding systems. Our computational algorithms automatically recognize geometric and non-geometric conditions in building models and produce a scaffolding system design which a practitioner can use in the field. We implemented our automated scaffolding system for a commercially-available BIM software and tested it in a case study project. The system thoroughly identified the locations in need of scaffolding and generated the corresponding scaffolding design in BIM. Further results show, the proposed approach successfully generated a scaffolding system-loaded BIM model that can be utilized in communication, billing of materials, scheduling simulation, and as a benchmark for accurate field installation and performance measurement.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Temporary facilities such as scaffolding systems, formwork, and shoring systems are structures that assist mainly in the placement of bulk materials. Most construction projects utilize temporary facilities frequently, and construction safety, quality, speed, and profitability are impacted by using temporary facilities [1]. Some aspects of these are elaborated further.

Temporary facilities can cause spatial and temporal conflicts between other temporary facilities or activities which can then lead to unsafe conditions and loss of productivity [2]. According to Ratay [3], many construction disasters occur due to the failures of temporary facilities during construction. In addition, the Construction Industry Institute (CII) highlighted in a recent research study that temporary facilities form one of the top four primary cost categories belonging to indirect construction costs [4]. In the author’s opinion, temporary facilities, to which scaffolding systems belong, deserve much more attention due to the impact they have on labor cost and construction schedule.

Scaffolding systems have significant impact on successful project delivery. The same research report by CII interviewed 56 owner and contractor companies. Results show that these companies consider scaffolding systems, and its construction and deconstruction, as one of the most challenging and wasteful component among the 16 subcategories of indirect construction cost [4]. In addition, other concerns were identified which matter for project success. The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) [5] and Workplace Health and Safety Queensland (WHSQ) [6,7], for example, reported that there exist repeated code-compliance problems related to scaffolding systems. OSHA reported also that 65% of the construction workers are frequently on scaffolding systems. It further states that preventing accidents associated with scaffolding systems exclusively can protect workers from about 4500 injuries and 50 deaths annually and save American employers spending $90 million on lost workdays [8]. Since work site productivity and safety go hand-in-hand, these statistics justify additional efforts towards optimizing design, planning, and utilization of scaffolding systems.

Despite the aforementioned issues and the importance of temporary facilities to a construction project, there are currently several problems in planning and managing these in the construction industry. First, most temporary facilities (incl. scaffolding systems) currently lack effective front-end planning and management. Architectural and bid drawings typically do not incorporate temporary facilities except for exceptionally complex temporary facilities such as cofferdams [9,10]. Although some construction plans include important temporary facilities late in the construction planning process, they are often installed at construction sites when needed but without sufficient planning effort. Furthermore, due to the lack of time and understanding, calculations and drawings of scaffolding systems submitted by temporary facility vendors are most often reviewed only to assess their impact on the permanent part of the building [9].

Along with the lack of front-end planning and management, current industry practices suffer from heavy reliance on the knowledge and experiences of individual engineers. Even though software programs exist that are specialized in designing temporary facilities (e.g., formwork and scaffolding), the functions of these commercially-available software programs are often limited to rapid generation of temporary facility designs. Only human cognition, based on visual analysis of the building designs or the construction sites, provides the basis for detecting locations where temporary facilities are required. It is today’s human decision makers that determine the proper types of temporary facilities and they typically generate the corresponding detailed designs.

Due to the complex nature of construction projects and potentially imperfect human judgment, there are opportunities to reduce or eliminate potentially erroneous temporary facility planning; especially in projects which are planned manually based on visual analysis of the construction site drawings and schedules. Some examples of errors are: necessary temporary facilities can be omitted in a construction plan; improper types of temporary facilities can be selected; temporary facilities design may not reflect the design requirements; and, accordingly, the amount of materials and associated cost for temporary facilities cannot be estimated accurately.

Taking into account the impact on the entire construction project and the deficiencies of the current practices in planning and managing temporary facilities, the industry needs to overcome these drawbacks by enabling thorough front-end planning of temporary facilities – and in this case – scaffolding systems.

This research addresses the articulated problems by integrating scaffolding systems into BIM-based construction planning. While a growing number of construction projects utilize BIM technology and processes already in order to incorporate temporary facilities into the construction plans, most of such planning is done manually. Taking advantage of the rich information available in BIM models, we attempt to automate most of the processes of: assessing the construction site condition that changes according to the construction schedule, detecting required scaffolding systems and generating the design, visualizing them in the building model and construction simulation, and generating periodical utilization schedules and reports.

In order to automate these processes, our research developed an automatic rule checking system for temporary facility planning focusing on traditional pipe and board scaffolding systems. Deciding where scaffolding systems are required and how they can be built satisfying various design and safety requirements are part of the research questions. Automated type or vendor selection of the scaffolding systems was not part of scope of the work. The research first established an initial rule related to scaffolding system installation. Then, the developed rule checking system was used to check the model at an early construction planning stage. The presented results are in the form of building models and construction simulations loaded with scaffolding systems and automatically generated reports.

This paper is organized as follows. The background section reviews the current industry practices and technology in support of scaffolding system planning and discusses the need for an automated solution. The section thereafter presents the proposed framework and methodology of the rule-based system for scaffolding system design, planning, and management. The customization of the automated system for scaffolding systems is presented in the following section. The final section shows the implementation of the scaffolding planning system for a realistic building model. The results from the case studies validate the feasibility of the proposed system by creating a realistic construction plan containing scaffolding system. The final section discusses limitations and contributions of this research, and potential future research.

@&#BACKGROUND@&#

The production plans of construction projects differ from the production plans in other industries such as manufacturing. In addition to the complex and dynamic nature of construction projects, the need for potentially extensive temporary facilities distinguishes construction plans from manufacturing plans. Manufacturing plans for mechanical components describe what manufacturing tools, e.g. drills and mills, should be used in what order to produce the desired shapes of the components [11].

On the other hand, construction plans present an execution strategy. Temporary facilities as part of plans often assist the construction activities conducted by workers and equipment. Project locations, times, and durations which require temporary facilities should be defined before they are needed in the field. Materials for temporary facilities therefore should be readily available since on time installation and avoidance of pre-mature dismantlement are keys to a successful project. As mentioned by many practitioners, temporary facilities should be designed with the same level of detail as the permanent structures to avoid schedule delay and additional costs. They should also comply with regulatory design requirements and best practices. The plan should include approaches to optimize the uses of temporary facilities. The examples of optimization are maximization of sharing of scaffolding between multiple tasks [12] and minimization of formwork system elements which require customized design [13]. Any error in planning temporary facilities can eventually lead to productivity losses and safety issues.

In order to utilize these temporary facilities safely and effectively, the construction industry currently focuses on checking regulations and guidelines provided by OSHA. Construction companies already apply advanced technology, for example, many construction projects utilize model-based technology such as BIM to incorporate major temporary facilities into their construction plans. For the construction project of the University of Baltimore’s Law School, a contractor utilized three-dimensional (3D) modeling of formwork systems and scaffolding systems. By doing so, scaffolding systems for floor structures were created and inserted into the main building model [14,15]. Other contractors created a set of parametric formwork system models [16]. As reported, when parametric models are utilized in a project, savings in cost and time were achieved by reducing manual efforts and using the accurate 3D visualization of the formwork designs. During the construction of the Tokyo Sky Tree, the contractor inserted maintenance scaffolding and ladders into the tower model for construction simulation [17]. Eastman et al. [18] introduced many other industry case studies for incorporating temporary facilities such as tower cranes and scaffolding in BIM-based construction planning. As already experienced, the development of realistic construction planning, accurate quantity take-offs, accurate evaluation of constructability and construction safety, and better communication facilitated by realistic 3D visualization, yields significant benefits. Nevertheless, these existing approaches of integrating temporary facilities into BIM-based construction planning have several limitations.

First, the current methods of construction companies utilize libraries of pre-modeled temporary facilities which are provided in BIM software packages. They use existing functions to manually create parametric models for temporary facilities [18]. Taking into account various possible project variations, it is impractical to prepare designs manually for all types and sizes of temporary facilities. Even more difficult is making all of these use cases comply with the existing standards, regulations, and best practices, including the assurance for structural stability [19]. Creating parametric temporary facility models using the modeling capabilities of BIM software packages also involves a lot of manual efforts and produces temporary facility models which today are not tested for any code-compliance and structural stability. Furthermore, the existing approaches rely heavily on the abilities and inefficient manual efforts of individual engineers that may or may not have safety, structural, or other critical knowledge in scaffolding design and use. In the following section, we review the leading industry practice of scaffolding systems in order to differentiate or confirm the already identified drawbacks.

In this section, we investigate the industry practice for planning and managing scaffolding systems based on the results from an existing research report [12]. Industry practices for different types of temporary facilities may vary because of the different characteristics how temporary facilities can be associated to construction tasks. Thus, an industry practice specific to one type of temporary facility should be investigated separately from others in order to identify the drawbacks and needs. In general, their wide use and the importance on construction projects justify the efforts in optimizing the planning and management of scaffolding systems.

In 2012, CII conducted data collection and interviews with 56 experts and compiled the results to determine the current leading industry practice in estimating, controlling, and managing scaffolding systems [12]. Fig. 1
                         illustrates three process flow charts for estimating, controlling, and managing scaffolding systems. In the estimating stage, a periodical cost plan for scaffolding is established. Project participants then identify the scaffolding needs considering the preliminary construction schedule, predict monthly scaffolding usage, and conduct scaffolding cost estimating using the estimating worksheet. The estimating worksheet derives an estimate on quantity and cost of materials based on a vaguely defined (sketch of a) scaffolding system. In the controlling stage, the scaffolding utilization is tracked monthly using scaffolding utilization reports. The actual scaffolding utilization is compared to the initial plan that was established during the estimating stage. Variances and forecasted uses are reported and discussed in the management stage. The reports from the controlling stage are reviewed. Meetings are conducted periodically to optimize the utilization and execute a pro-active scaffolding management. Specific tasks in pro-active scaffolding management include change order management, prevention of pre-mature dismantlement, and maximization of sharing of scaffolding between different tasks [12].

Based on the review of the process flow charts, tools, and associated considerations checklists [12], we identified that this current leading industry practice related to scaffolding systems has several drawbacks. These arise mainly from the heavy reliance of the process on manual efforts. Some of these manual efforts can be associated to work tasks like: identification of scaffolding needs, periodical review of utilization and cost plans, and preparation of bid documents and construction schedules. Additional concerns about the existing best practices are: estimation of material quantity and cost plans are based on sketches and other paper-based tools rather than modern information modeling and exchanges; manual recording is performed in generating utilization reports, inspection tags, installation, and dismantlement request forms. These forms contain essential data such as scaffolding ID, location, users, usages, approximate size, erection date, and dismantlement date. Further manual processing is required to generate reliable information which a user may need in decision making applications. Although the construction industry considers these processes and techniques as practical, certain advances in information technology can provide a more sophisticated methodology that optimizes and pro-actively plans for scaffolding systems.

Many approaches exist that focus on expanding the benefits of information technology. BIM is one example that supports planning and managing of temporary facilities. We reviewed existing industry and academic approaches to identify the problems that information technology can solve. Table 1
                         summarizes the capabilities of existing approaches.

In order to derive needed temporary facilities from a digital model, both geometric conditions as well as non-geometric condition (i.e., materials and construction schedule) should be analyzed by computers automatically. Currently, no approach enabled such a reasoning task that automatically assesses the project situations and identifies required temporary facilities for specific construction tasks. Most of the approaches conduct this process manually based on visual analysis.

Only the safety management tool developed by Kim and Ahn [10] automatically recognized the perimeter of a BIM model and incorporated a scaffolding system model around the building model. This research, however, did not present any detailed methodology to analyze a building’s geometry.

Kim and Fischer [20] established a theoretical foundation in support of automated temporary facility type selection. Even though they focused on automated type selection, they suggested a useful method to analyze the model’s geometric condition based on the relationship between the work face and the base surface. While their approach enables automated selection of temporary facility types, the work face and base surface of each situation should be specified manually by a user. Nagi et al. [13] developed an optimization tool for the aluminum formwork layout system with the objective of maximizing the area of standardized formwork elements compared to the area of customized formwork elements. The results show increased relative portion of standardized formwork elements compared to the customized elements. However, a major drawback that remains is the system still requires users to manually specify corners of the formwork elements to recognize the geometric information of the building objects.

Some of other approaches support the generation of temporary facility designs automatically or manually. The tool developed by Kim and Ahn [10] automatically designs scaffolding systems around a building model. CADS [21] also generates pre-defined types of scaffolding systems automatically around walls. While these two approaches assist users to generate scaffolding systems rapidly, they design scaffolding systems exclusively for walls and fail to distinguish scaffolding systems for different construction tasks. Scia scaffolding [22] provides functions in its user-interface that assist users to design scaffolding systems manually. It also provides automated code-compliance and structural stability checking for scaffolding systems. Sulankivi et al. [19] and Kim and Ahn [10] incorporated safety features such as guardrails into the temporary facility models. Lee et al. [23] developed a tool that generates the formwork layouts based on the prioritized design requirements.

Several approaches incorporate the temporary facility models into the main models and 4D construction simulations. While some of them used the temporary facility-loaded models and simulations for enhanced visualization and analysis of construction sites [24], Akinci et al. [2] specified the space occupied by a scaffolding system in an attempt to analyze the spatial conflicts between spaces occupied by other construction activities or temporary facilities.

Model-based technology such as BIM is regarded as one of the solutions to improve construction management. Many construction projects incorporate temporary facilities into building models in an attempt to simulate the construction sequences realistically. However, the main benefit from applying model-based technology is often limited to visualizing the temporary facilities within the model. The essential tasks for planning and managing temporary facilities have not been incorporated to date into BIM and thus users cannot take full advantage of advanced information modeling technology.

The current state of technology does not suggest a methodology that overcomes the explained drawbacks. Little research has been conducted to automatically analyze the geometric and non-geometric conditions of temporary facilities on a construction project. Since identification and designs of required temporary facilities still requires experienced engineers to understand complex building geometry and schedule, potential exists to assist them in their decision making. Furthermore, an integrated tool that utilizes the rich and precise information available from digital building models, assesses the project conditions, and develops a temporary facility utilization plan automatically does not exist.

Recognizing these needs, we attempt to develop and test a framework that automatically generates a temporary facility plan that supports pro-active management utilizing the rich information available in digital building models. Even though the framework proposed in this research can potentially provide the basis to plan many other types of temporary facilities, the current scope was limited to traditional pipe and board scaffolding systems.

The following section explains the algorithms we developed and utilized to: (a) recognize the geometric and non-geometric conditions in building models and (b) suggest automatically generated scaffolding system designs to a user. The presented algorithms will first detect locations that require scaffolding systems and then provide the geometric information to each location. After obtaining the geometric information that is essential for the scaffolding design generation, design guidelines and best practices were then incorporated into a construction plan to generate the necessary scaffolding design and utilization reports. Through the implementation of the proposed framework and methodology, we expect to improve the current practice to become less labor-intensive and time-consuming, and instead more efficient and accurate. Potential contributions of this research will be discussed later in the conclusion and discussion section.

In order to automate the planning of temporary facilities, we developed an automated rule-based building model checking system. The rule-based checking approach is one of the techniques that recognize features from the available digital model geometry. Feature recognition (FR) techniques are generally used to extract important features that are not explicitly expressed by the model. Features obtained from Computer-Aided Design (CAD) systems are used as the input for computer-aided analysis or automated manufacturing process planning systems. They save time and reduce potential human error [25]. Babic et al. [26] identified rule-based approaches as a robust method among various FR techniques such as hint-based, graph-based, artificial neural network-based and volumetric decomposition. According to Zhang et al. [25] rule-based systems are flexible and rational because the rules and facts are separated in the system structure.

Applying a rule-based approach for assessing building designs is regarded as a desired research direction in the architecture, engineering, and construction (AEC) industry. A rule-based checking system is equal to software that assesses a building design based on its attributes, relations, and configuration of building objects without making modifications to the design. A rule-based checking process can also report results [27]. Building design reviews can be conducted more quickly and reliably using a rule-based approach. There are wide uses of the rule checking approach in the AEC industry. An early concept design can be tested for spatial requirements, circulation requirements, energy consumption, and cost [28]. In the construction stage, a building model can also be evaluated to predict hazardous situations and eliminate them in advance [29,30].

A rule checking process can generally be structured into four stages [27]:
                           
                              (1)
                              Rule interpretation and logical structuring of the rules: building design rules written in the form of human language, text, table, etc. are interpreted in a form that can be processed by computers.

Building model preparation: building models should provide the information necessary to execute the specific rule checking. The information should be automatically derived from the design program or the rule checking system.

Rule execution: after the pre-checking process that verifies that the building model contains information required for the rule checking, the rules are executed against the building model.

Checking result reporting: the result of executing rules such as “pass” or “fail” is reported in the form of graphical reports or references to the source rules.

The intention of implementing a rule-based system in this research is to: (a) automatically evaluate the construction site condition, (b) identify the project locations and schedules that require scaffolding systems, and (c) provide solutions automatically and interactively. There are regulations and industry practices that can be applied as rules for planning scaffolding systems. The rules may provide descriptions about the conditions where a certain type of temporary facility is required. The rules may also vary depending on the types of temporary facilities and the characteristics of the related construction tasks. Such rules are generally interpreted and translated into machine-readable codes and implemented to check digital building models automatically. A rule-based platform then visualizes the results from the rule-based checking engine according to the progress of the construction sequence. Installation time and removal of scaffolding is finally shown in the construction schedule.


                     Fig. 2
                      illustrates the framework that implements the proposed rule-based system for temporary facility design and planning. The initial step is to collect project data from a building model and construction schedule. BIM and schedule information provide geometric information such as building object shapes and their locations within the model and non-geometric information such as materials, task information, and the stakeholder in charge of the task. This information is the essential source to automatically analyze the construction site condition that changes dynamically. The step is equivalent to the building model preparation stage in the rule checking process explained in Section 3.1.

Then, the rules for detecting required temporary facilities from the model are established based on best practices and regulatory rules. These are provided either by industry, for example vendors and suppliers, or other closely related organization, for example OSHA. This step is equivalent to the rule interpretation and logical structuring of the rules stage in the rule checking process.

Using such placement rules and project information, the model geometry is interpreted to identify the required temporary facilities. This step is equivalent to the rule execution stage in the rule checking process.

The temporary facility design is then generated in compliance with corresponding OSHA regulations and industry best practices related to temporary facility design. The process of identifying the locations in need of temporary facilities and generating the designs corresponds to the reporting stage in the rule checking process. Project participants can finally utilize the temporary facility-loaded model and automatically generate reports in order to facilitate better communication and decision making.

For both needs, identification of required temporary facilities and final decision making for temporary facility design selection, a variety of user-defined rules can be established. For example, the height of a work place, the weight of construction material to be lifted and placed on scaffolding systems, and/or a combination of both can determine if a scaffolding system is required. A rule based system may further suggest multiple scaffolding options for a specific work task situation, such as support or suspended scaffolding. User-defined criteria such as the maximum total weight and cost of the scaffolding materials may further drive the selection of the preferred scaffolding system type. Eventually, automated selection or user-preferences for selecting a scaffolding system can be incorporated into the decision making framework which scaffolding systems to use.

Many scaffolding systems provide construction workers with an elevated platform until the related work task is completed. The focus of our rule-checking system for scaffolding systems was to detect the instances where construction workers need to work at elevations high enough to demand an elevated platform. A first rule was generated based on deciding the primary type of use of the scaffolding system. Existing OSHA rules regulate what type of system must be used when working at greater than a specified height limits. This is in the US typically six feet. In this work, we name this feature the scaffolding height. It is the maximum distance from the base surface that a worker has to conduct a scheduled work task.

In future approaches more comprehensive rules can be designed to identify required scaffolding systems for complex geometric conditions. Eventually these might be based on industry know-how and best practices. Since companies, their projects, and tasks demand different requirements, scaffolding type and height of the elevated platforms are generally specified by a user. A practitioner might have further input in the decision making of which type to prefer over another and adjust values more easily depending on the situation at site.

We attempt to detect such situations in need of scaffolding systems based on the relationship between the work face and the base surface. A work face is a face where the effect of construction activity takes place. A base surface is a face where a worker or a temporary facility stands on. We base our work on Kim and Fischer [20], who analyzed the geometric conditions of a project and outlined the automation of the temporary facility type selection.

Shown in an example, Fig. 3
                         illustrates a situation in a construction project where the front face of a brick wall is the work face. In order to evaluate the scaffolding height in this situation, the distance from the adjacent floor to the top of the work face must be identified. This value is then compared against the pre-defined value (best practice) and it is decided if a scaffolding system is needed or not. The example in Fig. 3 illustrates the definitions we have established for such calculation. Assuming there is only one floor (indoors), the scaffolding height is equal to the work face height. Should a scaffolding system be needed outdoors for a two-story building and the base face is on the ground level, the sum of the work face height and the distance to work face becomes the scaffolding height. Ceilings can also be considered in the same way as the base surfaces. This would become an issue should a suspended scaffolding system be needed, which is a type of scaffolding system that remains outside of the scope of the presented work.

The proposed rule-based system is composed of two major parts. One is the algorithm that implements the rule-based model geometry interpretation. The other is the design and planning algorithm that utilizes the information acquired from the geometry interpretation and generates the scaffolding design, incorporates it into the model, and generates the utilization reports.

For the implementation of the rule-based geometry interpretation, the building model geometry was analyzed so that it contains a feature that can be evaluated by the placement rule. The rule evaluates each work face in the model by reasoning the scaffolding height. The geometry interpretation algorithm first detects all the work faces in the model and then identifies the scaffolding height for each work face. Since the work face and scaffolding heights are not explicitly represented in currently available commercial BIM software platforms, the developed geometry interpretation algorithm derives such information from the model before executing the rule against the model.

Deriving such information from a building model requires reasoning about the qualitative relationship between the building objects. Rather than considering the absolute coordinate information of the building objects, it evaluates how the building objects are placed relative to each other. This then determines the condition that is meaningful for placing scaffolding systems. Depending on the relative positions of the building objects, a work face can be composed of multiple parts belonging to multiple building objects.

Shown in an example for easier comprehension, Fig. 4
                            illustrates a portion of a realistic building information model. This model was used to test the proposed geometry interpretation algorithm. Considering the configuration of two wall and three slab segments, there are one large exterior work face and three smaller interior work faces in the model. In order to derive an object that functions as a work face, the walls have to be decomposed into faces and the faces have to be finally divided and reassembled into a larger work face. To evaluate the work face, the assembly of partial objects may also contain the scaffolding height as one of its attributes. However, existing BIM software and associated rule-checking tools currently do not have a function to support such object granularity and cannot conduct the qualitative reasoning about the project geometric conditions. We come back to this example to see how the scaffolding system is incorporated automatically once we have explained the second part of the rule-based system: the design and planning algorithm.

In order to enable the qualitative reasoning in the geometry interpretation system, we implemented a face-edge representation methodology. This methodology has been adopted in the fields of qualitative geometric reasoning, qualitative spatial reasoning, image recognition, and geographic mapping, and elsewhere [31–33]. Like Chinowsky and Reinschmidt [31] did for CAD model interpretation, we decomposed the physical building objects into geometric entities such as faces, edges, and vertices. We then utilized the coordinate information available for each geometric entity to form the basis in determining the qualitative relationship between building objects and geometric entities.

The data structure diagram for scaffolding placement is illustrated in Fig. 5
                           . Each building object is decomposed into faces, recomposed into work faces and further into sets of work faces linked together. To each face entity, the system added relational information about the relationships of floors and ceilings. Using the geometric and relational information, faces are combined to form work faces. Each work face entity then contains geometric information, relational information as well as scaffolding height. The height requirements determine if a work face requires a scaffolding system. A bounding box created in front of the work face further represents the work space required for the scaffolding system. Since the face-edge representations from a building object maintains its links to a BIM model object, important non-geometric information such as materials and work tasks in the schedule can also be accessed. These help in the effort to distinguish geometric entities related to work that intends the erection or disassembly of scaffolding systems.

The geometry interpretation process is composed of four steps: (a) object decomposition, (b) work face composition, (c) work face linking, and (d) scaffolding space specification. Further details to each step are provided.

In the object decomposition step, every building object is decomposed into its geometric entities. As shown in Fig. 6
                              , we focused on wall objects and considered only the two largest faces belonging to the wall. The bottom, top, and sides of a wall were not considered since they generally do not require scaffolding. Even though the faces belong to a single wall object, face objects were created separately in the geometry interpretation system because they can be combined into different work faces. The two faces were distinguishable either by different face vectors and different coordinate information or their relationships to other objects.

The next step was the work face composition. The face entities were combined into larger work faces. In addition to the coordinate information, relational information was used to determine if the faces can be combined. The relational information included the wall face’s relations with floors and ceilings.

In order to detect the slabs of the floor and ceiling that belong to the face, two sets of points were extracted from bottom and top of each face, respectively. Those points were moved two feet towards the direction of the face’s normal vector. These two sets of points were used to identify the adjacency between the faces and slabs. For a slab to be considered as a floor or a ceiling of a wall face, both horizontal and vertical conditions should be satisfied. If a slab contained a certain number of the points that were moved from the bottom of the face within its boundary contour and also had its z-coordinate within the tolerance of two feet from the wall face’s bottom z-coordinate, the slab was considered as the floor for the face. This tolerance was defined empirically and can be adjusted by a user. If there was no slab that satisfied both conditions, the nearest one among the slabs that satisfied the horizontal condition and had the z-coordinates smaller than the wall face’s bottom z-coordinate was identified as the nearest floor. Ceilings were identified using the points moved from the top of the face. In addition, the slabs that satisfied the horizontal condition but had their z-coordinates between the bottom and top of the face were identified as the abutting slabs. The wall face that had abutting slabs was finally vertically subdivided into pieces.

A face of a wall having a floor was not combined with any faces underneath the floor. Likewise, if the face of the wall has a ceiling, this face was not linked to faces above the ceiling (see Fig. 7
                              ). Face normal vectors were used as relational information to determine if two faces are oriented towards the same direction. In order for two different faces to be included in the same work face, at least the following three conditions need to be satisfied:
                                 
                                    (1)
                                    Face vector: two faces should have the same or similar vector indicating that the faces are parallel and oriented towards the same direction.

Face-to-face distance: two parallel faces should share the same work plane, this can be determined by having a zero or near-zero face-to-face distance. While the value for the near-zero distance is currently left for user-input, the tolerance should be defined. Eventually the tolerance can be based on the industry practice to develop an application programs utilizing this algorithm. The tolerance for developing this algorithm was set to two feet, but it can be adjusted by a user. Fig. 8
                                        illustrates the distance between two parallel faces.

Face adjacency: satisfying the previous two conditions means that two faces with the same orientation are on a single work plane. In addition to these conditions, two faces should be in close proximity. The proximity is identified using two-dimensional bounding boxes of the two faces and a tolerance of two feet that can be modified by a user. In order for two faces to be adjacent, two bounding boxes should overlap or be within two feet away from each other both horizontally and vertically.

While this method is simple and easy to apply, it can potentially produce erroneous results because it approximates the building object shapes into two-dimensional boxes. Therefore, future research may apply more advanced methods in defining the spatial relationships between building objects. [34,35] might be applied to produce more accurate results. Integration of faces was propagated from a selected face toward adjacent faces. One work face, like it is illustrated in Fig. 7, can then be detected by combining the faces above the floor and the other work face can be detected by combining all the faces below the floor.

After all work faces were detected as a result of the work face composition, the slabs adjacent to the bottom and top of the work faces were detected again using the same process of detecting slabs adjacent to the wall faces.

In the workface linking stage, the generated work faces were combined into sets of linked work faces again as construction activities can take place unceasingly along multiple work faces. An example is explained later (see Fig. 13). The continuity between multiple work faces generates realistic scaffolding designs. Therefore, the connections between scaffolding systems within a set of linked work faces must be processed to avoid any discontinuity or overlapping of scaffolding systems.

The final step of the geometry interpretation is the scaffolding space specification where the use of space is automatically specified. An example is shown in Fig. 9
                              . In front of each work face, a scaffolding space is created to indicate the space occupied by placing the scaffolding system. A work space is also created to indicate the space occupied by construction workers. Even though these spaces can be used for the visualization of spaces and many analyses such as spatial conflict analysis, our research only used scaffolding spaces to contain the geometric and non-geometric information that are essential for designing and planning scaffolding systems.

In order to assess the performance of the geometric reasoning approach, we applied the algorithm to several test case studies. Fig. 10
                            illustrates the process of detecting work faces from a part of a realistic BIM. The model, created in Tekla® Structure, is a three-story building model that is composed of three slabs and two wall objects. In the work face detection step, the geometric reasoning system extracts all the faces from the targeted objects (walls) and subdivides them into multiple faces depending on the qualitative relationship between the slabs. Each interior face in the test model was subdivided into three faces because of the two slabs which exist between the bottom and top of the face. Two exterior faces and six interior faces were detected in this step. Next, all work faces were detected by merging the faces. As a result of the test implementation, one exterior work face and three interior work faces were detected from the configuration of two walls and three slabs which coincides with the realistic perception about the situation. Depending on an architect’s design, the same geometric condition as the tested model can be created using different numbers and sizes of walls and slabs. However, the developed geometric reasoning algorithm detects the same work faces by automatically deciding how object faces are decomposed and recomposed.


                           Fig. 11
                            illustrates the scaffolding system planning procedure for a detected work face. As a result of the rule-based geometry interpretation, each work face contains a set of new information. The information includes geometric information, relational information, and task information: the geometric information explains the location, height, length, orientation of the work face; the relational information explains if the work face is attached to other objects such as floors or ceilings; and task information contains the information about schedule task and the stakeholder in charge.

The geometric information can include more detailed information such as openings and curved surfaces that should be considered for scaffolding design.

The floor slab adjacent to bottom of the work face is identified as a result of the geometric reasoning. The scaffolding height of each work face can then be calculated by subtracting the z-coordinate of the floor slab from the z-coordinate of the top of the work face. If the calculated scaffolding height was greater than the pre-defined value, the planning system generated a scaffolding system inside the scaffolding space. However, the developed system provides an alert – as required by the OSHA regulation – that only registered professional engineers can design scaffolding systems higher than 125 feet [36].

The generation of the scaffolding system designs followed a top-down modeling approach that transforms a scaffolding space to a scaffolding system design (see Fig. 11). After the work faces were detected, they were represented as the scaffolding spaces in front of them. The scaffolding design then replaced the scaffolding spaces. Furthermore, a three dimensional point array was created based on the height, width, and length of a scaffolding space. These points were used as the input for the generation of scaffolding materials such as pipes, boards, guardrails, and toe-boards.

The scaffolding elements were visualized using the following steps. A pipe element was created using start point, end point, and radius (see Fig. 12
                           ). Likewise, four contour points were used to describe the boundary a scaffolding board. The spacing of the points was decided according to the OSHA regulations related to scaffolding material spacing. For example, a light duty scaffold should have its posts to be spaced equal to or less than six feet apart horizontally and have the runners to be spaced within 6.6 feet vertically [37]. The intended load for each scaffolding system was left for the user as input.

After creating the 3D point array, the pipes and boards were created complying with other scaffolding design regulations such as guardrails for fall protection, cross bracing, longitudinal bracing (as specified in [36]). All the elements created for each scaffolding system were grouped as assemblies. Using the assemblies of scaffolding systems as the input, scaffolding material reports can be generated that are currently in use by the industry. Commercially-available BIM packages such as Tekla® Structure have functions and templates to create various types reports. The developed system uses the Application Programming Interface (API) of Tekla® Structure to automatically generate the report of the required materials to each scaffolding system design. As a result, a material quantity report can be created for each scaffolding system.

In addition, the detected work faces were linked into sets of linked work faces. Work faces that were geometrically close were grouped together if they can be considered as a set of work faces where construction workers need to work on continuously.

Finally, the scaffolding systems were automatically linked to the construction schedule as shown in a test case in Fig. 13
                           . The existing capabilities of Tekla® Structure were used to visualize the construction sequence incorporating the scaffolding systems and to assists pro-active procurement of scaffolding system materials by automatically notifying the upcoming needs. Tekla® Structure visualizes the construction sequence by creating the virtual links between construction activities and set of building objects to be constructed by the activities. The developed system enables the visualization of the scaffolding systems by creating the links between the building objects to be constructed and the assemblies of the scaffolding system elements to be placed in front of the building objects. Fig. 14
                            also includes an automatically generated bill of materials for one of the generated scaffolding systems.

After experimentation with various test models, the rule-based scaffolding planning system was implemented and validated in a BIM used on a life construction project. The model for a hospital extension is shown in Fig. 15
                     . The three-story medical facility used scaffolding systems extensively for exterior work, for example, bricklaying and curtain wall installation. Especially when working at larger heights (typically above six feet), scaffolding systems provide a safe elevation to the assigned work crews. Five brick laying activities at the north, east, south, and west faces and the roof of the facility were posted in the construction schedule. These tasks also included some brick laying work along several walls on the roof surface. The activities towards constructing a brick wall were coordinated by linking the activity to the building objects (done manually by the architect/engineer). As described in the previous section, the geometric reasoning algorithm was applied to analyze the site conditions using the geometric properties of every wall object and its relative position to the adjacent walls and slabs.

In the vast majority of the cases, the developed geometric reasoning algorithm successfully detected work faces from the building model. It also correctly connected the detected work faces so that the adjacent scaffolding joined in practical and economical ways. The result shown in Fig. 16
                      was finally visualized in the BIM of the medical facility using scaffolding models of a standard pipe and board scaffolding system. For those work faces which had height values smaller than a user-defined value, only the potential scaffolding spaces were highlighted. The BIM before and after the geometric reasoning algorithm was applied is shown in Figs. 15 and 16, respectively. Finally, the scaffolding systems and scaffolding spaces were incorporated into the construction schedule, and the building and scaffolding components were color-coded in an existing 4D schedule visualization tool (see Fig. 17
                     ). The 4D construction simulation containing the scaffolding systems has the capability to alert the users about forecasted needs for scaffolding through color-coded visualization and automatically generated bill of materials.

The developed algorithm detected 80 work faces from 61 wall objects. More details to the results are summarized in Table 2
                     . While the manual count of work faces that actually exist in the model was 84, only 72 (85%) were recognized correctly. The geometric reasoning algorithm yielded eight false positives (work faces were detected which were not required or detected in incorrect shapes). In addition, four false negatives were detected (the algorithm did not detect the work faces that were required).

The eight false positives were due to the lack of the algorithm to detect and solve for complex spatial conditions; for example: where a work face has other scaffolding spaces or building objects in front of or adjacent to it. The four false negatives were due to portions of the slabs intersecting partially with the faces of the walls. The success rate of the developed algorithm thus largely depends on the complexity of the provided model. Complex geometric conditions such as irregular floor levels or shapes intersecting at the same point in the model impact currently the performance of automatically generated solutions like the presented one here.

Other issues were observed, for example: some of the detected work faces adjacent to each other resulted in overlapping scaffolding spaces or collisions with building objects. These imperfections of the developed algorithm lead to the generation of impractical scaffolding design solutions. Although these issues were experienced, applying existing collision detection checking algorithms could solve the problem of at least identifying the location of the imperfection. Future research must focus on computational algorithm development that can solve for complex shapes which are likely to occur often in building information models.

The presented case study further identified potential constructability issues in scaffolding design and construction. Among the linked work faces identified on the roof of the medical building model, some were smaller than two feet wide. Since the scaffolding heights were also smaller than the pre-defined value, such scaffolding spaces in front of these work faces were highlighted and no scaffolding systems were applied. Although in this case no scaffold was required, slightly taller work faces which then would require a scaffold, would make it impractical to install a standard scaffolding system. Since the width would exceed the available two feet in this narrow space, more costly lifting methods (e.g., scissor lift) may need to be applied should alternative design solutions be rejected. As demonstrated, architectural and engineering design decision may in the future be guided by what construction methods are effective and efficient and given the availability of existing rule checking systems as developed in the presented approach.

In summary, a rule for scaffolding system placement was developed and translated into a machine-readable computer code. Algorithms automatically analyzed a model’s geometry and generated scaffolding system designs according to the geometry and schedule. The developed rule-based system for temporary facilities was successfully implemented on a test and a realistic building model. The results indicate success of the developed algorithms if geometries in the BIM are simple, though difficulties of the developed algorithm were detected when it had to handle complex and irregular shapes and arrangements of walls and floors. Adapting approaches like this work presents assists various practical tasks needed in pro-active engineering and management of temporary facilities, such as planning scaffolding systems thoroughly before they are installed on construction sites, forecasting the quantity needs of such systems, the length in a construction schedule, and benchmarking field installations to estimate the cost, quantity, and schedule of required scaffolding materials on future projects.

@&#DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS@&#

This work presented the framework, algorithms, and tests for automatically designing and planning scaffolding systems as part of Building Information Models (BIM). Previous efforts led by the construction industry and academia were usually concentrated on providing methods to properly design temporary facilities. However, the developed approach extends the range of automation to the identification of required scaffolding systems, generation of the corresponding designs, and generation of various utilization reports. The major contribution of the presented research is therefore in the automation of the process in design and planning of scaffolding systems. The geometric and non-geometric conditions and construction schedule were interpreted automatically based on pre-defined rules or commonly known and applied best industry practices. Thus, potentially, accurate plans for scaffolding systems can be generated in the future more consistently and assist or reduce the error-prone manual efforts eventually more significantly.

The proposed system also visualizes the temporary facilities in existing BIM software – in particular tube-and-board scaffolding systems – as well as the work spaces occupied by it. Such visualization can increase a project stakeholder’s awareness about work tasks and spaces that occur concurrently and are likely to cause time or space conflicts among competing crews. By increasing the project participants’ awareness, planning errors and hazardous situations arising from temporary facility uses can be realized and corrected before such situations take place, particularly during field implementation. In addition, the developed system is able to estimate the required materials for scaffolding systems to aid decision makers by providing more predictable quantity-based takeoffs in BIM. While construction companies and temporary facility vendors and suppliers have their own databases, they typically apply a “rule-of-thumb” approach for estimating quantities and schedules. The presented approach has a potential to provide them with more quantifiable means and methods. Such more accurate quantity-takeoff can potentially lead to project cost savings and as explained, in higher efficiency of work task execution and constructability.

There are limitations to the developed approach that must be overcome in order to realize its full potential. First, complex and unexpected project conditions as they often exist on construction sites can – at least with the current version of the developed approach – not be satisfactorily handled. As such, objects or their attributes that are often not represented accurately in the model create problems; for example, irregular ground conditions that are not modeled today. Today’s scaffolding designs derived from a BIM model may further require modifications to fit into the existing site conditions of the construction site.

In addition, the proposed framework relies on the assumption that the building model and construction schedule are available. As it is commonly known, building renovation projects often require scaffolding systems, but digital building models are rarely ever available unless drawn for this purpose. For such projects, a building model has to be created first and may require accurate dimensions. Laser scanning and other sensing technology might offer a solution by providing such realistic and accurate as-built conditions to generate a building model.

Future research may focus as well on developing more comprehensive rules for detecting required scaffolding systems from complex building geometry. Accordingly, more sophisticated algorithms should be developed to evaluate various geometric conditions and to generate corresponding scaffolding designs. Other potential exists on focusing on scaffolding systems for specific work tasks that often require scaffolds, such as masonry construction and painting. The proposed approach of automating temporary facility planning can further provide such tangible benefits if it is customized for the characteristics of different construction activities.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

