@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Computational exploration of microRNAs from expressed sequence tags of Humulus lupulus, target predictions and expression analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Twenty-two miRNAs belonging to 17 miRNA families were identified in hop following comparative computational approach and EST-based homology search according to a series of filtering criteria.


                        
                        
                           
                           The total of 47 potential miRNA targets were identified for predicted 22 miRNAs.


                        
                        
                           
                           The new miRNAs identified in this study should enable investigation of the complexity of miRNA-mediated genes network in understanding their roles in regulating growth, development, metabolism, and other physiological processes.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

microRNA




                     Humulus lupulus




                  

Comparative genomics

Posttranscriptional gene regulation

Expressed sequence tags

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Among computationally predicted and experimentally validated plant miRNAs, several are conserved across species boundaries in the plant kingdom. In this study, a combined experimental-in silico computational based approach was adopted for the identification and characterization of miRNAs in Humulus lupulus (hop), which is widely cultivated for use by the brewing industry and apart from, used as a medicinal herb. A total of 22 miRNAs belonging to 17 miRNA families were identified in hop following comparative computational approach and EST-based homology search according to a series of filtering criteria. Selected miRNAs were validated by end-point PCR and quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR), confirmed the existence of conserved miRNAs in hop. Based on the characteristic that miRNAs exhibit perfect or nearly perfect complementarity with their targeted mRNA sequences, a total of 47 potential miRNA targets were identified in hop. Strikingly, the majority of predicted targets were belong to transcriptional factors which could regulate hop growth and development, including leaf, root and even cone development. Moreover, the identified miRNAs may also be involved in other cellular and metabolic processes, such as stress response, signal transduction, and other physiological processes. The cis-regulatory elements relevant to biotic and abiotic stress, plant hormone response, flavonoid biosynthesis were identified in the promoter regions of those miRNA genes. Overall, findings from this study will accelerate the way for further researches of miRNAs, their functions in hop and shows a path for the prediction and analysis of miRNAs to those species whose genomes are not available.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Hop (Humulus lupulus L., Cannabaceae) is a dioecious, rhizomatous, twining perennial flowering plant, native to Europe, western Asia and North America. Lupulin glands of hop cones (female inflorescences) are composed of biosynthetic cells that secret a specific but complex metabolites consisting mainly of terpenophenolics (hop bitter acids and prenylflavonoids) and terpenoids (essential oil components), which serve essential raw ingredient in beer, contributing the distinctive bitterness, flavour and aroma, as well as preservative activity (Matoušek et al., 2006). In addition, hop has been traditionally used for variety of health benefits that lately has been confirmed through research. Among these health benefits from hops include relaxation and sleep inducer, anti-inflammatory effect, estrogenic effect, antioxidant activity and as an anti-tumor properties (Van Cleemput et al., 2009). Until recently limited progress has been made in basic gene discovery and gene regulation in hop, and none of the miRNAs have been reported. Understanding gene function and their regulatory mechanisms could provide new insight into the mechanisms of hop growth and development, the response to environmental abiotic/biotic stresses and particularly on cones initiation and development.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a subset of endogenous approximate 22 nucleotide (nt) small non-coding regulatory RNA molecules that regulate gene expression post-transcriptionally by mediating mRNA degradation or translational repression in a sequence specific manner (Filipowicz et al., 2008). In plants, most miRNA genes are intergenic and transcribed individually from their own region, but a few genes are organized into polycistronic transcription units and co-transcribed from a single promoter at the end of a miRNA gene cluster (Voinnet, 2009). Like other RNAs and protein-coding genes, miRNA genes are transcribed by RNA polymerase II (Pol II) in which the general transcriptional co-activator and mediator are used to recruit Pol II to miRNA gene promoters for transcription initiation (Kim et al., 2011). Increasing evidence suggests that miRNAs play pivotal roles in multiple biological processes in plants, especially controlling tissue (leaf, root, stem, and flower) differentiation and development, self-negative feedback regulation of metabolism, phase transition from vegetative growth to reproductive growth. signal transduction and response to environmental conditions such as biotic/abiotic stresses (Lakhotia et al., 2014), including nutrient stresses, for example, phosphorus starvation (Gu et al., 2010), nitrogen starvation (Zhao et al., 2011), and micronutrient deficiency or toxicity (Valdes-Lopez et al., 2010). Considering the importance of miRNAs several approaches have been established for identifying miRNAs in various plant species, such as, direct cloning, small RNA (sRNA) high-throughput sequencing by next generation sequencer (NGS) and computational prediction. Since some miRNAs are expressed at a low level and the expression of many miRNAs has spatio-temporal specificity, it is difficult to clone low-abundance miRNAs through direct cloning approach (Llave et al., 2002). High-throughput sequencing of sRNA has great promise to generate an accurate and comprehensive picture of the sRNA transcriptome in different plants, tissues, and at different developmental stages. Meanwhile, such a tool provides the direct way of discovering miRNAs as well as to quantify them, some of which facilitates the investigation of sRNA populations in economically important species which lack complete genome information. It is a high throughput and simple method, but costly for miRNA discovery (Martin et al., 2013).

A comparative genomics study across phylogenetically distant taxa has shown that many miRNAs are highly evolutionarily conserved in the plant and animal kingdom (Axtell et al., 2006). This feature of extensive evolutionary conservation of these miRNAs among themselves renders a powerful approach to their identification using computational based approaches. On the basis of this strategy, researchers developed an expressed sequence tag (EST) and a genome survey sequence (GSS) approach to identify miRNAs (Zhang et al., 2005) from plants or even from various animals. EST analysis has some substantial advantages over the other approaches such as: (1) conserved miRNAs can be identified without whole genome sequences, (2) direct evidence for miRNA expression could be obtained without genomic sequence surveys, and (3) miRNA identification can be conducted without highly specialized software. Based on this approach, thousands of miRNAs have been systematically identified in more than 42 plant species, including many important plant and agricultural crop species, such as maize (Zhang et al., 2006a), wheat (Han et al., 2009), soybean (Chen et al., 2009), tobacco (Frazier et al., 2010), potato (Xie et al., 2011) and Asiatic cotton (Wang et al., 2012).

In this study, we employed a comparative genome-based homology search to identify miRNAs in hop using their current expressed sequence tags (ESTs) available in the NCBI GenBank database. The new miRNAs identified in this study would enable investigation of the complexity of miRNA-mediated genes network in understanding their roles in regulating growth, development, metabolism, and other physiological processes such as cone development and transcriptional factors (TFs) involved in secondary metabolic pathway including a prenylflavonid, xanthohumol which has various useful biological activity (Matoušek et al., 2006).

The known plant miRNA sequences from Arabidopsis, Brassica, Glycine, Saccharum, Sorghum, Vitis, Solanum, Oryza, Triticum, Chlamydomonas, and other plant species were downloaded from the miRNA database miRBase (http://www.mirbase.org/) (miRBase version 21.0, accessed June 2014) and plant microRNA database (http://bioinformatics.cau.edu.cn/PMRD/). After removing redundant sequences, the unique sequences were used as reference miRNA set for identification of hop miRNAs using Blastn searches. Hop expressed sequence tags (ESTs), cDNAs, and mRNAs were downloaded from the GenBank nucleotide databases from the National Centre for Biotechnology Information (NCBI). Currently, a total of 25,692 hop ESTs are available in the NCBI EST database (dbEST release 130101, January 1, 2013; http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/dbEST/dbEST_summary.html). Comparative software mpiBLAST-1.6.0 (Darling et al., 2003) consist of core algorithm similar to BLAST-2.2.22 of NCBI GenBank (Altschul et al., 1997) was downloaded and set up locally. To predict the secondary structure of pre-miRNA, Zuker folding algorithm software MFOLD 3.2 (http://mfold.rna.albany.edu/?q=mfold/RNA-Folding-Form) was used online to analyze the secondary structure and calculating the minimum free energy (Zuker, 2003).

The mature sequences of all currently available plant miRNAs after removing redundant sequence were subjected to a Blastn search against all of the currently available hop EST sequences using mpiBLAST-1.6.0 algorithm in Linux based 32 core cluster system. Adjusted blast parameter settings were as follows: (1) the default word-match size between query and database sequences was set at seven; (2) the expected values were set at 1000 to increase the hit chance for more potential sequences and (3) the sequence number of the BLASTn search and the sequence alignments were set to 1000. If only a partial reference mature miRNA sequence was aligned to a EST sequence, the non-aligned parts were manually inspected and compared to determine the number of matching nucleotides. These sequences were considered as potential miRNA candidates only if they fullfil the following criteria with slight modification from a previous study (Zhang et al., 2007): (1) at least 18–22nt length was assumed between the predicted mature miRNAs, and (2) allowed to have 0–4nt mismatches in sequence with all previously known plant mature miRNAs. These whole EST sequences were used for BLASTx analysis using NCBI BLAST+2.2.29 against NCBI nr (non-redundant protein) database for removing the protein-coding sequences and retaining only the non-protein coding sequences (Altschul et al., 1997). In total, 47 EST sequences were found to be non-protein coding sequences.

The secondary structure of candidate pre-miRNA sequences of these potential miRNA homologs was predicted using the Zuker folding algorithm with MFOLD-3.2 (Zuker, 2003). All parameters were set to default values. All outputs obtained from mfold were recorded into an excel file, which included the EST ID numbers, respective miRNA homologs, total length of the sequences, the number of each nucleotide (A, G, C and U), the number of arms per structure, location of the matching regions, percentage (%) of (A+U/T) and (G+C) content and minimal folding free energy (MFE, DG in kcal/mol). Then, the adjusted minimal folding free energy (AMFE) [AMFE=(MFE/length of a potential pre-miRNA)×100] and the minimal folding free energy index (MFEI) [MFEI=AMFE/(G+C)%, where (G+C)% represents% GC content over pre-miRNA sequence] were calculated according to a previous report (Zhang et al., 2006b). An EST was considered a miRNA candidate when it fit all of the following criteria: (1) the predicted mature miRNAs had no more than three nucleotide substitutions compared with a known mature miRNAs; (2) the EST sequence could fold into an appropriate stem-loop hairpin secondary structure; (3) the mature miRNA was localized in one arm of the stem-loop structure; (4) there was no loop or break in the miRNA or miRNA* sequences; (5) there were no more than 6 mismatches between the predicted mature miRNA sequence and its opposite miRNA* sequence in the secondary structure; and (6) the predicted secondary structure had high negative MFE and high MFEI value. Candidate miRNAs met the criteria were further scanned to remove repeated sequences and the remaining list was used for subsequent analysis (Jones-Rhoades and Bartel, 2004).

A homology search of candidate hop miRNA was done against all plant miRNAs using a Bioedit sequence alignment (clustalW) editor tool (version 7.0.9.0) (Hall, 1999) allowing maximum of two mismatches and e-value <0.001. The corresponding precursor sequences of sRNAs homologs were identified and were aligned with hop miRNA homologs using Jalview 2.6.1 (Waterhouse et al., 2009). A query of hop sRNAs against known miRNA families (miRBase, release 21) allowed us to predict the family of hop miRNAs. The maximum likelihood trees were constructed based on the Tamura-Nei model (Tamura and Nei, 1993) with default bootstrap values using MEGA5.0 (Tamura et al., 2011) to illustrate the evolutionary relationships with other members of the same or different family.

The Dana-Farber Cancer Institute (DFCI) Plant Gene Index datasets was used for hop miRNA targets discovery (http://compbio.dfci.harvard.edu/tgi/). Prediction of candidate miRNA targets was done using psmiRNATarget (psRNAtarget, http://plantgrnnoble.org/psRNATarget/) with following parameters: (1) maximum expectation value 3; (2) multiplicity of target sites 2; (3) range of central mismatch for translational inhibition 9–11 nucleotide; (4) maximum mismatches at the complementary site ≤4 without any gaps. psRNA Target provides reverse complementary matching between miRNAs and its target transcript and finds the target site accessibility by calculating unpaired energy (UPE) necessary for opening the secondary structure around the miRNA target site (Dai and Zhao, 2011). The functional assignment of predicted target genes were performed by using COGnitor program against the Clusters of Orthologous Groups of proteins (COG) database (Tatusov et al., 2001) (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/COG/).

For promoter prediction, draft genome sequence of hop was downloaded from the European nucleotide archive (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/data/search?query=Humulus+lupulus). The 1000bp upstream promoter regions from the 5′-end of the entire hairpin structure of miRNA precursor sequence of each predicted miRNA genes were used for cis-regulatory elements analysis. Promoters were predicted by the plant promoter identification program TSSP (http://www.softberry.com), which is designed for predicting plant Pol II promoters (Shahmuradov et al., 2005). The predictions were performed at the default TSSP settings. Potential promoter regions from transcription start site (TSS) to 800bp upstream were obtained to predict the potential cis-acting elements and motifs. If there were overlapping TSSs in the selected region, only the sequence between the two TSSs was analyzed to exclude redundancy (Liu et al., 2010). The PlantCARE database (http://bioinformatics.psb.ugent.be/webtools/plantcare/html), a database of plant cis-acting regulatory elements (Lescot et al., 2002), was used to analyze the cis-acting elements of the miRNAs.

The predicted hop miRNAs were validated using stem-loop RT-PCR and End-point PCR according to the previous report (Varkonyi-Gasic et al., 2007). A stem-loop-containing RT primer with its 5′ end complementary to target the miRNA’s last six nucleotides at the 3′ end was designed. Small RNA was extracted from leaves, root and cones tissues of hop Osvald's clone 72 (also known as Saaz), which was grown under natural field conditions in Hop Research Institute in Žatec (Northern Bohemia, Czech Republic), using PureLink™ miRNA Isolation Kit (Invitrogen, Czech Republic). After measuring the concentration and quality of the miRNAs, 200ng of miRNA was used to reverse transcribe a miRNA into cDNA using a miRNA-specific stem-loop primer and the SuperScript™ III Reverse Transcriptase (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Reverse transcription (RT) reactions (20μl) consisted of 2μl of miRNA, 50nM stem-loop RT primer, 0.25mM each of dNTPs, 50 units reverse transcriptase, 1× reverse transcriptase buffer, 10mM DTT, and 4 units RNase inhibitor. The reactions were incubated for 30min at 16°C, followed by pulsed RT of 60 cycles at 30°C for 30s, 42°C for 30s, and 50°C for 1s. Pulsed RT reactions provide better detection sensitivity compared with non-pulsed reactions (Tang et al., 2003). Reactions were terminated by incubating at 85°C for 5min to inactivate the reverse transcriptase. U6, one of the uniformly expressed sRNAs, was used as the internal control for stem-loop RT-PCR. All the oligos used in this study were listed in supplemental table (Table S1).

End-point PCR 20μl reaction mixture consisted of 1μl of RT product, 0.25μM each miRNA-specific forward primer and universal reverse primer, 0.6 units of Hot Start Ex Taq polymerase (TaKaRa Bio), 1× Taq buffer, 200μM dNTPs mixture. The amplifications were carried out in thermal cycler (Bio-Rad) with an initial denaturing step at 94°C for 2min, followed by 40 cycles of 95°C for 15s and 60°C for 1min. The product size was confirmed by melting analysis and 4% agarose gel electrophoresis.

Quantitative real time PCR (qRT-PCR) was performed on an iQ5™ Real-Time PCR Systems (Bio-Rad). For each reaction, 20μL PCR reaction mixtures were prepared and each contained 2μL of RT product from the reverse-transcription reaction, 0.5μM miRNA-specific forward primer and stem-loop reverse primer, 1× Universal SYBR® Green PCR Master Mix (Invitrogen). Amplification curves were generated with an initial denaturing step at 95°C for 10min, followed by 45 cycles of 95°C for 15s and 60°C for 60s. Melting curves were generated using the following program: PCR products were denatured at 95°C and cooled to 65°C at the rate of 20°C per second to determine the specificity of each reaction. The fluorescence signals at a wavelength of 530nm were then monitored continuously from 65°C to 95°C as the temperature was increased at the rate of 0.2°C per second. All reactions were performed in triplicate and a control reaction without template was performed for each miRNA. The threshold cycle (C
                        T) values were determined automatically by the instrument and the fold changes of each miRNA gene were calculated as relative quantity (RQ) values using the comparative C
                        T(2−ΔΔCt) method (Schmittgen and Livak, 2008)

@&#RESULTS@&#

After circumspectly considering the BLASTn and Blastx searches as described in Materials and Methods, 47 unique EST sequences were identified that fulfilled the screening criteria for miRNA candidates. MFOLD 3.1 program was used for secondary structure evaluation of identified 47 unique EST sequences. The results obtained by MFOLD were inspected manually for determining the sequence of a miRNA precursor and appropriate stem-loop structure using the criteria described in material and methods. Finally, we identified 22 potential miRNA from hop EST sequences (Table 1
                         and Fig. 1
                        ). The predicted miRNAs were named according to their name in database (Griffiths-Jones et al., 2006). The mature sequences are designated ‘miR’ and the precursor hairpins are labelled as ‘MIR’ with the prefix ‘hop’ for H. lupulus. The hop miRNAs were classified into 17 different miRNAs families. Important to note that, the distribution of miRNAs was not even among the miRNA families. Some miRNA families had more hop miRNAs than others. For example, four and three members were identified in the miRNA 414 and miRNA 169 families while only a single hop miRNA was found in the majority of miRNA families. This could be due to limited number of available 25,692 ESTs of hop in the NCBI database.

The miRNA candidates identified in hop had different nucleotide identity ratios and related genetic distances compared with previously known miRNAs. The majority of the identified mature hop miRNAs had 2 to 4 nucleotide changes as compared with miRNAs in other plant species. The others showed phylogenetic distant and low nucleotide identity to known one (Fig. 2
                        ). The Jalview (2.6.1) alignment of miRNAs precursor sequences revealed maximum conservation among sequences in the stem region of the hairpin structures within the same miRNA family. Moreover, sequence diversity was observed in miRNA precursor sequences between hop and other plant species. The phylogenetic tree revealed that 22 precursor sequences of hop clustered with their homologues from other plants. The paralogous precursors of hop-miR-414, hop-miR-414a, hop-miR-414b and hop-miR-414f genes formed a cluster, indicating that they had evolved via local multiplication events. The same pattern was also found for hop-miR-169, hop-miR-169 v and hop-miR-169n (Fig. 2).

All the identified miRNAs were obtained from the plus strand. Among the 22 identified hop miRNAs, 15 miRNAs (68.18%) were found to be located on the 5′ arm of the hairpin secondary structure, whereas the remaining 7 miRNAs (31.81%) were found to be located on the 3′ arm (Fig. 1). The length of mature miRNAs varied from 19 to 22nt at an average of 19.86±0.86 nucleotides. The length of identified miRNA precursor sequences varied among identified miRNAs. The predicted precursor sequences length ranged from 98 to 501 nt with an average of 312±133nt (Table 2
                        ) and most of them (54.55%) had 100–300nt precursor sequence length. The percentage composition of each nucleotide was not evenly distributed in the identified hop pre-miRNAs (Table 1), which is in consensus with miRNAs previously found in other plants (Chen et al., 2009; Frazier et al., 2010; Wang et al., 2012). The U content in the identified hop pre-miRNAs varied from 18.5% to 46.1% with an average of 34.17±7.07% (Table 2); which is significantly higher than the content of other nucleotides, particularly much higher than nucleotides C (15.57±5.7%) and G (22.58±6.6%). A majority of pre-miRNAs (95.5%) contained more than 25% of the nucleotide U. Hop pre-miRNAs showed low GC content (38.16±6.5%) and high AU content (61.76±6.7%) (Table 2). The average A/U and C/G ratio were 0.86 and 0.76 respectively, showing that G and U nucleotide were distributed predominantly in the pre-miRNA sequences

The MFE of the 22 identified hop pre-miRNAs varied from −30.60 to −186.48kcal/mol with an average of −104.30±50.19kcal/mol (Table 2). The AMFE of the 22 identified hop pre-miRNAs ranged from −26.92 to −47.96kcal/mol with an average of −33.20±4.97kcal/mol. About 91% of the pre-miRNAs have AMFE values with −20 to −40kcal/mol (Table 1). The MFEI of the identified hop pre-miRNAs ranged from 0.81 to 0.96 with an average of 0.87±0.05 (Table 2).

The total of 47 potential targets for the 22 identified miRNA in hop was identified based on the criterion that miRNAs show perfect or near-perfect complementarity to their target mRNA sequences (Table 3
                        ). The results of PsmiRNATarget analysis indicated that individual miRNAs can regulate more than one target genes as previously suggested (Lai et al., 2012). The 47 potential miRNA targets were classified into different gene families with various biological functions, including the control of hop development, signal transduction, phase change, metabolism, protein translocation, and responses to biotic/abiotic stresses. It is interesting to note that 9 hop miRNA families have been predicted to target variety of transcription factors (TFs), which are involved in development and phase change from vegetative growth to reproductive growth such as hop-miR-394 and hop-miR-414a were predicted to target gene encodes for MYBPA1 and bZIP TFs respectively. Hop-miR-169v and hop-miR-169n were predicted to target gene encodes for nuclear transcription factor Y. In addition, hop-miR-414, hop-miR-1507 and hop-miR-1507, hop-miR-3843-5p were predicted to target gene encodes for zinc finger C3HC4 and WRKY27 TFs, respectively.

Related to other cellular processes involved in response to environmental stress, hop-miRf12247-akr, hop-miR-414a and hop-miR-5653 were predicted to target aquaporin encoding gene, TINY (Dehydration-responsive element-binding proteins), and dirigent protein-like family genes respectively. Several other predicted targets genes for hop miRNAs were classified into different cellular processes, including metabolic pathways, protein degradation, vesicle trafficking, ion transport and signal transduction such as hop-miR-5658 was predicted to target gene encoding kinase domain of BAK1-receptor, receptor-like protein kinase and Zinc finger (CCCH-type) protein. Hop-miR-7890-3p and hop-miR-414b were predicted to target gene encoding IDS4-like protein and Rho GDP dissociation inhibitor respectively.

Another important part of the predicted targets were various kinds of enzymes such as Serine acetyltransferase, Aldo/keto reductase family-like protein, Sucrose synthase, Aldehyde dehydrogenase, Acetolactate synthase and Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase, which might play roles in various metabolic pathways (Table 3). Hop-miR-5658 and hop-miR-3434 were predicted to target gene encoding CDC48 protein. Interestingly, hop-miR-414 was predicted to act on unique target retrotransposon (Ty3-gypsy sub-class).

To understand transcriptional regulation of hop miRNAs, cis-regulatory elements within the upstream sequences up to 1000 bp from the 5′-end of the entire hairpin structure of hop miRNA precursor sequence were surveyed by using PlantCARE. As expected, promoter regions of all miRNA genes have been found to contain a TATA-box (a core promoter sequence served for initiation of the transcription process) and a CAAT-box (a common cis-element in promoter and enhancer regions) confirming that miRNA genes were transcribed by RNA Polymerase II similar to other protein-coding genes (Fig. 2) (Cui et al., 2008). The cis-regulatory element involved in light responsiveness (GATA-box) were found to be more prevalent among the regions found on miRNA genes. Table 4
                         shows known stress-responsive elements, such as pyrimidine-box (a cis-regulatory element involved in transcription response to gibberellins and abscisic acid), ARR1AT-box (binding element for cytokinin response regulator) and other stress-relevant elements (Rizhsky et al., 2004) such as P-box, GARE motifs (a cis-element involved in gibberellin responsiveness), W-box and WRKY-box (a cis-element involved in pathogen defence, but also possibly involved in other activities). The cis-regulatory elements for phytohormone responses were also found in promoter region of various hop miRNA genes (Table 4). Interestingly, 5 hop miRNAs (hop-miR-394, hop-miR-412, hop-miRf10947-akr, hop-miR-1166, hop-miR-319 and hop-miR-5653) were found to contain putative GARE in its promoter region. Since GARE motifs mediate the balancing between the level of transcription factor and miRNA expression in Arabidopsis (Meng et al., 2011) and thus these five hop miRNAs might regulate itself through the similar feedback circuit. Moreover, the promoter analysis also showed that WRKY-box, MYB-box and bZIP box, cis-elements recognized by TFs are widely distributed 1kb upstream sequence of hop miRNAs.

In order to validate the expression of predicted miRNAs, 12 miRNAs (hop-miRf12247-akr, hop-miR-394, hop-miRf10947-akr, hop-miR-169, hop-miR-169v, hop-miR-4993, hop-miR-3434, hop-miR-169n, hop-miR-414, hop-miR-414a hop-miR-5653 and hop-miR-5288) were randomly selected for experimental validation by using a stem-loop RT-PCR with specific primer sets which were designed to amplify 60-70bp fragments specifically. The designed primer for specific detection of miRNAs yielded 60–70bp fragments in the gel (Fig. 3
                        ). Each amplified fragments from miRNAs were confirmed by sequencing. Furthermore, RT-PCR analysis showed that the expression of hop-miR-394 and hop-miR-169 were specifically restricted in leaf and cone (Fig. 4
                        ). Of the 12 miRNAs detected, six miRNAs (hop-miRf12247-akr, hop-miR-169, hop-miR-3434, hop-miR-169n, hop-miR-5653 and hop-miR-5288) were expressed significantly higher in young leaves than in roots and cones while two of them (hop-miR-394 and hop-miR-414a) were expressed higher in cones (Fig. 4). Differential expression of the hop miRNAs implies their involvements in various physiological and developmental processes.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Hop is an economically important crop, that has drawn more attention in recent years due to its potential pharmaceutical applications (Castro et al., 2008), in spite of that information of hop miRNA genes and their association with various biological processes are widely unexploited.

The conserved nature of miRNA indicates its conserved function in plants. miRNA genes in plants were considered to have evolved from inverted duplication of their target genes (Christopher et al., 2006), duplication of pre-existing miRNA genes with subsequent mutations (Li and Mao, 2007), spontaneous mutations from hairpin structures in the genome (De Felippes et al., 2008) and from transposable elements, in particular miniature inverted repeat transposable elements (Nozawa et al., 2012). The major constraint in the computational identification of miRNAs in many crop plants is the unavailability of genome sequence data and in this case EST based homology search method offer better option to identify miRNAs. This approach has many advantages over the other two approaches for miRNA cloning, namely forward genetics and direct cloning (e.g., library construction and high-throughput sequencing) (Jones-Rhoades et al., 2006). First of all, there is no specialized software required, it can be used to identify miRNAs in any species if they have registered EST sequences and EST analysis also provide direct evidence for miRNA expression as they are derived from transcribed sequences (Frazier and Zhang, 2011).

Here we identified hop miRNAs based on the characteristic parameters for miRNAs, including pre-miRNA length, AU content, and MFEI according to previous findings (Frazier et al., 2010). Unlike animal miRNAs whose precursors are usually less than 100 nt (Ambros, 2004), plant pre-miRNA length varies greatly and ranges from 60 to more than 600 nucleotides in plants (Xie et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2012). The length distribution of predicted pre-miRNA in hop justified the above criteria. Moreover, the A+U contents of the predicted hop pre-miRNAs are consistent with the previous notion that most miRNA precursors contain more A+U nucleotides than G+C (Frazier et al., 2010). In addition, the predicted miRNA hairpin structures showed that at least 12–21nt engaged in Watson-Crick or G/U pairings between the miRNA:miRNA duplexes in the stem region and do not contain large internal loops or bulges.

The MFE is an index for determining the secondary structure of nucleic acids such as DNA and RNA (Bonnet et al., 2004). The significant characteristic of pre-miRNAs is that they have higher MFEs as compared with some other types of RNA molecules, since they form a stable stem-loop structure (Bonnet et al., 2004). The predicted hop pre-miRNAs have higher MFEs values which are almost equal to the values of other plant precursor miRNAs. However, for a majority of hop pre-miRNAs, their MFE ranged from −30 to −100kcal/mol. A possible reason for causing the large variance in MFE is due to the significance variation of the length hop pre-miRNAs. Since MFE of RNA or DNA strands depends on their number, composition, and arrangement features of nucleotides, and thus MFE could not serve as important parameter for determining the stability of a RNA or DNA (Wang et al., 2012). MFEI is another useful criterion for distinguishing miRNAs from other types of coding and non-coding RNAs. The pre-miRNAs predicted had high MFEI values (−0.96 and −0.8), higher than other types of noncoding RNAs, e.g., tRNAs (0.64), rRNAs (0.59) and mRNAs (0.62–0.66) (Zhang et al., 2006b). Taken together, these data support that the hop miRNAs identified in this study are genuine miRNAs. Although miRNA mature sequences are highly evolutionarily conserved among different species, contrary to that, we found that a majority of identified mature hop miRNAs had 2–4 nucleotide changes as compared with miRNAs in other plant species. Several miRNAs (such as miR162 and miR164) evolutionally conserved among plants were not found in this study. This could be attributed to the fact that regionally-biased ESTs sequences retrieved from database from floral tissues only. In some other plants miRNAs are shown to express more frequently in the root and apical regions than the other parts (Breakfield et al., 2012). Moreover, organ-preferential and organ-specific miRNAs expression has been reported in several plant species such as Arabidopsis (Nag et al., 2009), peanut (Chi et al., 2011), bean (Peláez et al., 2012), chickpea (Jain et al., 2014). As more ESTs sequence from various tissues of hop including leaf and the root would become available in the database, it would be possible to identify some more conserved miRNAs in hop. In addition, we have observed the different degrees of sequence similarity among precursor sequences dataset from diverse plant species, mainly in the sequences flanking the region of mature miRNA used in this study suggesting that different members of the same miRNA family had evolved at different rates on lineage-specific manner.

For understanding the role of miRNAs in various cellular functions and gene regulation networks, identification of the miRNA target gene is crucial. The conserved nature of miRNAs in different organisms suggests their conserved function (Zhang et al., 2006a). The prediction of target genes for the hop miRNA in this study suggests that more than one gene are regulated by individual hop miRNA. This result shows similarity with some recent research in other plant species (Frazier et al., 2010; Xie et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2012) which also suggest that miRNA research should be focused on regulatory networks rather than individual connections between miRNA and their predicted target genes or regulatory factors. In fact, some miRNAs directly regulate target TF genes which are directly or indirectly involved in growth, development and metabolism of plants (Wang et al., 2012). These conserved miRNAs and their conserved target TFs again highlight their versatile functions, and further provide evidence of the phylogenetic distribution of miRNA families beyond species. Ty3/gypsy-like retrotransposon is ubiquitous in the plant kingdom throughout their genomes and considered to have contributed significantly to the evolution of genome structure and function. Occasionally, it acts as insulators and prevent transcription factor binding and retrotransposon expression (Bielskiene et al., 2009). Consideration with the report that huge number of putative Ty3-gypsy sequence (1542,274) was estimated in the draft hop genome (Natsume et al., 2015), hop-miR-414 has attracted considerable interest about its plausible involvement in the regulation of Ty3/gypsy-like retrotransposons.

The analysis of core promoters and cis-acting elements of identified 22 miRNAs showed the general features of their promoters and provided insights into their transcriptional regulation and functions in hop. As many studies indicate that characteristics of miRNAs promoters, including the relative frequencies of CpG, TATA box, TFs binding site, initiator elements and other chromatin signatures, are similar to that of promoter of protein-coding genes (Ozsolak et al., 2008), our results basically support the previous observations. Both the multiple types of cis-acting elements and the predicted target genes of these hop miRNAs indicate that hop miRNAs have diverse regulatory functions. For example, the hop-miR414 family has 13 types of cis-acting elements and regulates 14 target genes. This finding is consistent with previously reported study of miRNA family (gma-miRNA156) in soybean, which is comprised of 71 types of cis-acting elements and could regulate 27 target genes (Han et al., 2014).

We observed changes in gene expression of the 12 hop miRNAs in different tissues, suggesting their different roles in specific tissues. It should be noted that gene expression pattern of several hop miRNAs (hop-miR-394, hop-miR-414a and hop-miR-169) are different from that of other plants. The difference in expression patterns of the hop miRNAs suggests their involvements in specialized metabolisms and development characteristics to hop plant, is consistent with the previous notion that the expression pattern differ among different plants despite the structurally conserved nature of miRNAs (Yao et al., 2007). Hop cone with luplin gland is a special organ for accumulation of characteristic specialized metabolites such as terpenoids volatiles (major aromas in beer) and prenylflavonoid with health functionalities for human. Thus, it is of particular interest whether hop miRNAs influence these specialized metabolites by regulating target gene expression of regulatory TF or structural enzyme genes. Taken together, the knowledge gained from this research will provide an insight into hop miRNA-mediated gene networks which would undoubtedly be beneficial for the further researches of miRNAs function and regulatory mechanisms.

The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The work was supported by the project FP7-REGPOT-2012-2013-1 MODBIOLIN No. 316304, by Czech Science Foundation project (GACR 13-03037S) and by institutional support RVO:60077344.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2015.09.005.

The following are Supplementary data to this article:
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

