@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Pharmacoepidemiological characterization of drug-induced adverse reaction clusters towards understanding of their mechanisms

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Drugs and adverse reactions (ADRs) were clustered by a biclustering approach.


                        
                        
                           
                           ADR mechanisms were inferred for the clusters with drug indications.


                        
                        
                           
                           Some ADR cases were attributed to the patient's physiological backgrounds.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Adverse drug reaction

Biclustering

Drug indication

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  A big challenge in pharmacology is the understanding of the underlying mechanisms that cause drug-induced adverse reactions (ADRs), which are in some cases similar to each other regardless of different drug indications, and are in other cases different regardless of same drug indications. The FDA Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS) provides a valuable resource for pharmacoepidemiology, the study of the uses and the effects of drugs in large human population. However, FAERS is a spontaneous reporting system that inevitably contains noise that deviates the application of conventional clustering approaches. By performing a biclustering analysis on the FAERS data we identified 163 biclusters of drug-induced adverse reactions, counting for 691ADRs and 240 drugs in total, where the number of ADR occurrences are consistently high across the associated drugs. Medically similar ADRs are derived from several distinct indications for use in the majority (145/163=88%) of the biclusters, which enabled us to interpret the underlying mechanisms that lead to similar ADRs. Furthermore, we compared the biclusters that contain same drugs but different ADRs, finding the cases where the populations of the patients were different in terms of age, sex, and body weight. We applied a biclustering approach to catalogue the relationship between drugs and adverse reactions from a large FAERS data set, and demonstrated a systematic way to uncover the cases different drug administrations resulted in similar adverse reactions, and the same drug can cause different reactions dependent on the patients’ conditions.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Adverse drug reactions (ADRs) are one of the main causes of morbidity and mortality worldwide (Giacomini et al., 2007). Since not all ADRs are detected during drug development processes or clinical trials, many of them become a serious public health concern after the drugs are launched in the market. Post-marketed drugs, however, are continuously surveilled for adverse events and medication errors by regulatory agencies, pharmaceutical companies, and hospitals.

A big challenge in pharmacology is the understanding of the underlying mechanisms that cause these ADRs, which are in some cases similar to each other regardless of different drug indications. For example, a number of psychiatric disorders are expressed as a result of taking anti-psychotics, but some are also reported as side effects of unrelated drugs such as tamiful, an anti-influenza drug. As another example, varenicline, used to treat smoking addiction, and gabapentin, used to relieve neuropathic pain, both have showed risks of causing severe adverse events such as suicidal behaviors. It is suggested the similar ADRs by different drugs are the result of their common mechanisms.

In other cases, even when the same drug is used, the expression of ADRs varies from patients to patients. Types and severity of ADRs may vary depending on the patients’ physiological conditions such as age, sex, body weight, as well as their health states, and such information is provided in drug package inserts. Kuhn et al. (2010) collected drug side-effects by text-mining package inserts of marketed drugs, and listed them in the SIDER database. However, their approach has not yet covered these variabilities in the population of drug responses. In order to design personalized medicines, it is important to divide populations of patients according to their reaction expression patterns and characterize the populations with patients physiological backgrounds.

Spontaneous ADR reporting systems monitor unexpected drug outcomes over a large population of patients, and are extremely valuable for pharmacoepidemiology, the study of the effects of drugs focusing on the variabilities of drug responses. The FDA Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS) (http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Surveillance/AdverseDrugEffects/default.htm) has collected incidence of ADRs in the form of adverse event reports, where each report lists ADRs and the associated drugs along with the drug indications for use (the patients’ disease symptoms for which the drugs are prescribed). An event report also provides the patients’ demographic data. These resources provide us with profiles of ADRs and drugs from which knowledge may be mined to help characterize the adverse events.

A number of research studied the FAERS data. For example, Bate and Evans (2009) and Harpaz et al. (2013) detected possible relationships between ADRs and drugs that are unknown or incompletely documented in drug package inserts, but they did not systematically take the effects of the drug indications into consideration. Other studies detected ADR-drug pairs in consideration of only particular indications, e.g., anticoagulants (Tamura et al., 2012). Tatonetti et al. (2012) used information on drug indications or the patients’ physiological data to improve the detection method, whereas they did not consider the varieties of indications that cause the same ADR in a mechanistic point of view. In this study, we conducted a comprehensive investigation of the relationships between ADRs and the drug indications to identify drug administration patterns which lead to certain groups of ADRs, aiming at inferring the common mechanisms of reaction occurrences.

Clustering ADRs from the FAERS event reports may give us an inference of the common characteristics of ADR incidences. However, in contrast to the manually curated data such as drug package inserts, the spontaneous reporting system such as FAERS contains more noise, which deviates the application of conventional one-way clustering approaches. Specifically, considering a subset of drugs, rather than using all drugs, may help collecting ADRs whose event frequency profiles show high correlations. Accordingly, we applied a biclustering approach to the event frequency data from FAERS to extract clusters of drugs and ADRs in this study. A biclustering method, one of data mining approaches, is a useful tool to extract knowledge from such noisy data. The advantage of biclustering over one-way clustering is that it allows to focus on a subset of conditions over which features of correlated profiles are grouped in a cluster, while omitting other conditions of less correlation.

It was shown that our biclustering approach extracted clusters with different but possibly overlapping drugs and ADRs. Then we characterized the extracted clusters in the points of drug indications, using event reports in each cluster to infer how the drugs with different indications can cause the incidence of medically similar ADRs. Characterizing the extracted adverse event groups revealed the differences in patients’ populations (e.g., age, sex, and body weights) which showed expressions of different ADRs from the same drugs. Our findings may help understanding how an ADR can occur from unrelated drugs and how the patients’ physiological backgrounds may be an important factor for increased risk of the ADR.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

In order to find the biclusters of ADRs and associated drugs, we obtained 425273 adverse event reports from the FAERS, which contained the total of 5802ADRs and 1909 drugs. We coded the drugs in “D numbers”, unique identification numbers of drug entries in the KEGG DRUG database (Kanehisa et al., 2012), where drugs are characterized in a number of annotating systems including the Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical (ATC) classification system, and are cross-liked by LinkDB (Fujibuchi et al., 1998) to other pharmacological databases such as DrugBank (Knox et al., 2011), SIDER, and DailyMed (http://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/about.cfm). This yielded 1374 D numbers. Medically similar ADR terms were grouped using the MedDRA dictionary at the “High Level Terms (HLTs)”, which yielded 1317HLTs. Based on the data we constructed an event report frequency matrix whose rows are the ADRs and columns are the drugs. Then we performed an unsupervised biclustering to identify subsets of the ADRs (referred to as “REACs” hereafter) and subsets of drugs (referred to as “DRUGs” hereafter), where the frequencies of the REACs are consistently high across the DRUGs, using the Iterative Signature Algorithm (ISA) (Ihmels et al., 2004). In general, biclustering approaches pose a tradeoff between the overall coverage of row and column members, and the stringency of the extracted biclusters. Therefore, we optimized the bicluster extraction by setting a parameter range for the ISA workflow, following the strategy employed by Iskar et al. (2013). Detailed optimization process is described in Section 4. As a result, we extracted 163 biclusters (or “clusters” hereafter) containing 691REACs and 240DRUGs, and 182000 event reports (43% of all event reports counted in the matrix) in total. Some DRUGs and REACs appeared in more than one cluster. Fig. 1
                         shows the distribution of the FAERS adverse report entities, in which the ADRs were classified by the MedDRA “System Organ Class (SOC)” level, and the drugs were classified by the ATC anatomical level. Although the number of REACs and DRUGs extracted in the 163 clusters is not large, biclusering process retained the variations of the classifications. Fig. 2
                         shows the number of REACs and DRUGs extracted in each of the 163 clusters. Detailed information of the cluster entities are found in Table S1.

In order to check how many REACs in the 163 clusters are documented in drug package inserts, we referred the SIDER database. In the original data matrix, 80019 drug-ADR pairs appeared at least in one event report, of which 34315 (43 %) were listed in SIDER. In the 163 clusters, the number of drug-ADR pairs that were extracted at least in one cluster was 5159, of which 2481 pairs (48%) were listed in SIDER. This points out that the biclustering did not significantly affect the ratio of ADRs written in drug package inserts. It is also suggested that, even though the spontaneous ADR reports may contain many noises, the 2678 drug-ADR pairs that were found in the 163 clusters but not in SIDER may be worth investigating in order to enhance drug package inserts.

Each resulting cluster consists of REACs whose overall event report frequencies were consistently high across associated DRUGs in the cluster. Studying REACs and DRUGs within each cluster is expected to reveal physiological or molecular regulations common to take place in the expressions of REACs in the cluster. First we checked whether REACs in a cluster are medically similar to each other. Since REACs are written in the MedDRA HLT level, they were mapped to the HLGT level, one level higher to the HLT in the MedDRA hierarchy. Medical similarity of REACs was measured by how inequally the REACs were distributed across different HLGT terms, using the Gini coefficient (see Section 4). Gini coefficient measures the inequality among values of a frequency distribution, and high Gini coefficient represents high homogeneity in the population. Fig. 3
                         (right histogram) shows the distribution of 163 clusters as a function of Gini coefficient. In clusters with higher Gini coefficients, REACs were inequally distributed over a group of HLGTs, i.e., the majority of REACs was categorized only in particular HLGT(s), and were not categorized in any other HLGTs, which means the REACs in these clusters showed medical similarity in the MedDRA hierarchical classification. Similar REACs may be derived from administrations of unrelated drugs. In order to measure the degree of variation in DRUGs we constructed drug indication (INDI, hereafter) profiles within each cluster. The drug INDI profiles are also found in Table S1. For each pair of drugs in a cluster, we calculated the Pearson's correlation coefficient of their INDI profiles, and averaged over all drug pairs within the cluster. In Fig. 3 (top histogram), the 145 clusters out of 163 (89%) show Pearson's correlation coefficients less than 0.5, indicating that they had relatively high variation in DRUG INDIs. In addition, Fig. 3 (scatter plot in the center) shows that these 145 clusters are separated from the remaining 18 clusters. They represent high similarity in REACs and high variation in DRUG INDIs, which supports the tendency that medically similar ADRs can occur as a result of administrations of drugs with different indications for use.

The 145 clusters can be, therefore, interpreted as the catalogues of different drug administration patterns which can lead to the group of medically similar ADRs. Here, by giving three clusters as examples (Table 1
                         and Fig. 4
                        ), we address how medically similar REACs can occur as a result of administrating the associated DRUGs with different INDIs. In cluster 17, gastrointestinal and nervous system haemorrhages were two major REACs, which were associated with DRUGs of roughly three types of INDIs. Type 1: Warfarin is an anticoagulant (vitamin-K-epoxide reductase inhibitor), mainly indicated in this cluster for the treatment of “supraventricular arrhythmias”. Type 2: Rofecoxib and celecoxib are nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) (selective cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitors), that had indications for “arthropathies”, “osteoarthropathies”, and other musculoskeletal pain. Type 3: Aspirin and clopidogrel were indicated for “central nervous system haemorrhages and cerebrovascular accidents” and “coronary necrosis and vascular insufficiency”. They have additional efficacies. Aspirin is an antithrombotic agent, but is also a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAIDs) (nonselective cyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1) and cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitor). Clopidogrel is also an anticoagulant but targets different receptor (P2Y12 receptor antagonist). The risk of haemorrhage in warfarin use has been suspicious to incomplete regulations of warfarin dose (Ageno et al., 2012; Lam et al., 2013). The risk of haemorrhages have been suggested and reported for aspirin, clopidogrel, and a number of NSAIDs (Tamura et al., 2012; Chan and Graham, 2004), which infers the involvement of an unexpected regulation of the blood clotting mechanism (Fig. 4A). In fact, NSAIDs including aspirin, rofecoxib and celecoxib inhibit the action of cyclooxygenases, which results in the production of thromboxane A2, a blood coagulant in the platelets. Therefore, this cluster catalogues three distinct administration patterns which can lead to gastrointestinal and nervous system haemorrhages.

In cluster 29, extracted REACs were eye disorders such as “partial vision loss”, “retinal structural change, deposit and degeneration”, and “ocular haemorrhagic disorders”, which were associated with DRUGs with diverse INDIs as follows. Type 1: Bevacizumab and ranibizumab, monoclonal IgG1 antibody that inhibits the biologic activity of human vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), were used in the treatment of “retinal structural change, deposit and degeneration”, “ocular vascular disorders”, and “choroid and vitreous haemorrhages and vascular disorders”. Verteporfin also had these three INDIs. Type 2: Sildenafil is a vasoactive agent, which was indicated in this cluster to treat “sexual arousal disorders”. Type 3: Interferon beta-1a was used to treat “multiple scleroses acute and progressive”. Type 4: Etanercept is a fusion protein, which removes of pro-inflammatory cytokine tumor necrosis factor (TNF) from circulation, resulting in relieves of severe rheumatoid arthritis and severe plaque psoriasis as indicated in this cluster. In this cluster, there is a number of overlaps in the REAC and INDI terms in the HLT level. In fact, verteporfin, bevacizumab, and ranibizumab were used to treat structural alteration and haemorrhages in the eye, while these INDI terms were also reported as REACs. This indicates an incomplete regulation of the drugs leading to the eye-related ADRs. Ocular adverse events in bevacizumab and ranibizumab have been discussed in van der Reis et al. (2011). Additional remarks about this cluster are that it partly infers the involvement of unexpected regulation in the formation and regulation of the blood vessels. In addition, sildenafil is a vasodilator, whose drug actions are also known in the retina. These suggest the involvement of blood-related common mechanism in the occurrences of ocular haemorrhagic disorders caused by the different drug administrations (Fig. 4B). In cluster 30, abnormal body movement related ADRs were collected to associate with DRUGs of roughly two INDIs. Type 1: Aripiprazole, haloperidol, quetiapine, ziprasidone, and risperidone, 5-HT and/or D2 receptor antagonists, showed similar INDI profiles. Ziprasidone and risperidone are atypical antipsychotics indicated primarily for the treatment of “schizophrenia” and “bipolar disorders”. Aripiprazole and haloperidol are also antipsychotics indicated for the two disorders, but can be also applied in other psychoses. Quetiapine is a multi-acting-receptor-targeting-antipsychotics (MARTA) used to treat “schizophrenia”. Type 2: Atomoxetine showed different INDI profile. Atomoxetine is a selective norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (NRI) (noradrenalin transporter inhibitor) which was only used in the treatment of “attention deficit hyperactivity disorders”. These drugs all showed abnormal body movement related REACs such as “dyskinesias”, “dystonias”, “altered body temperature”, “Parkinsonism”, “eyelid movement disorders” and “decreased physical activity levels”. This suggests the two primary drug administrations responsible for the occurrences of the altered body movements. Some of the movement disorders such as “dyskinesias” have been suspected to be caused by dopaminergic blockage (Mathews et al., 2005). Type 1 drugs inhibit dopamine receptor. Norepinephrine transporter is also involved in dopamine uptake in the prefrontal cortex (Morón et al., 2002). Therefore, the dopamine blockage is a possible common mechanism involved in the expression of the movement disorders extracted in this cluster (Fig. 4C).

Per-drug inter-cluster pairwise comparison of event reports reveals interesting features of ADR incidence attributed to the patients’ physiological backgrounds. In the total of 182000 event reports associated to the 163 clusters, the following number of event reports were provided with gender, age, and body weight data in FAERS; 166704 for gender, 80013 for age, and 33315 for body weight. We examined differences in the physiological backgrounds between populations of event reports from two different clusters with exclusive groups of REACs, but same DRUG(s). The total of 17363 event report pairs spanning 152 drugs were tested for the distribution differences. Statistical significance in gender distributions was tested by the Fisher's exact test, and those in age and body weight distributions were tested by the Welch's t-test. As a result, 1606 event report pairs showed significant difference (p
                        <0.05) in gender distributions. These pairs were associated with 69DRUGs. 2514 showed significant difference (p
                        <0.05) in age distributions. These pairs were associated with 80DRUGs. In addition, 707 pairs showed significant differences (p
                        <0.05) in body weight distributions. These pairs were associated with 49DRUGs.

Here we present examples of such event report pairs. Examples were selected from cases where the distribution differences were observed in more than one drug in the associated cluster pair, extending the discussion to which the patients’ physiological backgrounds are important risk factors for the associated REACs. Comparison of clusters 148 and 163 on either etanercept, an antirheumatoid drug, or on isotretinoin, an acne agent, showed different gender distributions in event reports. For both of the drugs, patients in cluster 148 were all female, whereas patients in cluster 163 were female and male (Fig. 5
                        , top). In cluster 148, REACs contained “vaginal and vulval infections and inflammations”, which is consistent with the gender data. This cluster also contained other infections such as “streptococcal infections”, “fungal infections”, and “mass conditions” and “autoimmune disorders” (Fig. 5, bottom). This indicates the increased risk of these REACs in female patients. Cluster 163 contained REACs such as “neurologic visual problems”, “visual disorders”, “cardiac signs and symptoms”, and “circulatory collapse and shock”. In contrast to the case in cluster 148, REACs in cluster 163 were less likely to be gender-specific. Etanercept, used to treat rheumatoid arthropathies and psoriatic conditions, is known to express infections, autoimmune disorders, and cardiac disorders (DailyMed). For isotretinoin infections and cardiovascular disorders are known ADRs (DailyMed). Gender-related risk for the ADR incidences is not generally documented in public pharmaceutical databases. However, female sex has been suggested as a risk factor in Hernández et al. (2013).

Comparison of clusters 106 and 116 on either interferon beta-1a, an anti-neoplastic, or on levonorgestrel, a contraceptive agent, showed significant difference in age distributions (Fig. 6
                        , top). Patients of both drugs in cluster 116 were all female, consistent with that the extracted REACs were benign and malignant neoplasms in the female reproductive systems (Fig. 6, bottom), and mostly at the middle-age from around 30 to 50 years old (for interferon beta-1a) or around 30 to 55 years old (for levonorgestrel). Interferon-beta is used for the treatment of relapsing and remitting multiple sclerosis. Levonorgestrel is used for contraception, control of menstrual disorders, and treatment of endometriosis. Risk of ovarian and breast cancers has been documented for patients who currently have these diseases in DailyMed, and for postmenopausal women (Grady et al., 1995; Chlebowski et al., 2003; Anderson et al., 2004; Stefanick et al., 2006). Our result adds a supporting evidence to suggest relatively higher risk of uterine and ovarian neoplasms in middle-aged women in the use of either interferon beta-1a or levonorgestrel. In cluster 106, patients of interferon beta-1a showed a wider age range (significant age difference with p
                        =6.2E−10), and patients on levonorgestrel were younger (p
                        =2.6E−6), compared to the age distribution in cluster 116. In cluster 106, REACs were mostly nervous system disorders such as “disturbances in consciousness” and “neurological signs and symptoms”, and psychiatric disorders such as “dyssomnias”, “anxiety symptoms”, “emotional and mood disturbances”, “increased physical activity levels”, “fluctuating mood symptoms”, and “mood alterations with manic symptoms” (Fig. 6, bottom). In our result, younger levonorgestrel patients showed these REACs. Interferon beta-1a is reported to express psychiatric disorders (DailyMed), which was, according to our result, less likely to be age-related. However, our result indicates levonorgestrel use in younger ages seemed to be related to the occurrences of these REACs.

Comparison of cluster 108 and 156 revealed the difference in the body weight distributions of the event reports on paroxetine, an anti-depressant, or rofecoxib, an anti-inflammatory agent (Fig. 7
                        , top). For paroxetine, patients who reported the REACs in cluster 156 were mostly newborn infants because associated body weights were all less than 5kg, whereas patients in cluster 108 were mostly adults (p
                        =1.6E−7). Cluster 108 lists REACs such as “cardiac signs and symptoms” and “circulatory collapse and shock”. In cluster 156, REACs were “non-site specific injuries”, “inner-ear signs and symptoms”, “vertigos”, “myocardial disorders”, and “umbilical hernias” (Fig. 7, bottom). This indicates that the pregnancy is an important risk factor for the paroxetine toxicity in the fetus. Indeed, the risk of cardiovascular defects in infants has been reported as a result of paroxetine exposure in pregnant women (DailyMed). For rofecoxib, patients in cluster 108 showed relatively lower body weights than those in cluster 156 (p
                        =3.0E−3). The effects of body weights in the incidence of different REACs remains unknown, but our result might indicate body weight as a factor to differentiate the REACs in cluster 108 and 156.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

In this paper, we identified clusters of ADRs with coherent event frequencies, by applying a biclustering method on the FDA's adverse event data. Then we catalogued drug indications that were associated to the ADRs, and discussed why the drugs with different indications all showed high occurrences of the ADRs. Cataloguing drug indication profiles and linking them to medically similar ADRs may help us to infer common mechanisms underlying their occurrences. The clusters partly explained the drug-induced alterations common to the actions of drugs with different administrations at physiological or molecular levels. Pairwise comparison of clusters delineated how patients’ conditions affect the incidence of adverse reactions, demonstrating that extracting side effect information in drug package inserts is limited in this context.

Possible factors that are involved in the occurrences of adverse drug reactions are the off-targets, indigenous molecules that may be targeted by the drugs because of the drugs’ polypharmacology (Campillos et al., 2008; Kuhn et al., 2013). Although systematic understanding of the molecular mechanisms remains to be further studied, our results will provide a picture of the overall patterns of drug administrations which lead to medically similar adverse reactions.

The total of 1670724 event reports submitted from 2004 to the third quarter of 2012 were downloaded from the FDA Adverse Event Reporting Systems (FAERS) (http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Surveillance/AdverseDrugEffects/default.htm). These event reports contained 13599ADRs and associated 4939 drugs in total. Note that we only used event reports listing exactly one non-concomitant drug whose name is regularized by FDA. In addition, event reports that contained the same symptoms both in ADRs (REAC files in FAERS) and in drug indications (INDI files in FAERS) were removed.

ADR terms in the FAERS are coded in the Preferred Terms (PT) of the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA) Terminology. MedDRA is the international medical terminology developed under the auspices of the International Conference on Harmonisation (ICH) of Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use. It provides a classification of ADRs in five hierarchical levels, “System Organ Class (SOC)”, “High Level Group Terms (HLGT)”, “High Level Terms (HLT)”, “Preferred Terms (PT)”, and “Lowest Level Terms (LLT)”. Since ADRs are hierarchically annotated by the MedDRA classification, we first converted ADR terms from PT level to HLT level. The ADRs that were classified in the following SOC categories, “investigations”, “social circumstances”, and “surgery and medical procedures” were removed from the dataset, because these events are less likely to be the ADRs of drugs. This yielded 1317 ADR terms. 1909 drugs in the FAERS dataset were linked to the corresponding 1374 entries in the KEGG DRUG database (Kanehisa et al., 2012), which are regulated by KEGG identification numbers (referred to as D numbers). As a result, 1317 reactions and 1374 drugs were used to construct a frequency matrix which contains 425273 adverse event reports in total. Each row represents an ADR and each column represents a drug.

In order to find biclusters of REACs and DRUGs, we performed a biclustering on the constructed 1374 reactions vs. 1317 drugs matrix, using an algorithm called the Iterative Signature Algorithm (ISA) implemented in the R package, isa2 (Ihmels et al., 2004). The advantage of the ISA algorithm among others is that it can be applied to a large, noisy input matrix (Ihmels et al., 2004; Bergmann et al., 2003), and it allows overlaps between biclusters. It detects the subsets of rows and columns whose values are consistently higher than all other rows and columns by iteratively refining the subsets of rows and columns which finally reach given thresholds. The following two steps were performed iteratively. First, given a set of REACs, each DRUG was tested if the absolute value of the average frequency over the given set of ADRs exceeded a column threshold (thr.col). If it exceeded thr.col, it was selected in a set of DRUGs, and was used for the second step. Second, with the set of DRUGs fixed, each REAC was tested if the absolute value of the average frequency over the set of DRUGs exceeded a row threshold (thr.row). If it exceeded the thr.row, then it was selected in a new REAC set, which was used for the next iteration. The row and column thresholds controlled the stringency of the row sets and column sets, respectively. Especially, if the data matrix was normalized row-wise, thr.row value was equivalent to the degree of how much the frequency averaged over the selected rows exceeded the average frequency of all rows in the data. ISA started with a set of random seeds (randomly picks up REACs), and proceeded the above two steps iteratively until a convergence was reached, i.e., the selected set of rows and columns in the current iteration became equal to the set obtained from the previous iteration. The convergent subsets were referred to as “clusters” (or “biclusters”) in this study.

The original frequency matrix was normalized row wise (for each REAC). The threshold values for REACs (thr.row) were set in a range of 1 to 5 in increments of 0.5. Columns were not normalized and therefore thought to show a wider value range. Hence, the threshold values for DRUGs (thr.col) were set in a broader range, which is from 2 to 20 in increments of 2. For each combination from different thr.row and thr.col, 2000 clusters were initially detected, that were converged from 100 random starting points across rows and columns. The initial 2000 clusters were filtered for highly robust ones following the developer's recommendation. Thr.rows in a range from 3 to 5 and thr.cols in a range from 2 to 10 were determined to be optimal, so that clusters were stringent enough within the bounds of retaining as high number of REACs and DRUGs as possible (Fig. S1). Next, clusters obtained from the different threshold values were merged. Since the resulting clusters were still highly redundant, the ISA redundancy removal function was applied to reduce the number of very similar clusters using similarity score 0.8 (Fig. S2). Finally, the clusters whose REAC and DRUG members were all included in any other clusters were discarded.

In the original FAERS matrix, out of 1374 drugs in D numbers, 1092 were reported in the SIDER database for 1053ADRs in the MedDRA HLT terms. Likewise, in the extracted 163 clusters, which contained 240 drugs and 691 reactions, 203 drugs were listed in the SIDER database for 544ADRs.

In order to characterize the obtained clusters of REACs and DRUGs, we used drug indication information available for each adverse event report in the FAERS dataset. Out of 182000 event reports in 163 clusters, 95888 reports were available with indication data from FAERS indication (INDI) files. Since the indication terms are coded in the MedDRA PT terms, they were converted to the MedDRA HLT terms, which resulted in the total of 889 indications in the MedDRA HLT terms. For each of the DRUGs in a cluster, we constructed a profile of drug indications (INDI profiles), where the number of corresponding event reports was counted for each of the INDIs. Then, we compared all DRUG pairs using the INDI profiles. For each drug pair we calculated the absolute value of the Pearson's correlation coefficient between the two corresponding INDI profiles, and then took the average over all DRUG pairs within the cluster.

For each adverse event report, patients’ physiological conditions data such as gender, age and body weight were obtained from FAERS demographic (DEMO) files. In the total of 182000 event reports associated to the 163 clusters, 166704 event reports, 80013 event reports and 33315 event reports were provided with gender, age, and weight data, respectively.

For each of the 163 clusters, we gave a hierarchical classification of the REACs, and measured their classification variations by computing the Gini coefficient. The Gini coefficient measures the inequality among values of a frequency distribution across classification. If all members in a group are classified in one category, its Gini coefficient is one, and this group has no variation. If every member in a group is equally frequently distributed across different categories, the Gini coefficient is zero, and this group has a maximal variation.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This work was supported by the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan, and the Japan Science and Technology Agency. Computational resources were provided by Bioinformatics Center and Supercomputer system, Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2014.01.006.

The following are the supplementary data to this article:


                     
                        
                           
                        
                      
                     
                        
                           
                        
                      
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

