@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#A comparative computational investigation on the proton and hydride transfer mechanisms of monoamine oxidase using model molecules

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Reaction profiles of proton and hydride transfer mechanisms were generated.


                        
                        
                           
                           Dispersion-corrected density functional theory methods were employed.


                        
                        
                           
                           Water-assisted polar nucleophilic mechanism was investigated for the first time.


                        
                        
                           
                           Water-assisted polar nucleophilic mechanism is not a favorable path.


                        
                        
                           
                           Hydride transfer mechanism is more plausible than proton transfer.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Monoamine oxidase

Enzyme mechanisms

Flavoenzymes

FAD

Water-assisted mechanism

DFT methods

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Monoamine oxidase (MAO) enzymes regulate the level of neurotransmitters by catalyzing the oxidation of various amine neurotransmitters, such as serotonin, dopamine and norepinephrine. Therefore, they are the important targets for drugs used in the treatment of depression, Parkinson, Alzeimer and other neurodegenerative disorders. Elucidation of MAO-catalyzed amine oxidation will provide new insights into the design of more effective drugs. Various amine oxidation mechanisms have been proposed for MAO so far, such as single electron transfer mechanism, polar nucleophilic mechanism and hydride mechanism. Since amine oxidation reaction of MAO takes place between cofactor flavin and the amine substrate, we focus on the small model structures mimicking flavin and amine substrates so that three model structures were employed. Reactants, transition states and products of the polar nucleophilic (proton transfer), the water-assisted proton transfer and the hydride transfer mechanisms were fully optimized employing various semi-empirical, ab initio and new generation density functional theory (DFT) methods. Activation energy barriers related to these mechanisms revealed that hydride transfer mechanism is more feasible.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

MAO is the outer mitochondrial membrane protein and catalyzes the oxidation of the various amines including several neurotransmitters and xenobiotics to corresponding imines; the oxidized products are hydrolyzed non-enzymatically to the respective aldehydes or ketones. The enzyme exists in two distinct isozymic forms known as MAO A and MAO B (Ives and Heym, 1989; Tetrud and Langston, 1989). The two enzymes share 70% amino acid identity and both contain a covalently-bound FAD cofactor attached to an enzyme cysteine via 8α-methylene of the isoalloxazine ring (Binda et al., 2002; Bach et al., 1988). MAO A metabolizes serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine, while MAO B preferentially oxidizes benzylamine, dopamine and phenylethylamine and only metabolizes norepinephrine and serotonin slowly. MAO B also forms the neurotoxin 1-methyl-4-phenyl-pyridinium, a causative agent of Parkinson's disease, from 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) (Chiba et al., 1984). Inhibitors of the monoamine oxidase have been used clinically for the treatment of depression, as well as Parkinson's, Alzheimer's and other neurodegenerative diseases (Cesura and Fletcher, 1992; Youdim et al., 2006). In order to design new classes of inactivator compounds that reversibly block the enzyme action for MAO, it is important to understand the catalytic mechanism of this enzyme. In an effort to explain the underlying phenomena, there has been a continuous and long lasting debate on the amine oxidation mechanism of the monoamine oxidase. However, which mechanism is actually operative is still controversial. Various mechanisms have been proposed by different researchers such as the carbanion (Silverman, 1992), the single electron transfer (SET) (Lu et al., 2002), the polar nucleophilic (Edmondson et al., 2004; Edmondson et al., 2007; Miller et al., 1995; Miller and Edmondson, 1999), the concerted hydride transfer (Kay et al., 2007; Ralph et al., 2007; Fitzpatrick, 2010; Can, 2007) and the two step hydride transfer mechanisms proposed by Vianello et al. (2012).

SET mechanism is not validated, because of the failure to detect a radical intermediate species of catalytic significance in either MAO A or MAO B. Second negative evidence against SET is that a single electron transfer from the amine substrate to the flavin is thermodynamically unfavorable (Fitzpatrick, 2010; Vianello et al., 2012). Very recent work by Orru et al. (2013) proposes polar nucleophilic mechanism for MAO A and hydride transfer mechanism for MAO B suggesting differing mechanisms for the two isozymes. Thus, polar nucleophilic (proton transfer) and hydride transfer mechanisms remain as viable options for oxidation process.

Polar nucleophilic mechanism was proposed based on quantitative-structure activity relationship of p-substituted benzylamines by Miller and Edmondson (1999). According to this mechanism (Scheme 1
                     ), oxidation starts with the nucleophilic attack of amine nitrogen to the flavin C4a and flavin N5 abstracts α proton from the amine, forming an unstable adduct between flavin C4a and amine nitrogen. The second step is the dissociation of the adduct to produce the imminium ion and the reduced flavin. The first step (α proton abstraction) of the mechanism is the rate determining step (Edmondson et al., 2004; Erdem et al., 2006). The criticism in the literature (Fitzpatrick, 2010; Vianello et al., 2012; Gaweska and Fitzpatrick, 2011) concerning the polar nucleophilic mechanism could be summarized as follows:
                        
                           -
                           Amine N-flavin C4a adduct is very unstable.

Benzylamine αH is not acidic enough with an approximate pK
                              a of 25.

There is no basic amino acid residue strong enough to abstract benzylamine proton in the active site.

Flavin N5 atom is not basic enough to abstract αH of the amine substrate as a proton.

Elucidation of the crystal structures of MAO A (Son et al., 2008; De Colibus et al., 2005) and of MAO B (Binda et al., 2003) provided important new insights into this discussion. In the high resolution X-ray structure of the MAO A enzyme, 8 H2O molecules were detected on the re-face of flavin (Son et al., 2008). We thought that water-assisted αCH bond cleavage might deal with some of the above criticisms toward the polar nucleophilic mechanism through following arguments: It has been reported that the necessary pK
                     a value to detach benzylamine proton should be around 15 (Vianello et al., 2012). Thus, the H2O molecule situated in re-face of the flavin observed in the X-ray structure can act as a proton shuttle from αC to flavin N5. Therefore, the possibility of the polar nucleophilic mechanism running via H2O molecules as shown in Scheme 2
                      has been investigated as well. In the water-assisted polar nucleophilic mechanism, the H atom of the H2O molecule (PDB/2z5y code is HOH730) is transferred to the N5 atom of the flavin as a proton and the resulting OH− abstracts α proton of the benzylamine. In the literature there are other examples where the proton transfer reaction mechanisms are proceeding through the assistance of water molecules (Vianello et al., 2012; Markov and Enchev, 2004; Chen et al., 2009; Guo et al., 2008).

Concerted hydride mechanism (Scheme 3
                     ) was proposed based on the similarities to other flavoenzymes accepted to function via hydride transfer (Kay et al., 2007; Ralph et al., 2007; Fitzpatrick, 2010). In this mechanism, αH of the amine is transferred to flavin N5 as a hydride which is facilitated by the electron donation from amine nitrogen to αCN bond and gives rise to the reduced flavin and the imminium cation as products. In the two step hydride mechanism (Scheme 4
                     ) recently proposed by Vianello et al. (2012), the first step involves hydride abstraction from the αC of the substrate by flavin N5 atom to form the flavin N5-substrate αC adduct. In the second step, adduct decomposes to the final products, namely neutral imine and fully reduced flavin, FADH2, a reaction promoted by amine deprotonation by flavin N1 which is facilitated by two water molecules. In this study, we focus on the first step of this mechanism since the second step exhibits relatively low activation energy.

We have been involved in application of computational methods to assist the elucidation of amine oxidation mechanism by MAO (Erdem and Yelekçi, 2001; Erdem et al., 2006, 2013a,b; Erdem and Büyükmenekşe, 2011; Akyüz et al., 2007; Akyüz and Erdem, 2013). In a recent computational study, we presented negative evidence for the biradical SET mechanism based on structure–activity relationship of p-substituted benzylamine substrates (Erdem and Büyükmenekşe, 2011). Although the earlier PM3 calculations on p-substituted benzylamines (Erdem et al., 2006) and the ONIOM study (Akyüz et al., 2007) by our group supported the polar nucleophilic mechanism, all our later efforts to optimize the proposed amine N-flavin C4a adduct by density functional B3LYP functional failed. Therefore, we focused our attention to hydride transfer mechanism and very recent ONIOM (QM/QM) calculations (Akyüz and Erdem, 2013) including large portion of the active site interestingly revealed that MAO A and MAO B might have different hydride transfer mechanisms. As a continuation of the previous computational studies, our purpose here is to investigate the proposed mechanisms in detail and compare the relative barrier heights for each mechanism predicted by the same computational method. This will provide new data that will help to answer the unsolved questions on MAO mechanism as well as other amine oxidizing flavoenzymes. For this purpose, we focus on the small model structures mimicking flavin and amine substrates to avoid time-consuming computations in applications of various quantum mechanical methods (Fig. 1
                     ).

@&#METHODS@&#

While constructing the simulation model, 3 different structures with 17 (Model A), 19 (Model B) atoms and flavin-benzylamine structure (Model C) have been formed that include the most important atoms directly involved in the oxidation mechanism and the other atoms bonded to this core group that might have significant effect on the process (Fig. 1). For the proposed mechanisms (polar nucleophilic, water-assisted polar nucleophilic and concerted hydride transfer), reactants, transition states and the products belonging to model structures were fully optimized employing semiempirical PM3 and PM6 (Stewart, 2007, 2008), ab initio HF/6-31G* and HF/6-31+G** theories, and density functional theory (DFT) (B3LYP functional with the 6-31G* and 6-31+G** basis sets) (Becke, 1993) implemented in Gaussian 09 software (Frisch et al., 2009). Recently developed PM6 method is known to be successful for specialized modeling of biochemical reactions. The selection of PM6 method parameterized for 80 elements is also based on the fact that PM6 is shown to be one of the most accurate semi-empirical approaches for a wide range of problems (Rezac et al., 2009; Foster and Sohlberg, 2010). Standard DFT methods are inadequate to model long range dispersion effects and therefore cannot optimize the transition and adduct structures of the polar nucleophilic mechanism. Therefore, dispersion effect has been taken into consideration and the methods that are appropriate for this analysis have been chosen from current literature. It has been reported that WB97XD (Chai and Gordon, 2008, 2009) and CAM (Yanai et al., 2004) functionals have better capabilities concerning dispersion effect as compared to B3LYP. On the other hand, M06-2X method (Zhao and Truhlar, 2008a,b) with 6-31+G* basis set has been utilized in the recently proposed two step hydride mechanism for MAO Vianello et al. (2012). Therefore, we have also aimed to apply M06-2X method for all structures and for all mechanisms employed here so that direct comparison can be accomplished. Transition state structures were characterized with one imaginary frequency corresponding to the stretching motion of the bonds being broken or formed. IRC (intrinsic reaction coordinate) (Fukui, 1981; Hratchian and Schlegel, 2005) calculations were also performed for all transition state structures, the structures corresponding to the reactant and product complexes were characterized. Activation energy barriers related to the proposed mechanisms were calculated.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

Reaction profiles and Gibbs free activation energies of the polar nucleophilic mechanism were given in Figs. 2–4
                        
                        
                         and Table 1
                         for Models A, B and C. The first step which involves formation of unstable adduct (amine N-flavin C4a) is the slow rate-determining step. Therefore, in the following discussion, we mainly focus on the first step of the mechanism.

The results show that the mechanism explored is sensitive to the type of model system and computational method used. Table 1 reveals that for Model A, the polar nucleophilic mechanism could be modeled with all methods except DFT/B3LYP functional. The HF methods calculated remarkably high activation barriers (71.55–75.49kcal/mol); CAM-B3LYP (54.32–55.37kcal/mol), WB97XD (49.52kcal/mol), M06-2X (52.82kcal/mol) gave rise to smaller activation energies whereas semi-empirical methods (34.89–47.84kcal/mol) predicted relatively lower activation barriers. For Model B which was obtained by including carbonyl group to Model A (Fig. 1), the mechanism could be accomplished only by semi-empirical and HF/6-31G* methods. All other computational methods failed to optimize the transition state of the first step. In most cases, the transition state optimization gave rise to the transition structure of the hydride transfer mechanism instead of the polar nucleophilic mechanism. An additional difficulty was the failure of optimizing the C4a-N11 adduct. All our attempts to optimize the proposed adduct were unsuccessfully resulted in a somewhat different adduct or the final product complex structure of the reduced flavin and imminium cation similar to our previous work (Erdem et al., 2006). It seems that the carbonyl group plays the key role in modeling the mechanism. The activation free energies acquired for Model B by semi-empirical (30.29 and 50.30kcal/mol) and HF/6-31G* (72.45kcal/mol) methods are very close to the values of Model A. For Model C which includes all atoms of the isoalloxazine ring of the flavin and benzylamine substrate, only semiempirical methods (PM3 and PM6) were able to optimize the proposed adduct and the desired TS for polar nucleophilic mechanism. The predicted activation barriers by PM3 and PM6 (51.64 and 36.61kcal/mol, respectively) for the rate determining step were close to the barriers obtained from Model A and Model B. Thus, it appears that the results of PM3 and PM6 calculations are insensitive to the type of model structure.

Inspection of the optimized structures provided some hints about the mechanism. For Model A, the proposed adduct (ADD1) was successfully optimized by all the methods employed except B3LYP, which can be ascribed to the inaccurate description of the long-range interactions and dispersion effect in standard DFT methods (Fig. 2). The C4a-N11 bond distance of ADD1 was calculated to be 1.50–1.54Å by HF and dispersion-corrected DFT methods. Semiempirical methods predicted 0.1Å longer C4aN11 distances. According to the proposed mechanism in Scheme 1, a product complex between reduced flavin and imminium cation is expected to form following the dissociation of the adduct. However, another adduct structure depicted as ADD2 formed with the formation of a single bond between flavin N5 and αC (C14) (Scheme 5
                        ) from the optimizations using PM6, HF/6-31+G**, WB97XD/6-31G*. Other types of adducts such as C4aN11, C4aC14, and N1C14 also formed depending on the computational method used (type of adducts are given in the Suppl. material in Table S9). The formation of ADD2 structures instead of the expected product complex is indeed reasonable since a zwiterionic product complex will be unstable in gas phase without the effect of a polar environment. On the other hand, in the enzyme active site there may be some stabilizing interactions with the surrounding residues or with the water molecules keeping the reduced flavin and imminium cation in separated form. Our recent ONIOM (QM/QM) study (Akyüz and Erdem, 2013) including the active sites of MAO isoforms showed that this zwiterionic product complex indeed forms in the active site of MAO A whereas for MAO B, N5αC adduct formation is possible. In accordance with most of our results in the present study, Vianello et al. (2012) reported adduct structures between flavin N5 and αC which, afterwards, donates its amino hydrogen to flavin N1 by the assistance of two water molecules so that the neutral reduced flavin–imine product complex forms. We assume that the similar water-assisted proton transfer can occur in our case for the last step of polar nucleophilic mechanism as shown in Scheme 5 but since its energy barrier was reported to be low we did not model this step.

Examination of the optimized structures of polar nucleophilic mechanism revealed that a slightly different mechanism is operative for Model B. As shown in Scheme 6
                        , it was observed that, as the reaction proceeds through TS1, an internal rotation around the flavin C4aC4 single bond occurred due to the favorable H-bonding interaction between carbonyl group O atom and the H atom bonded to N1. This rotation is also favorable in terms of steric considerations since it decreases the repulsion caused by carbonyl group. Moreover, an additional internal rotation around C4aC9a resulted in a more favorable carbonyl–HN interaction in the adduct. Similar to Model B, for Model C, all HF and DFT methods employed failed to optimize either the transition state or the C4aN11 adduct of the polar nucleophilic mechanism. Thus, the mechanism could not be modeled with these methods. The reason for failure in optimization of the adduct can be related to the rigidity of the flavin ring in Model C which will prevent internal rotations mentioned above for Model B. Moreover, it appears that carbonyl group and other flavin ring atoms cause a steric repulsion and prevent the approach of amine N to C4a. Electronic effects may also play an important role. When the electronic APT charges on important atoms were examined (Suppl. material Table S12) it was observed that, in the RC structure, the electron density on C4a increases as the size of the model increases. In Model C, C4a has a significantly high negative partial charge. On the contrary, the same partial charge in Models A and B are slightly positive and slightly negative, respectively. Thus, another reason why the polar nucleophilic mechanism cannot be modeled with larger model structures is the decrease in electrophilicity of C4a which would prohibit the nucleophilic attack of the benzylamine N11 atom.

The possibility of polar nucleophilic mechanism operating via water-assisted α-proton transfer depicted in Scheme 2 was explored for the three model structures. Reaction profiles and Gibbs free activation energies were given in Figs. 5–7
                        
                        
                         and Table 2
                        . Table 2 demonstrates that, except semiempirical methods, most of the other computational methods did not generate the desired transition state and adduct structures similar to the results obtained for classical polar nucleophilic mechanism in Table 1. The PM3 method found quite high and approximately similar activation energies for Models A, B, and C (61.71, 69.47 and 64.56kcal/mol, respectively). On the other hand, the PM6 method gave rise to much lower activation energies for the three model structures (26.73, 30.28 and 37.08kcal/mol, respectively). It is remarkable that, while B3LYP functional was unable to model the classical polar nucleophilic mechanism, B3LYP/6-31G* afforded to model the water-assisted polar nucleophilic mechanism for only Models A and B, producing large activation energy barriers (47.37 and 49.43kcal/mol, respectively). Dispersion-corrected DFT methods such as CAM-B3LYP/6-31G* and M06-2X/6-31+G* also managed to handle water-assisted proton transfer mechanism but again resulted in relatively high energy barriers. The transition state bond distances between flavin N5 and transferred proton calculated by semi-empirical methods are about 1.30Å range while much shorter distances (1.08Å) were predicted by more accurate dispersion-corrected DFT methods. This particular behavior and the ranges of computed bond distances (Suppl. material Table S10) are parallel to the classical polar nucleophilic mechanism.

Of the dispersion-corrected DFT methods, M06-2X is highly recommended by Zhao and Truhlar (2008a,b) for accurate description of long-range interactions. Based on this, high activation energies (Model B: 51.56kcal/mol; Model C: 55.25kcal/mol and Model A: 52.82kcal/mol) predicted by M06-2X/6-31+G* give rise to convincing evidence that polar nucleophilic mechanism is not favorable.

Concerted hydride transfer mechanism illustrated in Scheme 3 cannot be accomplished in gas phase since the zwitterionic product complex is very unstable without stabilization effect of the environment. Consequently, an αCN5 adduct forms instead of the product complex. Here, we concentrated on the rate-limiting αCH cleavage step of this mechanism shown in Scheme 4. Reaction profiles and Gibbs free activation energies were given in Figs. 8 and 9
                        
                         and Table 3
                        . The most striking feature of Table 3 is that, for Model A, none of the methods employed in this study were able to model hydride transfer mechanism. Optimization of the transition states usually resulted in the transition structure of polar nucleophilic mechanism. On the other hand, all methods successfully optimized the desired stationary points of hydride transfer mechanism for Models B and C. It is remarkable that Table 1 for polar nucleophilic mechanism and Table 3 for hydride transfer mechanism exhibit almost complementary results suggesting that αCH bond cleavage occurs via hydride transfer mechanism for Models B and C whereas for Model A, proton transfer (polar nucleophilic mechanism) mechanism is predominant. A reasonable explanation for this observation is the increase in electron density (Suppl. material Table S12) on flavin C4a atom as the model size increases through the Models A, B, and C. The effect of the carbonyl group is also discussed in previous sections. For Model C, Gibbs free activation energies predicted by more reliable DFT functionals (CAM-B3LYP, WB97XD, M06-2X) are always smaller than those for Model B, which is expected since Model C represents the complete model. Table 3 also demonstrated that both HF methods gave rise to extremely high activation barriers (62.89–84.06kcal/mol) which can be attributed to the insufficient treatment of electron correlation within HF methodology. Standard DFT method with B3LYP functional predicted the lowest energy barriers in general (29.40–32.61kcal/mol). This is in accordance with the literature reports where B3LYP was found to underestimate the barrier heights which was ascribed to the self-interaction error in local DFT (Zhao and Truhlar, 2008a). Last five methods listed in Table 3 include functionals developed recently for more accurate description of dispersion effect and they are expected to produce more realistic results. These methods predicted the barrier height for hydride transfer in the range of 30.85–38.67kcal/mol. Since M06-2X was reported to give the best estimate for the barrier heights of hydrogen transfer reactions (Zhao and Truhlar, 2008a) we assume that 31.12kcal/mol calculated in this study is the more realistic estimate for hydride transfer mechanism for the employed model in gas phase. However, it is expected that the same reaction can take place with much lower activation energy under the influence of enzyme active site. The MAO substrate cavity has a hydrophobic environment with the shape of an elongated disk perpendicular to the flavin ring. There are two tyrosyl residues that are approximately perpendicular to the flavin and parallel to one another and function as an “aromatic cage” in the active site (Li et al., 2006). The amine group of the substrate must approach the flavin through this path (Akyüz et al., 2007). The π-interactions with aromatic side-chains and a few water molecules may be important for proper orientation of the substrate. Very recent ONIOM (M06-2X/6-31+G**:PM6) calculations by our group including relatively large active site of MAO A and MAO B generated 25.0–27.2kcal/mol Gibbs free energy barriers (Akyüz and Erdem, 2013). Moreover, Vianello et al. reported 24.4kcal/mol barrier height after single point energy refinement with very large basis set (CPCM/M06-2X/6-311++G(2df,2pd)) for much smaller but well-chosen part of the active site. Further lowering of the activation free energy is expected via tunneling effect (Hay and Scrutton, 2012; Pang et al., 2008).

It is noteworthy that semiempirical PM6 method successfully predicted very close barrier height (34.48kcal/mol) to dispersion-corrected DFT functionals. This is in line with the comments in the literature that PM6 method achieved major improvements in accuracy of the interaction energies of biologically relevant, noncovalently bound systems with empirical corrections for dispersion and hydrogen-bonding interactions (Stewart, 2007). Thus, it appears to be superior to HF and PM3 methods for modeling the hydride transfer and polar nucleophilic mechanisms in this study.

It should be emphasized that careful attention is needed to distinguish the first transition structures of the hydride transfer and polar nucleophilic mechanisms since they both involve transfer of αH to flavin N5. Inspection of the important bond distances (Suppl. material Tables S9–S11) reflects the similarities in C14αH and N5αH distances in the optimized transition states. The major discripancy of the two mechanisms is the distance between substrate nitrogen and flavin C4a (C4aN11) such that transition states for the hydride mechanism exhibit much longer (approximately 2.7Å) distances than for the polar nucleophilic and the water-assisted polar nucleophilic mechanism (approximately 1.7Å). Obviously, shorter C4aN11 distance imitates the attack of lone pair electrons of amine nitrogen to flavin C4a according to the proposed polar nucleophilic mechanism. However, in the hydride mechanism, the lone pair electrons of the amine nitrogen migrate to N11C14 bond leading to a change in hybridization from sp3 to sp2 and formation of a π-bond. This is apparent from shorter N11C14 bonds (1.32–1.40Å) in hydride transfer TS than in polar nucleophilic TS1 (1.37–1.57Å). Nitrogen sp3–sp2 rehybridization is also evident from the animation of the imaginary frequency in TS which shows the bending motion of amine hydrogens. Vianello et al. (2012) reported that degree of pyramidalization in isolated dopamine (37.4%) decreased to 4.2% in TS. Subsequently, dopamine nitrogen atom restored its pyramidalization back to13.9% in the αCN5 adduct leaving its planarization to the second step of the mechanism. These findings were in agreement with MacMillar et al. (2011) who measured 15N kinetic isotope effects for MAO B and showed that αCH cleavage was not concerted with nitrogen rehybridization. However, our recent work revealed that such two step hydride transfer mechanism could only be valid for MAO B whereas for MAO A, the product complex between reduced flavin and imminium cation formed, suggesting somewhat different mechanisms for the MAO izoforms (Akyüz and Erdem, 2013).

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

Three mechanistic scenarios on MAO catalyzed amine oxidation mechanism have been investigated on small model structures using various computational methods. Increasing the size of the model structures from Model A to Model B and then to Model C enabled us to understand the underlying issues on the αCH cleavage during MAO catalyzed amine oxidation.

In general, polar nucleophilic mechanism seems to be predominant for Model A but exhibits quite large free energy barriers except the result of PM6. When the size of the model is enlarged hydride transfer mechanism becomes predominant. Except semiempirical PM3 and PM6 methods, there is no computational method that can optimize the desired TS1 and adduct of polar nucleophilic mechanism. M06-2X/6-31+G* can also optimize TS1 for the water-assisted polar nucleophilic mechanism but predicts large barrier height. Calculated partial charges point out that the reason behind this can be the diminishing of the electrophilic nature of flavin C4a in going from Model A to Model B and Model C, thus disfavoring the nucleophilic attack of amine nitrogen to C4a. Steric hindrance by the carbonyl group and the rigidity of the flavin ring also disfavor the formation of the proposed amine NC4a adduct.

For the full model structure (Model C), direct comparison of the barrier heights of polar nucleophilic and hydride transfer mechanism is available only by PM3, PM6 and M06-2X/6-31+G* methods. These methods predicted 3.6, 2.1 and 14.13kcal/mol smaller energy barriers for hydride transfer, respectively. For medium size model structure (Model B), hydride transfer barrier heights calculated from PM3, PM6, HF/6-31G*, B3LYP/6-31G*, and M06-2X/6-31+G* (water-assisted) are all remarkably smaller by 14–20kcal/mol. Overall, these findings supports hydride transfer mechanism for MAO similar to other flavoenyzmes known to operate by hydride transfer (Ralph et al., 2007; Fitzpatrick, 2010; Tilocca et al., 2002; Kong et al., 2011). However, it should be kept in mind that, in Model C, PM6 predicts very close barriers for the two mechanisms indicating that both mechanisms may be operating and the two isozymic form may function with different mechanisms as suggested by Orru et al. (2013). It is our goal to test this proposal including the enzyme in calculations.

Calculation of the pK
                     a values of Tyr residues in MAO by Borstnar et al. (2012) confirmed the hydrophobic nature of the active site, which indicates that gas-phase calculations can be used as useful tools. Thus, although small model molecules were employed in this study without including enzyme active site, the results reported herein provide important insights into MAO catalysis and are relevant to other amine-oxidizing flavoenzymes.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

Authors acknowledge Marmara University Scientific Research Project Commission for the financial support (Project No: FEN-C-DRP-181208-0279 and FEN-D-310510-0198) and V.E. Atalay is grateful to TUBITAK for the studentship.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2013.08.007.

The following are the supplementary data to this article:
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

