@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Exploring the inhibitory potential of bioactive compound from Luffa acutangula against NF-κB—A molecular docking and dynamics approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           NF-κB signaling is a major target for anticancer drug development.


                        
                        
                           
                           Bioactive compound was isolated form Indian traditional medicinal plant L. acutangula.


                        
                        
                           
                           The binding affinity of isolated bioactive compound and NF-κB was investigated by in silico approach.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

NF-κB

DHMA

Molecular docking

Dynamics

DFT

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB) is a transcription factor, plays a crucial role in the regulation of various physiological processes such as differentiation, cell proliferation and apoptosis. It also coordinates the expression of various soluble proinflammatory mediators like cytokines and chemokines. The 1, 8-dihydroxy-4-methylanthracene-9, 10-dione (DHMA) was isolated from Luffa acutangala and its in vitro cytotoxic activity against NCI-H460 cells was reported earlier. It also effectively induces apoptosis through suppressing the expression NF-κB protein. Based on experimental evidence, the binding affinity of compound 1 with NF-κB p50 (monomer) and NF-κB-DNA was investigated using molecular docking and its stability was confirmed through molecular dynamic simulation. The reactivity of the compound was evaluated using density functional theory (DFT) calculation. From the docking results, we noticed that the hydroxyl group of DHMA forms hydrogen bond interactions with polar and negatively charged amino acid Tyr57 and Asp239 and the protein-ligand complex was stabilized through pi-pi stacking with the help of polar amino acid His114, which plays a key role in binding of NF-κB to DNA at a site of DNA-binding region (DBR). The result indicates that the isolated bioactive compound DHMA might have altered the binding affinity between DNA and NF-κB. These findings suggest that potential use of DHMA in cancer chemoprevention and therapeutics.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

NF-κB is one of the most important transcription factors that belong to the Rel family, which regulates various physiological processes including inflammation, innate and adaptive immune responses, cell survival, proliferation and apoptosis. It has also been shown to play a vital role in cellular transformation and tumorigenesis. NF-κB is frequently exists as a p65-p50 heterodimer in the cytoplasm in an inactive state complex with inhibitor of kappa B protein (IκB) (Sullivan et al., 2007; Pande et al., 2003). Binding of IκB protein to the NF-κB prevents its translocation to the nucleus and modulates its transcriptional function. All IκB proteins contains six ankyrin repeat domain (ARD) that is responsible for interaction surface around the NF-κB dimer and a signal responsive domain (SRD) that contains phosphorylation and ubiquitination sites for signal responsive degradation. Degradation of IκB regulates specific phosphorylation by activating IκB kinase (IIK) proteins results in activation or translocation of NF-κB to nucleus. The mammalian transcriptional factor (NF-κB) family consist of five major members such as RelA (p65), RelB, c-Rel, p50 (NF-κB1) and p52 (NF-κB2..

All five members are characteristic by a conserved Rel homology domain (RHD). The dimer binds to the κB sites in DNA of their target genes and form homo or heterodimeric DNA-binding complexes (Kawai and Akira, 2007). RHD is divided into two subclasses; first class consist of active and short DNA binding proteins includes p105-p50 and p100-p52, which have long C-terminal domain that contain multiple copies of ankyrin repeats that are effectively involved in masked translocations. The second class (Rel proteins c-Rel, RelB and RelA) contain C-terminal transcription activation domain that are critical for nuclear translocation and DNA binding of NF-κB p65/p50 (Fan et al., 2013).

NF-κB plays a key role in blocking apoptosis by regulating the expression of the antiapoptotic proteins such as Bcl-XL, c-IAP1, c-IAP2, XIAP, TRAF-2. It promotes cell survival by desensitizing the cells to apoptosis induced by various relevant stimuli, which is constitutively active in several tumor types, including prostate, breast, cervical and lung cancer. Although, high levels of NF-κB activation is found in both small cell lung cancer (SCLC) and non small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and was significantly associated with poor survival in lung cancer patients (Chen et al., 2011). Therefore, NF-κB signaling is a major target for the development of novel anticancer drugs. The dysregulation of NF-κB cascade has been associated with the development and progression of several cancers. Therefore, there is an urgent need to develop potent inhibitors targeting NF-κB for better chemoprevention and treatment strategies for human cancers (Tang et al., 2006).

From ancient years, nature has been a major source of medicinal agents to treat various pathological diseases. A significant number of compounds have been isolated so far from plant origin with anticancer properties. The compounds identified and reported by researches are with the availability of bioassay guided fractionation and in house screening. Currently used anticancer drugs such as taxol, vinblastin, vincristin and epipodophyllotoxin were isolated from plant origin. In our previous study, we have isolated the quinone derivative 1, 8-dihydroxy-4-methylanthracene-9, 10-dione from Luffa acutangula through bio-assay guided isolation (Vanajothi and Srinivasan, 2014). The compound shows anti-apoptotic property on lung cancer cell lines by enhancing the expression level of p53 and p21 and significantly decreasing the expression level of NF-κB (Vanajothi and Srinivasan, 2014). In this study, we investigated the molecular interaction of DHMA with DNA binding domain of NF-κB homodimer (1NFK) through three different docking protocol such as extra precision (XP), induced fit docking (IFD) and quantum polarized ligand docking (QPLD). Furthermore, molecular dynamics simulation and molecular mechanics generalized Born/surface area (MM/GBSA) are conducted to explore the molecular basis of the binding.

The 2D structure of DHMA was drawn using Marvin sketch. The 3D conversion and minimization were performed using Ligprep (OPLS-2005 force field). Up to 32 stereoisomers were generated per ligand and all possible ionization was generated at pH of 7.0. Conformer generation of each ligand was carried out using Confgen with default parameters. A maximum of 1000 conformers per ligand were searched (Chen and Foloppe, 2010; Selvaraj et al., 2011). Each minimized conformer was filtered through a relative energy window of 10kcalmol−1 and a minimum atom deviation of 1.0Å. This value (10kcalmol−1) sets an energy threshold relative to the lowest energy conformer. Conformers having higher energy than threshold are discarded. Distances between all pairs of corresponding heavy atoms must be below 1.00Å for two conformers to be considered identical. This criterion is applied only after the energy difference threshold and only if two conformers are within 1Kcalmol−1 (Reddy et al., 2012).


                        Qikprop (2013)(Qikprop, version 3.8. Schrodinger LLC) module of the Schrodinger was used to predict the absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion (ADME) properties of isolated bioactive compound (DHMA). It predicts both physically significant descriptors and pharmaceutically relevant properties. The drug-like properties of a compound was evaluated using the Lipinski rule of five (number of violations of Lipinski's rule of five) which is based on a set of property values, like the number of hydrogen-bond donors and acceptors, the molecular weight and the logP. It also evaluates the chemical behavior of a compound through the analysis of pharmacokinetic parameters required for ADME property. The percentage of their human oral absorption was also predicted to determine the toxicity levels.

The crystal structure of NF-κB (PDB ID: 1NFK) p50 homodimer with the resolution of 2.30Å was retrieved from Protein Data Bank. Chain A (monomer p50 subunit) and Chain A complexes with DNA was used for docking studies. It consists of 325 amino acid and 11 base pair of DNA molecule. All crystallographic water molecules were deleted and hydrogen atoms were added to the structure. Next, the orientation of amide, hydroxyl and thiol groups and the protonation, tautameric state of His residues were optimized. Partial atomic charges were assigned according to the OPLS-2005 force field (Kaminski et al., 2001). The structures were then subjected to impact minimization with a cut off RMSD of 0.3Å.

The active sites are usually a pocket or cleft at the surface of the protein that contains residues responsible for substrate specificity which often act as proton donors or acceptors (Brindha et al., 2009). The active site of the protein was investigated using the Site Map program. This software generates information on the binding site’s characteristics using novel search and analytical facilities. SiteMap calculation begins with an initial search step that generates site points on a grid surrounding the protein surface that may be suitable for binding ligands to the receptor. Contour maps are then generated, and analyzed for hydrophobic and hydrophilic regions spanning the active site.

Molecular docking was carried out to find out the molecular interaction of the small molecule in the active site of protein by using Grid-Based Ligand Docking with Energetic (Glide) from Schrodinger (Friesner et al., 2004). To investigate, whether DHMA can tightly fit into the DNA binding domain, crystal structure of NF-κB (PDB ID: 1NFK) with and without DNA were used for this study. Prior to the molecular docking simulation, the binding site of protein is analyzed and the receptor grid generation panel generated the grid map for the receptor. The grid-enclosing box was centered to the active sites of the corresponding 3D-structure of the receptor so as to enclose them within 3Å from the centroid of these residues. A scaling factor of 1.0 was set to van der Waals (VDW) radii of those receptor atoms; with the partial atomic charge less than 0.25. Docking calculations were performed with XP mode it performs through a conformational search for a ligand. Glide XP mode determines all reasonable orientation for each low-energy conformer in the designated binding site. In the process, torsional degrees of the ligand are relaxed, though the protein conformation is fixed. During the docking process, glide performs a complete search of conformational, orientational and positional space of the docked ligand molecule and scoring function (G-score) was used to select the best conformation of ligand molecules. Bond order of both ligand and protein were adjusted and minimized up to 0.30Å RMSD. The OPLS-AA force field was used for the refinement of docking results including torsional and rigid-body movements of the ligand. The final energy evaluation is done with Glide score (Gscore) and a single best pose is generated as output for a particular ligand (Halgren et al., 2004; Sengupta et al., 2007).
                           
                              Gscore = a×vdW+b×Coul+Lipo+Hbond+Metal+BuryP+RotB+Site
                           
                        where, vdW is van der Wall energy; Coul is Coulomb energy; Lipo is lipophilic contact term; Hbond is hydrogen-bonding term; Metal is metal-binding term; BuryP is penalty for buried polar groups; RotB is penalty for freezing rotatable bonds; Site is polar interaction at the active site; and the coefficients of vdW and Coul are: a=0.065, b=0.130.

The isolated bioactive compound DHMA with NF-κB p50 subunit and NF-κB-DNA complex was used as an initial geometry for the IFD protocol implemented in the Schrodinger suite. IFD is a more robust and accurate method to account for both ligand and receptor flexibility (Zhong et al., 2009). In this method, the flexibility of the receptor is taken into account by combining a series of Glide and Prime processes. For this method, first the ligand was docked to the rigid protein with van der Waals radii scaling of 0.5 and a maximum of 20 poses per ligand were retained (Wang et al., 2008). Residues within 5Å of the ligand poses were subjected to a conformational search and minimization (Sherman et al., 2005). The initial docking was carried out using standard prediction mode and the numbers of poses generated were set to be 20 for protein refinements. Each 20 structure from the previous step was subjected to prime side chain and backbone refinements. Refined complex was ranked by Prime energy and the receptor structures within 30 Kcal/mol of the minimum energy structure were passed through for a final round of Glide docking and scoring. In the final step, each ligand was redocked into every refined low-energy receptor structure produced in the second step using Glide XP at default settings. An IFD score that accounts for both the protein-ligand interaction energy and the total energy of the system was calculated and used to rank the IFD poses (Friesner et al., 2004).

In order to find the probable binding mode between ligand and receptor, QM/MM docking was employed by the QPLD protocol implemented in Schrodinger. In this method, the initial docking was conducted using Glide in standard precision (SP) mode followed by XP refinement with default settings. The output docking poses from Glide docking were submitted to the second docking to calculate the atomic charges of the ligands using QM/MM approach at B3LYP/6-31G* level within the protein environment. Finally, the ligand with new QM/MM modified charges was redocked by Glide with XP mode.

The binding free energy of receptor-ligand complexes were predicted using Prime MM-GBSA calculation available in Prime 3.4 module. MM-GBSA is an acronym for a method that combines OPLS-AA (optimized Potential for Liquid Stimulation-All Atom) molecular mechanics energies (EMM), an SGB solvation model for polar solvation (GSGB), and a nonpolar solvation term (GNP) composed of the nonpolar solvent accessible surface area and van der Waals interactions (Moran et al., 2013). Binding energy was calculated by the following formula:
                           
                              ΔE=Ecomplex
                                 −Eprotein
                                 −Eligand
                              
                           
                        Where, Ecomplex is energy of the protein-inhibitor complex, Eprotein is energy of protein and Eligand is energy of ligand.

Molecular dynamics simulation of NF-κB monomer (NF-κB p50), NF-κB-DNA and its complex with ligands were carried out using Desmond (Maestro-Desmond, 2013, Maestro-Desmond version 3.6) with OPLS-2005 force field. The system was solvated by TIP3P orthorhombic water box keeping 10Å distance away from each edge of the box (Jorgensen et al., 1996). The salt concentration of the system was set to 0.15M Na+/Cl− for neutralizing the system and 12Å cut-off value was used for the non-bonded interactions. Then the system was equilibrated with the NPT ensemble at 300K using Nose-Hoover thermostats while the pressure was maintained using Berendsen thermostats and barostats method. All production-phase MD simulations were run with a time step of 2.0 femto-seconds (fs) with far time step size of 6.0fs using RESPA integrator for bonded and non-bonded interaction (Jatana et al., 2011; Pradhan et al., 2014). RMSD and root mean square fluctuation (RMSF) were analyzed to evaluate the structural changes for both apo (without ligand molecule) and complex structure of NF-κB receptor.

Bioactive compound DHMA was subjected to DFT calculation to obtain the highest occupied (HOMO), lowest unoccupied (LUMO) molecular orbital and energy gap (Homo-Lumo). All the DFT calculation was carried out using Jaguar (2013) (Jaguar, version 8.2 Schrödinger). Geometry optimization of DHMA was performed using hybrid density functional theory method, with B3LYP based on Becke's three parameter exchange potential and Lee-Yang-Parr correlation functional with basis set 3-21G* level (Lee et al., 1988; Becke, 1993; Binkley et al., 1980; Gordon et al., 1982).

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

In our previous in vitro study (Vanajothi and Srinivasan, 2014), we reported that the DHMA (1, 8 dihydroxy-4-methyl anthracene 9, 10 dione) exhibit significant anticancer ability against lung cancer cells (NCI-H460) by growth inhibition, induction of apoptosis and suppression of NF-κB. Nowadays, the prediction of accurate binding mode of small molecules in the active site of proteins is one the most challenging problems in computational chemistry. The accurate binding mode of a ligand at a binding site is essential to the design of potential lead compounds in computer-aided drug discovery. To understand the binding mode of DHMA with DBR site of NF-κB was investigated by different docking protocols (XP, IFD, and QPLD). The crystal structure of NF-κB (1NFK) consists of one DNA molecule and two p50 subunits; each subunit has two distinct domains connected by a 10-residue linker. Both domains form a sequence-specific DNA-binding surface by contributing 5 loops per subunit that fill the entire major groove of the DNA. Subunit p50 (chain A) has been separated from its homodimeric form shows the molecular surface of DNA binding region (DBR). In this present study, we used three different docking protocols such as classical docking (XP), IFD and QPLD to predict the binding modes of bioactive compound DHMA with NF-κB monomer and NF-κB-DNA complex. The docking score and interactions of DHMA with NF-κB monomer and NF-κB-DNA were summarized in Table 1
                         and Table 2
                         respectively. The crystal structure of 1NFK do not have a bound ligand so, the binding site of the protein was defined by previously reported residues, such as Arg54, Arg56, Try57, Cys59, Gly306, Lys241, Pro243, His141 and Asp239 which are essential for DNA binding to NF-κB/p50 monomer (Piccagli et al., 2008). The present results demonstrated that all the three docking simulation predicted the same binding site. In the three different docking protocols, the binding pose of the bioactive compound DHMA shows more or less similar binding energy and docking score in the DNA binding region (DBR) of NF-κB. Comparing the binding energy and number of interactions, it was found that the pose obtained from IFD for both the compounds shows more interactions with NF-κB as well as NF- κB-DNA complex than XP and QPLD. After docking, only the pose obtained from IFD was considered by visual inspections based on the score and interactions. The binding mode of DHMA with the NF-κB receptor is shown in Fig. 1
                        . It forms one hydrophobic interaction with Try57 and the hydroxyl group of the DHMA forms two hydrogen bond interactions with His141 and Asp239. Further, the interaction of DHMA with NF-κB receptor was stabilized by π-π stacking interaction between aromatic ring of DHMA and His141 with 5.34Å distance. It was demonstrated that the DHMs was well accommodated inside the binding pocket of NF-κB and can interfere the binding of DNA to NF-κB receptor.

Due to the supposed planar structure, most of the anthraquinone derivatives are able to intercalate the DNA molecule. A widely used anticancer agent derived from anthraquinone derivatives have the ability to intercalate into DNA and inhibits catalytic activity topoisomerase II (Muller and Stopper, 1999). In our previous report, the DHMA effectively inhibit the expression of NF-κB (Vanajothi and Srinivasan, 2014). Hence, to evaluate the DNA-binding efficacy of the compound molecular docking studies was carried out in the presence of DNA with the monomer of NF-κB. The result suggests that the compound binds to DNA via groove binding mode. From IFD docking, it was identified that the bioactive compound DHMA has high binding affinity with NF-κB in the presence of DNA than NF-κB p50 subunit. In case of NF-κB-DNA complex, hydroxyl group present at 1st position of the ligand molecule form hydrogen bond interactions with side chain of Lys249 (2.15Å) and DNA DG-4 (1.76Å), while the neighboring carbonyl group present at one end of the aromatic ring forms hydrogen bond interaction with side chain of Lys249 (2.53Å). The carbonyl group present at another end of the ring formed hydrogen bond interaction with backbone of Lys 272 (1.83Å). The hydroxyl group present at 8th position of the ligand molecule formed hydrogen bond interaction with side chain of Asn247 (2.03Å) and interaction with oxygen atom of the phosphate backbone of DG-3 (1.85Å) residues of DNA. In addition, it showed π-π stacking interaction with DG-4 and DG-5 (Fig. 2
                        ).

To define the behavior of conformational stability and the binding affinity between the ligands and receptor, molecular dynamic simulation was performed for both ligands bound with NF-κB and NF-κB-DNA as well as for apo enzyme for 10ns. The best docked conformation of both the compounds into the active site of NF-κB monomer and NF-κB-DNA obtained from IFD was taken as initial structure for MD simulations. The root mean square deviation (RMSD) of protein backbone atoms of both the lignads with NF-κB monomer and apo enzyme (NF- κB p50 subunit alone) during the simulation were calculated and displayed in supplementary Fig. 1. The figure demonstrate that both the apo enzyme and complex with DHMA shows the average RMSD values within 4.8Å and 4.0Å respectively during 10ns simulation. However, from the supplementary Fig. 1 it should be noted that the RMSD of apo enzyme does not have much stability when compared to that of complex with DHMA. The RMSD value of apo enzyme was steadily increased up to 4ns followed by a slow increase up to 4.2ns. After this there is no much fluctuation in RMSD values and the system shows less stability. In case of the NF-κB-DNA-DHMA complex, the RMSD value was found to 2.0Å up to 8ns (Supplementary Fig. 3). After this, there is a slow increase up to 2.5Å till remaining simulation time. During the whole period of simulation, both the compounds have shown hydrogen bond interaction with key residues and remain bound into the DNA binding region of NF-κB. The bioactive compound DHMA maintained stable binding conformation throughout the simulation with DNA. Mostly the hydrogen bond interactions Lys272, DA-4 and π-π stacking interaction with DA-5 are stable during the MD simulation. This result indicates that the binding mode of the DHMA with NF-κB-DNA complex creates more stable conformation when compared to that of apo form NF-κB-DNA and NF-κB-monomer (Supplementary Fig. 1, 3). NF-κB alone shows higher RMSD values when compared with complex of NF-κB-DHMA. Due to the binding of DHMA at the DNA binding site of apo-form and its stable interaction with NF-κB-DNA-complex showed that the DHMA does not allow the DNA to fit as tightly as in protein molecules.

The flexibility of the complex was further analyzed by measuring the root mean square fluctuation (RMSF) of each residue. The average RMSFs for DHMA with NF-κB p50 subunit, NF-κB-DNA are 4.0Å, 2.5Å, respectively. The RMSF profile of apo and complex with bioactive compound with DHMA is shown in supplementary Fig. 2. Very few residues were fluctuates more and reach 8.0Å. However, there are no much fluctuations in the active site residues. As shown in supplementary Fig. 2 it is observed that the residue Lys74 of NF-κB-DHMA show more fluctuation than NF-κB-DNA-DHMA complex. RMSF profile of the apo- enzyme compared with complex (Supplementary Fig. 4) shows that the flexibility of DNA binding residues reduced upon the binding of NF-κB-DHMA as well as NF-κB-DNA-DHMA complex.

DFT is presently the widely used approach to calculate the electronic matter of molecules. It has been used to predict the stability of the charge transfer and to study the reaction mechanisms responsible for the activity. In addition DFT provides an accurate description of the electronic and structural properties of small molecules by computing the electronic structure of matter. HOMO and LUMO are the popular quantum mechanical descriptors which play a crucial role in governing much chemical reaction (Maria Lara et al., 2011; Singh et al., 2011; Erol et al., 2007). The result shows that the LUMO orbital of isolated bioactive compound DHMA found in the oxygen atom of phenol ring and HOMO orbital found in hydrogen atom of aromatic ring. The electrostatic potential (ESP) maps are shown in Fig. 3
                        a. The ESP plays important role in the initial step of small molecule conformation and explaining the small molecule interaction with the receptor. The values of the electrostatic potential at the surface are represented by different colors, the most negative ESP regions are represented by red color, most positive ESP regions are represented by blue and moderate potential are represented by green color (Sakkiah et al., 2013). Fig. 3c, d shows the distribution and energy levels of the HOMO and LUMO orbital computed at the B3LYP/3-21G* level. We found that HOMO and LUMO energies of both the compounds are small and values are summarized in Table 3
                        . The energy gap (eV) was calculated by the difference of the energies between the HOMO and the LUMO. The molecules with a larger energy gap should be less reactive than one having a smaller gap. The energy gap value of the DHMA was found to be 0.13eV. The energy gap of the HOMO-LUMO is the indicator of the stability of molecule (Forrest et al., 2014). The present observation revealed that the bioactive compound DHMA, have shown smaller energy thereby indicated their less stability and high reactivity. The lower value in the HOMO and LUMO energy gap indicates that the eventual charge-transfer interaction within the molecules and it could lose electrons easily.

Molecular interactions and contribution of various parameters in binding of small molecules gives a better understanding of the peculiar mode of binding with receptor (Malla et al., 2013). Both the complex NF-κB monomer (P50) and NF-κB-DNA with DHMA was rescored by calculating the free energy using MMGB/SA method. The bioactive compound DHMA have more preferable predicted binding energy of −34.769kcal/mol with NF-κB monomer. In case of NF-κB-DNA complex, the DHMA have the highest energy of −43.002kcal/mol. These calculations signify that the DNA is required for high affinity of binding of the ligands. In order to get a better view on which energy have more impact on the binding affinity between ligand and receptor, the other components to the prime MM GBSA free energy of binding were further analyzed. Table 4
                         shows contribution to the MM/GBSA free energy of binding from hydrogen bonding (ΔG
                           Hbond) contribution to the MM/GBSA free energy of binding from the coulomb energy (ΔG
                           coulomb
                        ), contribution to the MM/GBSA free energy of binding from lipophilic binding (ΔG
                           Lip), contribution to the MM/GBSA free energy of binding from covalent binding (ΔG
                           covalent) contribution to the MMGBSA free energy of binding from van der waals energy (ΔG
                           vdw), and MM/GBSA free energy of binding (ΔGbind). From the binding energy score (Table 4), it clearly indicate that the isolated bioactive compound primarily contributed by other energy contributions such as van der Waals, H-bond and electrostatic interactions. The most stable conformer of compound 1 with NF-κB (ΔGbind=−43.02kcal/mol) showed that its hydroxyl groups (OH) of ligand formed strong hydrogen bond interactions (short Acceptor-Donor distance) with DNA and crucial amino acids (Try57 and Asp239). It bound strongly to NF-kB-DNA complex than NF-kB monomer. It indicates that the DHMA occupies a key position in the DNA binding site of the NF-κB receptor. The predicted binding energy shows a nice correlation to the experimental IC50 value of DHMA.

The development of small molecule scaffolds having good binding affinity towards the receptor with significant ADME properties and having less toxicity is one of the most important aspects in the drug designing (Shukla et al., 2012). ADME properties of both small molecules were predicted by using QikProp. A total of 44 physically significant descriptors and pharmaceutically relevant properties were analyzed. Among which significant descriptors such as logP (Octanol/Water), QPlogS, QPPCaco, QPlogBB, permeability through MDCK (Madin-Darby Canine Kidney) cells in nm/sec and% of human oral absorption were selected for this study and values are shown in Table 5
                        . The value of permeability through MDCK cells of both compound was found to be <500, MDCK cells are considered to be a good mimic for the blood-brain barrier. The partition coefficient (QplogPo/w) and water solubility (QPlogS) are critical for estimating the absorption and distribution within the body. It was found to be −0.855, and −2.765 respectively. The blood-brain barrier partition coefficient of the both ligand was found to be −0.855. Further, it follows the Lipinski rule of five and human oral absorption is found to be within the desirable range. The above results indicate that the bioactive compound DHMA showed ADME properties in the acceptable range.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

In the present study, molecular docking, molecular dynamics simulation, MM/GBSA binding free energy calculation and ADME properties were performed to investigate the reasonable binding conformation of DHMA with NF-kB p50 monomer and NF-kB-DNA complex. The comparison of three different docking protocols suggests that IFD gives better accuracy of prediction. The bioactive compound DHMA shows remarkable affinity with NF-κB p50 subunit and NF-κB-DNA. The docking result reveals that the DHMA can form hydrogen bond interaction with active residues like Arg57, His141, Asp239 and Lys24 which are play an important role in DNA binding to the DBR of NF-κB. The RMSD and RMSF results indicate that the NF-κB-DNA-DHMA complex is more stable compared to NF-κB-DHMA. In summary the findings in the present study, suggested that DHMA might alters the binding abilities between DNA and NF-κB. These finding suggest that the DHMA as a potent inhibitor for non small cell cancer chemoprevention and therapeutics.

The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENT@&#

The financial assistance from UGC-RGNF(No. F.16-1005 (SC)/2008 (SA-III), Government of India as Senior Research Fellowship to Ms. R. Vanajothi is greatly acknowledged.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2016.03.006.

The following are Supplementary data to this article:
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

