@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Genome-wide evidence of positive selection in Bacteroides fragilis
            

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We identified 1275 orthologous gene clusters present in all eight Bacteroides genomes.


                        
                        
                           
                           52 genes were identified as being under positive selection in the Bacteroides fragilis lineage.


                        
                        
                           
                           Many genes involved in the cell surface/membrane exhibited positive selection.


                        
                        
                           
                           Positively selected proteins in B. fragilis might interact with host immune systems.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#




                     Bacteroides fragilis




                  

Molecular evolution

Positive selection

Pathogenicity

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  We used an evolutionary genomics approach to identify genes that are under lineage-specific positive selection in six species of the genus Bacteroides, including three strains of pathogenic Bacteroides fragilis. Using OrthoMCL, we identified 1275 orthologous gene clusters present in all eight Bacteroides genomes. A total of 52 genes were identified as under positive selection in the branch leading to the B. fragilis lineage, including a number of genes encoding cell surface proteins such as TonB-dependent receptor. Three-dimensional structural mapping of positively selected sites indicated that many residues under positive selection occur in the extracellular loops of the proteins. The adaptive changes in these positively selected genes might be related to dynamic interactions between the host immune systems and the surrounding intestinal environment.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


                     Bacteroides fragilis is a Gram-negative anaerobe and a component of the normal intestinal flora in humans. Although the viable cell number of B. fragilis in fecal isolates is 10- to 100-fold smaller than those of other intestinal Bacteroides sp. (Salyers, 1984), it is the pathogenic anaerobe most frequently isolated from intra-abdominal infections, abscesses, and blood (Finegold, 1989; Snydman et al., 2007). The pathogenic potential of B. fragilis has been linked to several virulence factors, such as the capsular polysaccharide (Kasper et al., 1977; Onderdonk et al., 1977), some proteases (Duerden, 1994) and the B. fragilis toxin (Sears et al., 2006). Moreover, factors contributing to the resistance of B. fragilis to oxidative stress and extreme aero-tolerance, each of which is an important virulence factor for extraintestinal infections, have also been reported (Sund et al., 2008). While these factors have been thought to be important for pathogenicity, at the present time their relative contributions are not known, and other possible mechanisms must be considered.

In the evolution of many microorganisms, positive selection and recombination are important evolutionary driving forces (Aguileta et al., 2009; Perfeito et al., 2007). There are many reports suggesting that positive selection contributes to the evolution of virulence genes in bacterial pathogens (Suzuki and Stanhope, 2012) such as Escherichia coli (Peek et al., 2001), Neisseria meningitidis (Andrews and Gojobori, 2004; Urwin et al., 2002), Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Smith et al., 2005), Streptococcus pneumoniae (Stanhope et al., 2008), and Helicobacter pylori (Ogura et al., 2007). Thus, positive selection for the fixation of advantageous point mutations is an important force in the adaptation of pathogenic microorganisms to different environmental niches, in terms of both optimizing infection processes and escaping host immune responses (Toft and Andersson, 2010). Genome-wide studies on positive selection and recombination in bacterial whole genomes have further contributed to a comprehensive understanding of the evolution of important pathogens, including Streptococcus spp. (Lefebure and Stanhope, 2007), Salmonella serotype (Soyer et al., 2009), Campylobacter spp. (Lefebure and Stanhope, 2009), Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae (Xu et al., 2011), E. coli (Petersen et al., 2007), Staphylococcus (Guinane et al., 2010), and Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Zhang et al., 2011). No genome-wide analyses of positive selection in Bacteroides sp. have been reported to date.

To improve our understanding of the evolutionary dynamics and functional differentiation of Bacteroides sp., we performed full genome analyses for positive selection using the completed and published genome sequences for six Bacteroides sp., including three strains of B. fragilis. We focused on the evolutionary characterizations of core genome genes that are shared by the eight Bacteroides genomes. The results of our analysis of site- and lineage-specific selection patterns provide insights into the evolution of the core genomes in these Bacteroides sp. and information regarding the potential functional diversification of genes related to bacterial pathogenicity.

Eight available annotated Bacteroides genomes, representing six different species, were used in this study (Table 1
                        ). The genome sequences were downloaded from the Integrated Microbial Genomes (IMG) database in FASTA format (http://img.jgi.doe.gov/cgi-bin/w/main.cgi). Gene annotations with COG (Clusters of Orthologous Groups) functional classification were also retrieved from the IMG database. Protein coding sequences were extracted from FASTA files, and orthologs were determined using OrthoMCL (v1.4) (Li et al., 2003). Genes with premature stop codons or with a sequence shorter than 50 codons were excluded from the subsequent analyses. OrthoMCL uses reciprocal best BLAST scores in a normalized similarity matrix that is analyzed using an additional step of Markov Clustering to improve sensitivity and specificity. OrthoMCL was run with a BLAST E-value cut-off of 1e-05, and an inflation parameter of 1.5. The OrthoMCL output was used to construct a table describing the genome gene content. We used this table to plot Venn diagrams and to delimit the distribution of genes within the eight Bacteroides genomes included in this analysis. Venn diagrams were plotted with the Vennerable R package (http://r-forge.r-project.org/projects/vennerable).

Core genes (core genome) were defined as the orthologous genes shared by all Bacteroides genomes. To increase the accuracy and power of the selection analyses, an ortholog cluster was excluded from the core genes if the length of any gene was lower than 50% of the maximum length or the cluster contained more than one gene from each genome.

Core gene orthologs grouped in the same clusters were aligned using the program MUSCLE (Edgar, 2004) with default settings. Multiple sequence alignments were carried out on amino acid sequences from each orthologous group, followed by conversion to nucleotide sequence alignments using the PAL2NAL software package (Suyama et al., 2006). Since recombined fragments among aligned codon sequences have a profound effect on the detection of positive selection (Anisimova et al., 2003) and phylogenetic inference, we tested for recombination signals between sequences in the alignment of orthologous genes. The alignments were tested for intragenic recombination based on single breakpoint (SBP) analysis and KH test in the HyPhy package (Kosakovsky Pond et al., 2006; Pond et al., 2005; Suzuki and Stanhope, 2012).

To investigate the phylogenetic relationships of the Bacteroides sp., we concatenated alignments of the 1214 ortholog clusters which were created by excluding the recombinant gene clusters from core gene clusters. The resultant 1199,271 nucleotide alignment was used to reconstruct a genome-wide tree (species tree) using PhyML (Phylogenetic Estimation Using Maximum Likelihood) (Guindon et al., 2010; Guindon and Gascuel, 2003) with the GTR+Gamma substitution model of nucleotide evolution, and the Subtree Pruning-Regrafting (SPR) branch-swapping method. Branch support was calculated using the non-parametric Shimodaira-Hasegawa-like (SH-like) approximate likelihood ratio test (aLRT) as implemented in the PhyML program.

The maximum likelihood method was used to test for traces of positive selection and to infer amino acid sites under positive selection using the codeml program of PAML version 4.5 (Yang, 2007). We used the branch-site models, which allow the ω ratio to vary among sites and lineages (Zhang et al., 2005). Branch-site model A assumes the following four classes of codon sites: class 0 with 0<
                        ω
                        0
                        <1 in all branches; class 1 with ω
                        1
                        =1 in all branches; class 2a with foreground ω
                        2
                        ≥1 but background 0<
                        ω
                        0
                        <1; and class 2b with a foreground ω
                        2
                        ≥1 but background ω
                        1
                        =1. Null model A1 was the same as A but with the foreground ω
                        2 constrained to 1.

The model allowing positive selection (model A) was tested using a likelihood ratio test (LRT) that was compared to a χ
                        2 statistic with one degree of freedom. Likelihoods were estimated based on the species tree, and each lineage leading to the six different Bacteroides sp. was tested as foreground. Genes for which significant positive selection was detected were inspected for alignment errors potentially affecting the results of this analysis. If necessary, the alignments were manually modified and the codeml analysis repeated. Gene-specific trees were constructed for each positively selected gene, and the codeml analyses were re-run if the gene-specific tree differed from the species tree. A PAML analysis with gene-specific trees confirmed all positive selections detected using the species tree. Correction for multiple testing was performed using the procedure reported by Benjamini and Hochberg (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995). For all genes tested for positive selection, we calculated q-values from p-values using the R package QVALUE with the proportion of true null hypothesis set to 1 (π
                        0
                        =1) (Storey and Tibshirani, 2003). A false discovery rate (FDR) of 2% was basically used for the positive selection analyses. A binomial test was used to estimate the associations between each COG category and the frequency of positive selection.

In the case of alternative models that allow for positive selection, we used the Bayes Empirical Bayes approach to calculate the posterior probability (PP) that each codon evolved under positive selection (Yang et al., 2005). The codeml program was used to calculate the PP of each amino acid site that came from the ω
                        >1 class. We used a cutoff of PP>0.95 to identify sites under positive selection.

To construct the three-dimensional (3D) structure models of the proteins encoded by the genes that showed evidence of positive selection, homology modeling was performed by using the Phyre2 (Protein Homology/analogY Recognition Engine) server (http://www.sbg.bio.ic.ac.uk/phyre2/html/page.cgi?id=index) (Kelley and Sternberg, 2009). The amino acid sequences of the proteins were submitted to the Phyre2 server for modeling in the intensive mode, which is based on a profile–profile alignment algorithm using multiple templates. Six templates were selected based on heuristics to maximize confidence, percentage identity, and alignment coverage. The visualizations of the positively selected sites mapped onto the structure were created in the PyMOL Molecular Graphics System, version 1.3 (Schrödinger, LLC).

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

Using OrthoMCL, we identified 1275 orthologous genes present in all eight Bacteroides genomes, representing an initial definition of the core genome. The numbers of protein-coding genes per genome within the various species and strains of Bacteroides varied within the range of 3436–4917 (Table 1), but the gene composition of these genomes was much more variable. Based on the gene content table obtained by OrthoMCL output, we found that three strains of B. fragilis share about 75% of their genes, and three different species of Bacteroides share only a smaller number of their genes (Fig. 1
                        ).

Our comparison of B. fragilis against two closely related pathogenic Bacteroides sp., B. vulgatus and B. thetaiotaomicron (Finegold, 1989), defined a common set of 2004 genes. On the other hand, the comparison of B. fragilis against two closely related non-pathogenic Bacteroides sp., B. xylanisolvens and B. salanitronis, defined a common set of 1497 genes (Fig. 1). These patterns of gene co-occurrence do not coincide with the evolutionary distances depicted in the phylogenetic tree (Fig. 2
                        ), but may have been somewhat influenced by the presence or absence of pathogenicity. Fig. 3
                         shows the distribution of the orthologous clusters of genes among the eight Bacteroides genomes; 46% of the genes in the genome were present in only one genome, which represented lineage-specific genes. Next to the lineage-specific genes, the 13% of genes shared by all eight Bacteroides genomes comprised a coherent core genome (Fig. 3).

To exclude the possibility that recombination or horizontal gene transfer within the set of core genome genes affected our phylogenetic and positive selection analysis, we tested genes for evidence of recombination among Bacteroides sp., using the single breakpoint analysis and KH test as implemented in HyPhy (Pond et al., 2005). This method compares a likelihood model that assumes a single recombination breakpoint with a different topology on either side, with a model that assumes no recombination. In cases in which we found support for the model with recombination, we used the KH test for incongruence (Kishino and Hasegawa, 1989), as implemented in HyPhy to determine whether the level of support was significant. The HyPhy analysis detected significant recombination breakpoints with a p-value <0.05 in only 61 of the 1275 core genome genes. These recombinant genes were not included in our positive selection analysis using the whole coding sequences. Instead, the recombinant gene alignments were broken into two gene fragments at the recombination breakpoint, and the positive selection was assessed on each split alignment separately by using branch-site models as described below.

We inferred a species tree of the eight Bacteroides sp. based on concatenated core genome genes excluding recombinant genes (Fig. 2). Using this species tree, we carried out the analysis of positive selection with branch-site models implemented in the PAML package (Zhang et al., 2005). Overall, evidence of positive selection was abundant across all Bacteroides lineages, but it was highly variable among lineages (Table 2
                        ). The number of genes under positive selection was greatest along the lineages leading to B. salanitronis and B. vulgatus.

The 167 genes under positive selection on the B. salanitronis branch represent 13.1% of the core genome genes included in our analysis. The smallest numbers of genes determined to be under positive selection were on the B. xylanisolvens and B. thetaiotaomicron lineages. These results indicate that the number of genes under positive selection per lineage was roughly related to the branch length, and the low number of genes in the B. xylanisolvens and B. thetaiotaomicron lineages may be the consequence of a short period of evolution.

To assess the possible implications of positive selection with Bacteroides pathogenicity, we conducted a detailed investigation of positively selected genes in the branch leading to the B. fragilis lineage. Based on the LRT statistic for the branch-site models (FDR<2%), a total of 48 genes were identified as being under positive selection (Table 3
                        ). In addition, we also detected positive selection in 4 recombinant genes using alignments of the gene fragment (Table 3). The sequence alignments of these positively selected genes are given in the supplementary data. As shown in Fig. 4
                        , the assignment to COG functional classification indicated that genes in three of the COG categories—i.e., “Lipid transport and metabolism”, “Intracellular trafficking, secretion and vesicular transport” and “Defense mechanisms”—were significantly over-represented among the total genes under positive selection (P
                        <0.05; one-sided binomial test). We also found that although positively selected genes in the COG category “Cell wall/membrane/envelope biogenesis” were not significantly enriched, many genes with positive selection in other COG categories were suggested to encode proteins localized on the surface/membrane according to the gene annotations (Table 3).

Of the 52 positively selected genes, 17 genes (33%) were connected to the surface/membrane structures (Table 3). These findings are consistent with previous genome-wide studies which showed that many proteins that undergo positive selection are exposed on the cell surface or localized on the surface membrane (Orsi et al., 2008; Petersen et al., 2007; Xu et al., 2011). The positive selection and rapid evolution of genes involved in the cell surface/membrane are likely to be important to allow B. fragilis to adapt to different and rapidly changing environments, including competing bacteria in the human intestinal tract as well as effectors of innate and adaptive immune systems in hosts with pathogenic infections (Duerkop et al., 2009; Massari et al., 2003).

To obtain more insight into the roles that positive selection might play, we mapped the positively selected amino acid sites on the 3D model of the proteins. Because many of the genes involved in the cell surface/membrane exhibited positive selection in the B. fragilis lineage, we focused on two representative proteins localized in the outer membrane. Fig. 5
                         shows the 3D structures of the TonB-dependent receptor (Cluster ID 1083 in Table 3) and outer membrane protein/Omp85 (Cluster ID 1117 in Table 3), which were based on homology modeling by using the Phyre2 server. The TonB-dependent receptor, which was predicted to be constructed with a beta-barrel structure, showed strong evidence of positive selection with a low q-value (Table 3). According to our analysis using the Bayes Empirical Bayes approach, nine sites in the TonB-dependent receptor were inferred to have ω
                        >1 with high posterior probabilities (PP>0.95) under branch-site model A: 212L, 267P, 391M, 424R, 473S, 537Q, 561R, 575P, and 610L. We mapped nine positively selected sites onto the 3D structure of the TonB-dependent receptor (Fig. 5A). Seven of the nine amino acids identified as having experienced positive selection were located in extracellular loops of the protein; only two positively selected amino acid residues were located in the β-strand facing the membrane boundary. In Omp85, which was predicted to have a beta-barrel structure positioned in the outer membrane, only one amino acid site was inferred to be positively selected. The positively selected site in Omp85 (829A) was also located in the extracellular loop (Fig. 5B).

As was elucidated some years ago (Schauer et al., 2008), TonB-dependent receptors play important roles in the physiological uptake of various nutrients such as iron complexes and vitamin B12. Since the survival of pathogenic bacteria in their respective hosts depends on their ability to compete for nutrients such as iron (Miethke and Marahiel, 2007), TonB-dependent receptors might be important for pathogenicity (Koebnik, 2005). Another study demonstrated that a TonB-dependent receptor of B. fragilis binds to plasmatic fibronectin, suggesting the importance of this receptor as an adhesion molecule to host tissue (Pauer et al., 2009). The evolutionary analysis performed in the present study indicated that many residues under positive selection in TonB-receptor occur in the extracellular loops. It is thus interesting to speculate that positively selected amino acids might be implicated in efficient nutrient recognition and host cell attachment during pathogenesis. In addition, Omp85 as a surface antigen was reported to interact with host immune systems and to be positively selected in E. coli (Fitzpatrick and McInerney, 2005).

Together, the above observations and the present results further support the above-mentioned hypothesis that positively selected proteins in B. fragilis most likely interact with host immune systems or the surrounding intestinal environment and contribute greatly to the pathogenicity of this anaerobic bacterium.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

Our genome-wide analysis defined the core-genome genes of the genus Bacteroides, including three B. fragilis pathogenic strains. Based on maximum likelihood codon substitution models, we identified lineage-specific positive selection in a wide range of genes from Bacteroides sp., indicating that positive selection contributed to the evolution of the Bacteroides core genome. In particular, genes encoding proteins associated with the surface/membrane, such as TonB-dependent receptor and Omp85, are the primary targets of positive selection. The adaptive changes in these positively selected genes might be related to dynamic interactions caused by the host immune and defense systems. Although further experimental evidence is needed to test our functional predictions on adaptive genes, the list of genes identified as being under positive selection may provide targets for further research into the mechanisms of the host-pathogen interactions in B. fragilis.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2014.09.001.

The following are Supplementary data to this article:
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

