@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Computational simulation of ligand docking to L-type pyruvate kinase subunit

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Computational docking revealed binding sites of L-type pyruvate kinase N-domain in domains A and C of the protein.


                        
                        
                           
                           Peptide RRASVA and its phosphor-analogue were used to model the regulatory N-domain.


                        
                        
                           
                           Phosphorylation shifted the peptide binding from domain A to domain C.


                        
                        
                           
                           Shift of N-domain interaction site may explain switching on L-PK cooperativity by phosphorylation.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

L-type pyruvate kinase

N-terminal domain docking in protein

Regulatory phosphorylation

Putative N-terminal docking sites

Substrate affinity regulation

Switching in cooperativity

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Computational blind docking approach was used for mapping of possible binding sites in L-type pyruvate kinase subunit for peptides, RRASVA and the phosphorylated derivative RRAS(Pi)VA, which model the phosphorylatable N-terminal regulatory domain of the enzyme. In parallel, the same docking analysis was done for both substrates of this enzyme, phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) and adenosine diphosphate (ADP), and for docking of fructose 1,6-bisphosphate (FBP), which is the allosteric activator of the enzyme. The binding properties of the entire surface of the protein were scanned and several possible binding sites were identified in domains A and C of the protein, while domain B revealed no docking sites for peptides or for substrates or the allosteric regulator. It was found that the docking sites of different ligands were partially overlapping, pointing to the possibility that some regulatory effects, observed in the case of L-type pyruvate kinase, may be caused by the competition of different ligands for the same binding sites.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Four pyruvate kinase isozymes, which catalyse ATP synthesis from phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) and ADP:
                        
                           (1)
                           
                              
                                 PEP
                                 +
                                 ADP
                                 
                                    ⟶
                                    
                                       Pyruvate
                                          
                                       kinase
                                       ,
                                       
                                          Mg
                                          
                                             2
                                             +
                                          
                                       
                                       ,
                                       
                                          K
                                          +
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 Pyruvate
                                 +
                                 ATP,
                              
                           
                        
                     have been described in mammalian tissues and were denoted as L, R, M1 and M2 (Munoz and Ponce, 2003). All these enzymes are homotetramers revealing significant structural homology (Munoz and Ponce, 2003; Valentini et al., 2002). Monomers of these isozymes can be presented by structurally well-characterised domains denoted as A, B and C (see Fig. 1
                     ), and also include the N-terminal domain, which spatial structure is not known in L and R isozymes due to its remarkable flexibility even in the crystallised protein.

Differently from other known pyruvate kinase isozymes, the activity of the L-type enzyme (L-PK), which has been initially isolated from liver tissue, is regulated through phosphorylation of serine residue in position 12 of this flexible N-terminal domain (El-Maghrabi et al., 1980, 1982; Pilkis et al., 1980; Muirhead et al., 1986; Mattevi et al., 1996; Munoz and Ponce, 2003):
                        
                           (2)
                           
                              
                                 
                                    MEGPAGYLRR
                                    
                                       10
                                    
                                 
                                 A
                                 
                                    S
                                 
                                 
                                    VAQLTQEL
                                    
                                       20
                                    
                                 
                                 GTAFF.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  

This phosphorylation down regulates the activity of L-PK by decreasing its apparent affinity for PEP and increasing the cooperativity parameter n (Hill coefficient) for this substrate. Discovery of this regulatory phenomenon in the early seventies (Ljungström et al., 1974) has played an important role in the formulation of the principles of the regulatory phosphorylation in general (Engström, 1978). However, the molecular mechanism and structural background of the role of the phosphorylatable N-terminal regulatory domain, located at a considerable distance from the substrate binding sites, have not been established.

One reason for this uncertainty is the significant flexibility of the N-terminus of the protein that prevented determination of the spatial positioning of its amino acids by X-ray analysis (Noguchi et al., 1987; Friesen and Ching, 1998; Pendergrass et al., 2006). Moreover, due to the same reason the conventional allostery models, which assume transfer of allosteric signals from the regulatory site to the substrate site by altering interactions between certain sets of amino acids in a trimmed protein structure, cannot be applied in this case, as no such structure exists. Therefore, the transition of the regulatory effect to the active site of L-PK and its targeted manifestation in the case of only one substrate, governed by phosphorylation of the remote regulatory site of the enzyme, seems to demand an alternative mechanism of signal transmission. Most probably, this mechanism should use noticeable flexibility of the regulatory N-domain, as was initially proposed by Bergström et al. (1978), and further discussed proceeding from results of proteolytic truncation experiments (Fenton and Tang, 2009).

The truncation experiments revealed that the binding effectiveness of PEP could be decreased not only by N-domain phosphorylation, but also by proteolytic removal of amino acids 7–14 around the phosphorylatable serine residue of the N-terminal domain (2). On the basis of these data it was suggested that the N-terminal domain might interact with the main body of the enzyme molecule and this interaction might be necessary for formation of the active state of the enzyme, and interruption of this interaction by proteolytic truncation should convert the enzyme into the low affinity state against PEP (Fenton and Tang, 2009). Notoriously, the results of probing the L-PK phosphorylation site by mutational analysis agreed with this hypothesis, as modulation of PEP binding effectiveness was achieved through alteration of amino acids surrounding the phosphorylation site at Ser12 (Faustova et al., 2012).

In this report we investigated the possibility of formation of this intramolecular complex between the main body of the protein and the N-terminal peptide by mapping its putative binding sites using computational docking analysis. As there was no prior information about the location of these binding sites, the “blind docking” approach was used and the search space encompassed the entire surface of domains A, B and C of a single L-PK subunit. The N-terminal domain of the enzyme was modelled by peptide RRASVA, representing sequence of the amino acids flanking the phosphorylatable serine in position 12, and corresponding to the part of the N-terminal domain, which proteolytic removal affected the enzyme affinity for PEP. This set-up simplified the computational analysis, but was still sufficient for collecting preliminary information about the putative binding sites, while the role of different subunits in the L-PK tetrameric structure should be analysed separately.

As a separate part of this analysis, the docking sites for substrates ADP and PEP, as well as for the allosteric regulator FBP were mapped. The purpose of this analysis was determination the presence of additional docking areas for these ligands, and comparison of their location with docking sites for peptides. For this reason the “blind docking” approach was used also in the case of these low-molecular weight ligands.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

The model of the L-PK subunit was built up proceeding from structural data for the R-type isozyme (Valentini et al., 2002), which is produced from the same gene as L-PK, but using different promoters (Noguchi et al., 1987). The flexible N-terminal domain of the protein was omitted from this protein model, as location of amino acids of this part was not determined by X-ray analysis. Glutamine no. 26 was the first amino acid determined in the protein structure and its position was marked by Q in Fig. 1.

The location of one bivalent cation (Mg2+) and one monovalent cation (K+), depicted by the blue and yellow spheres, were also included in the protein model (Fig. 1). These ions mark the catalytic site of L-PK, as their participation is important for the phosphoryl transfer from ADP and PEP in the reaction of ATP synthesis (Muirhead et al., 1986). Indeed, structural studies have revealed that amino acids implicated in the formation of the binding site for PEP were mostly located in sub-domains A4 and A5 (Munoz and Ponce, 2003; Mattevi et al., 1996), while the amino acids involved in the ADP binding site formation were mostly located in sub-domain A2 (Jurica et al., 1998). All these sub-domains still belong in the same domain of the protein and remain close to each other. The close location of the enzyme-bound ADP and PEP is required for the direct transfer of the phosphate group from PEP to ADP in the chemical step of the catalysis (Muirhead et al., 1986).

This set-up of the L-PK subunit structure was used for mapping of the putative ligand binding sites in the whole subunit structure. From these calculations the spatial locations of 1000 docking poses were obtained for each ligand and marked by black dots, denoting the positioning of the centre of the docked molecule in the protein model. Therefore, the putative ligand binding sites appeared as clouds of these dots. In parallel, all docking poses were also characterised by binding energy, and comparison of these values could be used for ranking of the predicted binding sites, but not for explicit predicting the biochemically relevant binding site that needs structural biology approaches.

As bivalent and monovalent cations label the active site of the enzyme, it was not surprising that docking sites for ADP and PEP marked quite definitely this part of the protein structure (Fig. 1, left and centre panels). However, more surprisingly, several other areas of the protein were also populated with docking poses even in the case of these two substrates. So, in the case of ADP two additional binding regions could be located in domain A and the third more intensively populated site could be observed in domain C. The same domain included one more binding site, marked by a smaller number of docking poses. In the case of PEP there was no highly populated alternative binding site in domain A, but one rather well populated and one less populated binding site were observed in domain C.

Comparison of docking energies of ADP and PEP in these sites revealed that the strongest substrate-protein interaction (−8.7kcal/mol) could be identified in the case of ADP binding in the area of the enzyme active centre, while in all other sites the docking energy of this ligand remained between −7.2 and −7.4kcal/mol. Differently from this substrate, PEP docking energies did not reveal so clear preference for certain binding site, and its docking energy in the active centre (−6.0kcal/mol) was comparable with the appropriate values −6.0 and −6.6 in two sites of domain C, while the less populated peripheral site revealed even stronger binding.

Structural studies have revealed that FBP, which is the allosteric activator of the phosphorylated L-PK, interacts with the subunit C of the enzyme, and its binding site, contains a clear phosphate binding pocket (Jurica et al., 1998), where the 1′-phosphate group of FBP interacts electrostatically with an arginine residue and 6′ phosphate forms a series of hydrogen bonds with other amino acids forming this binding site. Therefore, it was natural that this binding site, characterised by docking energy −8.7kcal/mol, was also clearly recognised by our docking study, although its location corresponded to the less populated site in domain C. However, two alternative docking sites were observed in the same domain and in domain A and were characterised by the docking energy −7.2 and 7.5kcal/mol, respectively.

It was noteworthy that significant similarity in the pattern of binding sites location was observed in the case of these three ligands, although their biological role is different. On the other hand, however, it is obvious that the binding specificity of these ligands should be governed by molecular recognition of their phosphate group(s) by the appropriate binding pockets. This structural element is present in all these compounds that could explain similar docking patterns.

Peptide RRASVA, resembling the surroundings of the regulatory phosphorylation site of L-PK, and the phosphorylated peptide RRAS(Pi)VA resembling the same site after phosphorylation of serine residue in position 12, were used to map possible docking sites in the L-PK main body. As described above, the location of each binding pose of these peptides was marked by black dot in the protein model (Fig. 2
                        ). It can be seen that in majority cases the docking poses were clearly grouped within the same region of the protein surface, thus labelling the location of the probable binding sites. Therefore, these calculations confirmed the possibility of peptide docking in domains A and C, and the observed sites could be listed as putative binding sites for interaction of the regulatory N-domain with the protein main body.

It can be seen in Fig. 2 that two peptide docking sites were located in domain A close to the enzyme active site. Therefore, these sites may, indeed, affect substrate binding effectiveness. On the other hand, alternative peptide docking sites were rather close to the FBP binding site in domain C, providing good possibility for interactions with this allosteric ligand and its binding site.

The pattern of docking site location was similar for RRASVA and RRASPiVA. However, comparison of the calculated docking energies for these two ligands revealed some trends, which may have impact on formation of the internal complex between the N-domain peptide and the main body of the enzyme. Firstly, phosphorylation changed the calculated docking energy of the model peptide RRASVA in all sites mapped in the protein molecule. Secondly, phosphorylation of the peptide decreased its interaction effectiveness in all sites located in domain A. Thirdly, phosphorylation increased binding effectiveness of the peptide in both sites of domain C, while the docking energy in the more populated site reached −7.8kcal/mol. This means that phosphorylation may well shift equilibrium of the peptide binding between domains A and C. The reason of this difference seems to be connected with different contribution of the phosphoryl group into the overall binding effectiveness of peptides in these sites, while the rest of the peptide structure may be recognised in a similar way.

If the same conclusion is valid for the interaction between the regulatory N-terminus of L-PK and the main body of the protein, phosphorylation of the N-terminal domain may well cause shift of the intramolecular complex from domain A to domain C. Remarkably, this conclusion does not depend on the specific positioning of the involved binding sites in these two domains. As the transition between the R and T states of the enzyme has been linked with the rotation of these subunits relative to each other (Mattevi et al., 1996), this conformational change may well accompany a shift of the internal complex between domains A and C, initiated by peptide phosphorylation.

Our preliminary calculations revealed that the distance between the Gln26 αC atom of the L-PK subunit and the putative peptide docking site in vicinity of the catalytic site is approx 43Å, while the distance between the same C atom and the Arg residue of the N-terminal peptide is approx 45Å. Therefore the complex formation could be assumed even within the same subunit. On the other hand, however, the N-terminal domain of one subunit could interact with docking site in the next subunit. In this case the Gln26 residue in one subunit is approx. 35Å off the putative docking site in the second subunit.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

This computational analysis revealed that several possibilities exist for binding of the flexible N-terminal peptide of L-PK with the main body of the protein in domains A and C. In the case of the non-phosphorylated N-terminal peptide this interaction could take place preferably in domain A, and as the appropriate binding sites are rather close to the active centre, this complex formation could be responsible for the high affinity of the enzyme for PEP. As proteolytic truncation of the N-terminus excludes this complex formation, it is not surprising that the decrease in enzyme affinity takes place.

On the other hand, if phosphorylation of the protein shifts the binding site of the N-terminus from domain A to domain C, this also dissolves the internal complex, which putatively promotes PEP binding in the active centre. Therefore, proteolytic truncation and phosphorylation of L-PK should, indeed, have similar effect on PEP binding effectiveness, as was shown by Fenton and Tang (2009). However, if phosphorylation shifts the intramolecular complex of the N-terminus from domain A to domain C, this change may be responsible for switching on cooperativity and allostery of the enzyme (Faustova et al., 2010; Faustova and Järv, 2013), as the putative binding site(s) of the phosphopeptide are close to the FBP binding site. At the same time the enzyme affinity for ADP should be not affected by these intramolecular complexes, as either phosphorylation or truncation of the N-terminal domain have had no effect on binding of this substrate.

Taken together, the present computational analysis was made to model the putative interactions between the N-terminal domain of L-PK and domains A and C of the same protein, which could hypothetically govern the enzyme activity and cooperativity. The results of this computational analysis revealed the presence of docking sites, which are needed for formation of these intramolecular complexes, and thus were in agreement with the hypothetical regulation mechanism. However, for further discussion of structural and mechanistic aspects of L-PK regulation by phosphorylation, a more thorough analysis is needed, where the enzyme complex structure and possibilities of inter-subunit interactions within the tetrameric structure of L-PK molecule are considered.

Docking modelling was carried out by using the AutoDock Vina software, version 1.0.3 (Trott and Olson, 2010), proceeding from the X-ray structure of the pyruvate kinase R isozyme subunit structure listed in PDB, entry 2VGB. In these calculations torsion rotation around the most flexible bonds was defined for docking procedures. The ligands structure modelling was performed using the Spartan 4.0 software suite (Wavefunction, Inc., USA) and the minimum-energy conformations of the compounds were obtained. Pre-optimisation preparations were made by using molecular mechanics and final conformational searches were done by semi-empirical method AM1. Both peptides were represented as zwitterions for these calculations.

The docking compatible structure formats of the protein were prepared by AutoDockTools (ver. 1.5.4) (Sanner, 1999). The partial charges for all atoms in structures of ligands were signed. The fitting box with 0.3Å of grid spacing was defined once and used for all docking calculations. The fitting area covered the whole protein space and the docking poses were obtained and listed following the values of the docking energy. Positioning of centre of ligand in its bound state was calculated and marked by a black dot in the protein model. The graphic software package VMD (ver. 1.9.1) was used for illustration of ligand docking poses on protein surface (Humphrey et al., 1996).

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The present investigation was supported by the Estonian Ministry of Education and Research Grant [SF0180064s08]. Docking modelling was carried out in the High Performance Computing Centre at the University of Tartu.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

