@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#QM/MM–PB/SA scoring of the interaction strength between Akt kinase and apigenin analogues

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           The QM/MM–PB/SA is compared with empirical scoring functions and free energy analysis.


                        
                        
                           
                           The QM/MM–PB/SA is used to score the binding affinity of apigenin analogues to Akt.


                        
                        
                           
                           Kinase assay is performed to solidify the results arising from theoretical analysis.


                        
                        
                           
                           Four apigenin analogues are found to exhibit Akt inhibitory activity at nanomolar level.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Akt kinase

Apigenin

Binding affinity

QM/MM–PB/SA

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Identification of small-molecule compounds that can bind specifically and stably to protein targets of biological interest is a challenge task in structure-based drug design. Traditionally, several fast approaches such as empirical scoring functions and free energy analysis have been widely used to fulfill for this purpose. In the current study, we raised the rigorous quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics in combination with semi-empirical Poisson–Boltzmann/surface area (QM/MM–PB/SA) as an efficient strategy to characterize the intermolecular interaction between Akt kinase and its small-molecule ligands, although this hybrid approach is computationally expensive as compared to those empirical methods. In a round of experimental activity reproduction test based on a set of known Akt–inhibitor complexes, QM/MM–PB/SA has been shown to perform much better than two widely used scoring functions as well as the sophisticated MM-PB/SA analysis with or without improvement by molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. Next, the QM/MM–PB/SA was employed to screen for strong Akt binders from an apigenin analogue set. Consequently, four compounds, namely apigenin, quercetin, gallocatechin and myricetin, were suggested to have high binding potency to Akt active site. A further kinase assay was conducted to determine the inhibitory activity of the four promising candidates against Akt kinase, resulting in IC50 values of 38.4, 67.5, 157.1 and 25.5nM, respectively.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Flavonoids consist of a large group of polyphenolic compounds and are ubiquitously present in plants. They are synthesized by phenylpropanoid pathway and can be categorized, according to chemical structure, into flavonols, flavones, flavanones, isoflavones, catechins, anthocyanidins and chalcones. Over 4000 flavonoids have been identified, many of which occur in fruits, vegetables and beverages (Heim et al., 2002). Flavonoids have been shown to have a wide range of biological and pharmacological activities, including anti-allergic, anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, anti-microbial, anti-cancer and anti-diarrheal activities (Si et al., 2009; Chakravarthi et al., 2009; Taupin, 2009; Zhao et al., 2010; Ruela-de-Sousa et al., 2010; Ohno et al., 2013); the activities and functions depend on their structural class, degree of hydroxylation, other substitutions and conjugations, and degree of polymerization (Kumar and Pandey, 2013).

On of the most biologically important flavonoids is the apigenin, which has been shown to be a very potent anti-cancer compound. It beneficially protects against a wide variety of cancers with high selectivity for cancer cells as opposed to non-cancerous cells (Gupta et al., 2001; Patel et al., 2007; Shukla and Gupta, 2010). It also has a very high safety threshold, and active doses can be gained through consuming a vegetable and fruit rich diet. In vitro studies implicated that the apigenin inhibits the development, proliferation and invasion of tumor cells is to inactivate Akt signaling pathway by binding specifically to the Akt kinase, which triggers apoptosis in human cancer (Kaur et al., 2008). The Akt also known as protein kinase B (PKB), is a human homologue of the viral oncogene v-Akt that plays a key role in multiple cellular processes such as glucose metabolism, cell proliferation, transcription and migration (Fayard et al., 2005). However, the molecular mechanism of Akt–apigenin recognition and interaction still remain largely unexplored to date. The apigenin is a flavonoid derivative that is substituted by three hydroxyl functional groups at positions 4′, 5 and 7 of the basic flavonoid skeleton, namely, flavone. Accumulated data revealed that many flavonoids exert chemopreventive effects through acting at protein kinase signaling pathways, more than as conventional hydrogen-donating antioxidants. Recent studies show that flavonoid inhibitors can bind directly to certain protein kinases such as Fyn JAK, MEK1 and PI3K, and then alter their phosphorylation state to regulate multiple cell signaling pathways in carcinogenesis processes (Hou and Kumamoto, 2010). Calorimetric studies and theoretical investigations have revealed an essential role of substituents in flavonoid’s selectivity and affinity toward their cognate targets; minor change in substituent type, position and/or quantity can address a marked effect on the binding behavior of flavonoid ligands to protein receptors (Saija et al., 1995; Jain et al., 1999; Shi et al., 2011).

The flavonoid skeleton possesses a number of positions at which the substitutions can result in various flavonoid derivatives. Thus, empirical rule has been widely used to perform theoretical analysis of protein–flavonoid interaction and rational design of novel flavonoid ligands that can bind specifically and stably to the protein targets of biological interest. Previously, however, we demonstrated a typical non-additive contribution of hydroxyl substituents to Akt–apigenin affinity by integrating several sophisticated molecule modeling techniques, and we also found that the non-additivity can only be described accurately with rigorous QM/MM–PB/SA approach (Lu et al., 2014). Very recently, Wichapong et al. (2014) compared QM/MM–GB/SA, MM-GB/SA and MM-PB/SA in discriminating between active and inactive kinase inhibitors, and results showed that QM/MM–GB/SA performed much better than normal docking scores or MM-GB/SA and MM-PB/SA in classifying active and inactive inhibitors. In the current study, we attempted to implement QM/MM–PB/SA scoring of the relative binding strength of apigenin and its flavonoid analogues to Akt kinase. Before the analysis we have collected a number of small-molecule Akt inhibitors with known biological activities to test the QM/MM–PB/SA scoring performance, and the obtained results were compared systematically with that derived from empirical scoring functions and MM-PB/SA analysis with or without assistance of molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. The method was later used to computationally estimate the relative binding strength of apigenin and its flavonoid analogues to Akt kinase. We also performed kinase assay to test the Akt inhibitory activity of several highly promising candidates screened with the QM/MM–PB/SA scoring strategy.

Akt inhibitor set (Table 1
                        ). We collected eight existing small-molecule inhibitors that have been reported previously to possess both high affinity and selectivity toward Akt kinase. The biological activities, i.e., IC50 values, of these inhibitors were determined by standard kinase assay experiment; all of the values are at nanomolar level, showing a strong binding potency to Akt. These compounds are diverse in terms of various structure features they possess, including quinoline and indole scaffolds as well as many others. Some of these inhibitors such as GSK690693 and AZD5363 have been solved for their high-resolution complex crystal structures with Akt kinase.

Apigenin analogue set (Table 2
                        ). The apigenin is a flavonoid derivative that is substituted by three hydroxyl functional groups at positions 4′, 5 and 7 of the basic flavonoid skeleton. In fact, there are a number of flavonoid natural products that are structurally similar to the apigenin molecule, from which we selected eleven commercially available compounds to define a distinct apigenin analogue set. Some of these selected compounds have been previously reported to have capability to disrupt Akt signaling pathway; they are therefore potential inhibitors of Akt kinase. For example, the quercetin was found to induce tumor cell apoptosis via caspase activation, regulation of Bcl-2 and inhibition of PI-3-kinase/Akt and ERK pathways in a human hepatoma cell line (Granado-Serrano et al., 2006), and the kaempferol acts through Akt and mitogen-activated protein kinases to elicit protection for neuroinflammation in BV2 microglial cells (Park et al., 2011). Therefore, we herein attempted to investigate the binding behavior and to evaluate the binding affinity of apigenin and these flavonoid analogues to Akt at different theoretical levels.

The crystal structure of Akt complexed with apigenin and other flavonoids are not available, and thus we herein described a computational procedure to model their complex structures. As shown in Fig. 1
                        , the Akt structure (PDB: 1GZN) in unbound state was retrieved from the PDB database (Berman et al., 2000), which misses two loop regions corresponding to sequences 189–197 and 297–312. Thus, we first employed the FALC-Loop server (Ko et al., 2011) to build these missing loops for the incomplete protein. The analytical loop closure algorithm allows efficient search for loop conformations that fit into the protein framework starting from the fragment-assembled structures. Subsequently, a procedure developed in our recent work was used to model the Akt–apigenin structure (Lu et al., 2014): the repaired Akt structure was superposed onto the high-resolution crystal structure template of protein kinase CK2–apigenin complex (PDB: 4DGM), and the CK2 protein was then removed from the superposed system, resulting in artificial Akt–apigenin complex, which was subjected to a molecular dynamics (MD) simulation with AMBER03 force field (Duan et al., 2003) to eliminate the atomic collisions and bond distortions (see Section 2.4).

Two empirical scoring functions, DrugScore (Gohlke et al., 2000) and DFIRE (Zhou and Zhou, 2002), that have been widely used to study protein–ligand binding phenomena are considered to assess the interaction strength of apigenin and its analogues with Akt kinase. The scoring procedure was conducted based on the coarse–grained complex structure models obtained using the computational procedure described above. DrugScore is a distance-dependent pair potential obtained from nonbonded interactions in small organic molecule crystal packing. Compared to those potentials derived from biomolecular structures, the better resolved small molecule structures provide relevant contact data in a more balanced distribution of atom types and produce potentials of superior statistical significance and more detailed shape. DFIRE is an all-atom knowledge-based potential derived from high-quality crystal structures, which provides accurate predictions as far as the stability of protein–ligand complexes is concerned.

Counterions were placed nearby the modeled complex structures of Akt kinase with apigenin and its analogues using a coulombic potential on a grid to keep the whole simulated system neutral, and then the system was solvated in a rectangular box of about 3900 TIP3P water molecules (Jorgensen et al., 1983) with extended 9Å away from any solute atom. Subsequently, a MD simulation procedure modified from previous descriptions (Hou et al., 2006, 2009) was used to treat the complex systems. Briefly, the AMBER03 force field (Duan et al., 2003) was applied the SHAKE scheme (Ryckaert et al., 1977) was employed to constrain all bonds involving hydrogen atom, and the time step was 2fs. Parameters that were not found in standard AMBER force field were assigned with the generalized amber force field (GAFF) (Wang et al., 2004). The MD simulations consisted of a gradual temperature increase from 0 to 300K over 0.5ns and a 4.5nM simulation for equilibration and data collection. Based on structure snapshots extracted over the equilibrated MD trajectory, MM-PB/SA analysis was carried out to derive the binding free energy of ligand (inhibitor, apigenin or its analogue) to Akt (Kollman et al., 2000), which considered the total binding free energy made up of direct nonbonded interactions between Akt and ligand (Zhou et al., 2012) and indirect desolvation effect due to the draining out of water from the Akt–ligand interface.

The complex structure models were refined with the hybrid quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics (QM/MM) method (Senn and Thiel, 2009), which was implemented using the ONIOM algorithm (Vreven et al., 2006). Previously, we have successfully employed this method to investigate enzyme–substrate binding phenomenon (Ni et al., 2011a,b). The whole Akt–ligand complex system was partitioned into two layers: the ligand and the first shield residues in Akt active site (i.e., Leu156, Lys179, Glu198, Ala230 and Glu234) that directly interact with the ligand were included in the high-level QM layer, while the rest of the system was in the low-level MM layer (Fig. 2
                        ). The QM and MM layers were described by AM1 theory (Dewar et al., 1985) and AMBER force field (Cornell et al., 1995), respectively. In the MM layer, the restricted electrostatic potential (RESP) fitting strategy (Comell et al., 1993) was used to generate partial atomic charges for the ligand. After optimization, the interaction energy between Akt and its ligand was calculated based on the refined complex structure using a strategy described in our previous works (Zhou et al., 2009; Ni et al., 2014), while the associated solvent effect was considered using the PB/SA scheme (Fogolari et al., 2002). The QM/MM and PB/SA calculations were performed with the Gaussian 03 (Frisch et al., 2003) and DELPHE (Rocchia et al., 2001) programs, respectively.

The compound samples were dissolved in DMSO and stored at −20°C. All other materials and methods were as described previously (Rhodes et al., 2008). Briefly, activated Akt enzymes were incubated with tested compounds at room temperature for 0.5h before the reaction was initiated with the addition of substrate. Final reaction contains 10nM Akt protein, 2μM ATP, 0.15μ Ci/AL [γ
                        33-P]ATP and 1μM peptide substrate as well as 10mM MgCl2; 25mM MOPS and 1mM DTT. The reactions were incubated at room temperature for 1h, followed by termination with LEADseeker beads in PBS containing EDTA. The plates were then sealed and the beads allowed to settle for several hours, and quantitated using a viewlux imager. Each sample was tested for duplicate.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

Four out of the eight Akt inhibitors listed in Table 1 have already been solved complex crystal structures with Akt kinase. The complex structure models of other inhibitors with Akt were manually modified from these crystal templates using a protocol described above. These crystal structures or coarse-grained structure models were relaxed via atomistic molecular dynamics (MD) simulations with AMBER03 force field (Duan et al., 2003). Because the unbound Akt structure is in the ‘DFG-in’ state where ATP pocket is partially occupied by the F294 residue, here we examined the F294 interaction with the apigenin ligand. As can be seen in Fig. 3
                        (A), before MD simulation inter-atomic collisions between the F294 and apigenin can be readily observed since the ATP pocket was partially occupied by the benzene moiety of F294 residue. However, the collisions actually are not very severe because the apigenin is separated by a small distance from the F294. After MD simulation, as seen in Fig. 3(B), the system was relaxed and the F294 side chain was turned to another direction. In addition, the location of apigenin ligand was also adjusted. As a result, the slight collisions existing originally between the F294 residue and apigenin molecule were completely eliminated, resulting in a reasonable structure arrangement around the active pocket of the modeled Akt–apigenin complex.

The equilibrated complex structures were evaluated for their binding affinities using the empirical scoring functions DrugScore and DFIRE. As can be seen from Fig. 4
                        (A) and (B), the linear correlations between the calculated score and experimentally determined activity are insignificant, with Pearson’s correlation coefficients R
                        p
                        =−0.261 and 0.07, respectively. The DrugScore seems to have a very weak negative correlation with the biological activity of Akt inhibitors (R
                        p
                        =−0.261), while DFIRE does not show any correlation with the activity (R
                        p
                        =0.07), suggesting that the empirical scoring functions are unable to give quantitative evaluation for ligand binding capability to Akt kinase.

Further, we employed semi-empirical MM-PB/SA method to derive the interaction energy between Akt and its inhibitors based on the minimized complex structures, and the resulting correlation with experimental activity is still quite modest (R
                        p
                        =−0.139) (Fig. 4(C)), which does not receive a substantial improvement as compared to those obtained from empirical scoring functions. Traditionally, the MM-PB/SA analysis was performed on the multiple snapshots of a dynamic complex structure to derive a consistent expression for the binding free energy of a ligand molecule to its protein receptor (Zhou et al., 2013). Therefore, 5ns MD simulations were addressed for each of the eight Akt–inhibitor systems to generate a series of dynamic complex structures to facilitate the post MM-PB/SA analysis (MD-MM-PB/SA). The root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) of the protein and the inhibitors showed small fluctuations indicating the stability of these complexes during the simulation. It can be seen from Fig. 4(D) that, however, the MD simulations have only a quite modest effect on MM-PB/SA performance, with the obtained R
                        p value changing from −0.139 to −0.201 due to the simulations. This finding is basically consistent with that reported recently by Wichapong et al. (2014), who also found that MM-PB/SA binding energy either derived from a single complex or an ensemble from MD simulations cannot be used to classify active or inactive Myt1 kinase inhibitors.

Next, the rigorous QM/MM method was employed to minimize Akt–inhibitor complex structures and, then, the QM/MM–PB/SA was utilized to assess the complex interaction energies based on their refined structures. Consequently, a strong linear correlation between the QM/MM–PB/SA derived energy and the experimentally measured activity emerged readily through the eight inhibitor samples, as seen in Fig. 4(E). Given the significant Pearson's correlation coefficient R
                        p
                        =−0.646, the QM/MM–PB/SA appears to be a useful tool to evaluate Akt–inhibitor affinity based on complex structures, although the QM/MM–PB/SA calculations is computationally expensive as compared to empirical scoring functions and MM-PB/SA analysis. Therefore, it is believed that the QM/MM–PB/SA could be used to rigorously evaluate the relative binding strength of few or moderate quantity of compound samples at high level.

In addition, we found that the absolute values of inhibitor binding free energies to Akt kinase were largely overestimated by QM/MM–PB/SA. In fact, the overestimation of interaction strength between the protein receptors and their ligands with the QM/MM–PB/SA method appears to be a common phenomenon, and a number of studies published previously have faced with this problem. For example, Zhou et al. employed the method to analyze the intermolecular interactions of flufenamic acid and 2,3,4,5,6-pentafluoro-SBB with their cognate protein receptors, resulting in obviously overestimated values (Zhou et al., 2009). In our recent study of HIV-1 protease–peptide binding free energy changes upon the protease mutations, we also observed that the QM/MM–PB/SA overestimated the associated mutation energies as compared to corresponding experimental values (Ni et al., 2014). In fact, the independent QM/MM calculation is absent of solvent screening (i.e., the calculation is performed in vacuum but not in solvent) (Zhou et al., 2010). Therefore, the electrostatic interaction (one of the most important nonbonded interactions) between the Akt protein and its ligands is largely overestimated by the QM/MM due to absent of solvent screening. However, the solvent screening usually contributes constantly to the binding free energies of a series of ligand analogues, and thus absence of it in QM/MM calculation does not change the resulting relative energy values for the ligand series.

The binding free energies ΔG of apigenin and its flavonoid analogues to Akt kinase were calculated rigorously using the QM/MM–PB/SA scheme, and the obtained results are listed in Table 2 and shown in Fig. 5
                        . As can be seen, the absolute ΔG values are significantly larger than that arising from MM-PB/SA and MD-MM-PB/SA; this is because electronic effects associated with Akt–ligand binding can be fully considered by the QM/MM method, which would contribute substantially to the binding. The calculated ΔG values range from −30 to −65kcal/mol, where four compounds, i.e., apigenin, quercetin, gallocatechin and myricetin, were predicted to possess high Akt affinity, viz. ΔG
                        <
                        −50kcal/mol. Besides the apigenin whose Akt inhibitory activity has been extensively studied previously (Kaur et al., 2008), the quercetin and myricetin have also been found to have capability of targeting Akt signaling pathway and inhibiting tumor cell growth. For example, Granado-Serrano et al. found that the quercetin can induce apoptosis via caspase activation and inhibition of PI3K/Akt pathways in a human hepatoma cell line (Granado-Serrano et al., 2006); this finding was later solidified by Gulati et al. (Gulati et al., 2006), who demonstrated that the anti-proliferative effect of quercetin in cancer cells is mediated by inhibition of the PI3K/Akt pathway. Furthermore, the Akt kinase has also been shown as a direct target for myricetin to inhibit cell transformation (Kumamoto et al., 2009); myricetin was observed to inhibit Akt survival signaling and induces Bad-mediated apoptosis in HaCaT human immortalized keratinocytes (Kim et al., 2010). In order to solidify the theoretical results obtained from QM/MM–PB/SA calculations, the four promising compounds were assayed in vitro for their inhibitory activities against Akt kinase. Consequently, the IC50 values of apigenin, quercetin, gallocatechin and myricetin were determined to be 38.4, 67.5, 157.1 and 25.5nM, respectively; the inhibitory activities of apigenin analogues is at nanomolar level, which appear to be slightly lower as compared to those of existing Akt inhibitors (Table 1). However, apigenin analogues are natural products that possess low toxicity and high biological computability, and could therefore be considered as good candidates to develop new Akt inhibitors.

Further, we added the 4 assayed flavonoids into the scatter plot (Fig. 4(E)) of inhibitory activity pIC50 against QM/MM–PB/SA derived binding affinity for the 8 Akt inhibitors, result in Fig. 6
                        . As seen, the correlation has a moderate degradation relative to that only plotted by those Akt inhibitors; the correlation decreases from original −0.646 to current −0.596. This is acceptable if considering that the structures of inhibitor molecules and flavonoids differ significantly, and also the 8 inhibitors and the 4 flavonoids were assayed in different labs. Therefore, the slight incompatibility between the 8 inhibitors and the 4 flavonoids may be caused by a systematic bias. The Pearson correlations R
                        p for the 8 inhibitors and the 4 flavonoids are −0.646 and −0.729, respectively; when combining them together, the R
                        p reduces slightly to −0.596, suggesting that the compatibility within the 8 inhibitors or within the 4 flavonoids is fairly well, but the compatibility between the 8 inhibitors and 4 flavonoids is relatively weaker.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Nos. 31271272 and 31200602), the Jiangsu University for Advanced Professionals (No. 1281330021) and the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (No. 2012M521001).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

