@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Identification of evolutionarily conserved Momordica charantia microRNAs using computational approach and its utility in phylogeny analysis

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Twenty four pre-miRNAs were reported from Momordica charantia developing seed transcriptome.


                        
                        
                           
                           Phylogeny analysis with binary data were unreliable.


                        
                        
                           
                           Identified miRNAs held sequence conservation in mature miRNAs.


                        
                        
                           
                           Phylogeny analysis of pre-miRNA sequences revealed genus specific segregation.


                        
                        
                           
                           Predicted targets revealed role of miRNAs in regulation of developmental process.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

microRNA




                     Momordica charantia




                  

Phylogeny

Short Read Archive

Plant develolpment

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  
                     Momordica charantia (bitter gourd, bitter melon) is a monoecious Cucurbitaceae with anti-oxidant, anti-microbial, anti-viral and anti-diabetic potential. Molecular studies on this economically valuable plant are very essential to understand its phylogeny and evolution. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are conserved, small, non-coding RNA with ability to regulate gene expression by bind the 3′ UTR region of target mRNA and are evolved at different rates in different plant species. In this study we have utilized homology based computational approach and identified 27 mature miRNAs for the first time from this bio-medically important plant. The phylogenetic tree developed from binary data derived from the data on presence/absence of the identified miRNAs were noticed to be uncertain and biased. Most of the identified miRNAs were highly conserved among the plant species and sequence based phylogeny analysis of miRNAs resolved the above difficulties in phylogeny approach using miRNA. Predicted gene targets of the identified miRNAs revealed their importance in regulation of plant developmental process. Reported miRNAs held sequence conservation in mature miRNAs and the detailed phylogeny analysis of pre-miRNA sequences revealed genus specific segregation of clusters.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

MicroRNAs are small non-coding RNAs (19–25nt long) which play a major role in post-transcriptional regulation of protein-coding genes (Sekar et al., 2014) and are important for evolution of developmental processes in plants (Jasinski et al., 2010). In plants the prefect homology between the miRNA and its target gene leads to catalytic degradation of the target mRNA. Inspite of this translation repression of target gene expression have also been noticed from plant miRNA-mRNA interaction as a rare event. Using the above two mechanisms plant miRNA are known to act as most important players in the regulation of plant growth and development, in response to biotic and abiotic stress. In general plants miRNA are transcribed as long primary transcript (pri-miRNA) by RNA polymerase II. The pri-miRNA are further processed by a Dicer-like RNAse III ribonuclease (DCL1), which yields further shorter miRNA precursor (pre-miRNA) with stem loop structure and miRNA:miRNA* duplex. Unlike the animals, the whole process of plant synthesis starting from transcription to miRNA:miRNA* duplex formation takes place in the nucleus and transported to the cytoplasm and methylated. In cytoplasm the methylated mature miRNA is incorporated in the RNA-Induced Silencing Complex (RISC) and recruits the ARGONAUTE1 (AGO1) to silence the target mRNA (Gazzani et al., 2009).

The family Cucurbitaceae which comprises of 800 species in 130 genera is well known for the vegetable crops such as melon, cucumber squash and zucchini (Wang et al., 2010). Momordica charantia (bitter gourd, bitter melon) is a monoecious Cucurbitaceae plant and is mainly cultivated in the tropical regions such as subtropical Asia, Africa and South America (Miniraj et al., 1993). Bitter gourd is well known for anti-oxidant, anti-microbial, anti-viral, anti-diabetic activities (Joseph and Jini, 2013). Further considering the origin, it have been described that bitter gourd has been cultivated in India as early as <1590 AD (Decker-Walters, 1999), which indicates the level of an extremely ancient attentiveness about this plant species. More recently Schaefer and Renner (2010) reported the origin of Momordica from tropical Africa and that the Asian species has been dispersed about 19 million years ago. Among the Natural products known with pharmaceutical biology, bitter melon is considered as a good source of biologically active compounds (Islam et al., 2011). Further bitter gourd gains economically important morphological diversity and it varies with size, color, surface texture, and edible maturity trait of mature fruit (Robinson and Decker-Walters, 1999). In addition sex expression (i.e., monoecious and gynoecious sex types) is also considered as an economically important trait of the bitter gourd widely cultivated in the tropical regions (Behera et al., 2006).

Different molecular approaches have been applied to document the genetic diversity associated with economically important traits of bitter melon. Gaikwad et al. (2008) performed AFLP based comprehensive diversity assessment of 38 Indian commercial varieties and cultivated landraces originating from different agroecological zones and reported genetic discrimination among the cultivars. Recently 108 AFLP markers and five qualitative trait loci fruit color, fruit luster, fruit surface structure, stigma color, and seed color has been reported from the first genetic map of bitter melon (Kole et al., 2012). Sixteen polymorphic microsatellite loci from 36 individuals of M. charantia were reported using Fast Isolation by AFLP of Sequence COntaining Repeats (FIASCO) (Wang et al., 2010). Guo et al. (2012) reported genetic diversity of Momordica using 10 FIASCO derived SSR marker. Matsumura et al. (2014) identified GTFL-1 as the closest SNP locus to the putative gynoecious locus and suggested GTFl-1 for marker-assisted selection of gynoecy in bitter melon breeding program.

Though there are reports on the development of molecular markers for various QTL (Kole et al., 2012) and transcriptomic studies for gene discovery (Yang et al., 2010), up to our knowledge no work has been initiated on discovery of miRNA from this economically valuable plant till date. In this present study we have used the computational approach to identify miRNA from M. charantia by searing the short read archive (SRA) database in NCBI and for the first time we have reported 27 mature miRNA in the bitter melon, M. charantia. Further the phylogenies of the identified miRNAs were compared with the earlier reported miRNAs and the results were discussed in detail.

We used short reads archive (SRA) database from NCBI for the identification of miRNAs from M. charantia using computational approach (Fig. 1
                        ) as per Thirugnanasambantham et al. (2013). M. charantia SRA sequences (1,05,995 RNA sequences as of reported from developing seeds of bitter melon under the experimental accession SRX330814) were extracted from NCBI using the search term “Momordica charantia”. The pre-miRNA (28,645 as of June 2014) and mature miRNA (35,828 as of June 2014) sequences were retrieved from the miRBase (http://www.mirbase.org/). After eliminating redundant and poor quality sequences, local nucleotide database was created for M. charantia SRA sequences. The created local nucleotide database was searched against the miRNAs dataset for their corresponding homolog sequences.

The mature miRNA sequences were used as a query for homology search against our local M. charantia nucleotide sequence database at e-value threshold <0.01 using BLAST 2.2.22+ program with all other parameters as default (Altschul et al., 1990). The candidate miRNA sequences and their corresponding SRA sequence were collected and archived as FASTA formats. The respective precursor and mature miRNA sequence were aligned against the corresponding nucleotide sequence using ClustalW (Thompson et al., 1994) multiple sequence alignment tool. Selected nucleotide sequence with less than four mismatches with precursor and mature miRNA sequence were validated for their non-protein encoding phenomenon using BLASTx programme with default parameter (Altschul et al., 1997). Selected nucleotide sequences were aligned to reference pre-miRNA sequences, the aligned region were extracted and considered as candidate pre-miRNA sequence.

The candidate pre-miRNAs extracted as above were validated using Mfold v 3.2 (http://www.mfold.rna.albary.edu/). While selecting a RNA sequence from the nucleotide resource as a candidate miRNA precursor, the criteria as reported by Zhang et al. (2006a) was followed as specified below: (a) the candidate pre-miRNA sequence must fold into an appropriate stem-loop hairpin secondary structure, (b) mature miRNA sequence must be located in one arm of the hairpin structure, (c) the mature miRNAs should <7 mismatches with the opposite miRNA* sequence in the other arm, (d) loop or break in miRNA sequences should not be noticed, (e) the MFEs of predicted secondary structures should be ≤−18kcal/mol and 40–70% A+U contents. Target of the identified M. charantia miRNA were predicted using psRNATarget with the Cucumis sativus transcriptome sequences (Dai and Zhao, 2011). The identified targets were used as query sequences for BLASTx search (Altschul et al., 1997) and functionally annotated using AmiGO Blast and literature survey.

Predicted miRNAs were named as per the pattern of miRBase Griffiths-Jones et al. (2003). The mature sequences were designated “miR” and the respective precursor hairpins were labeled as “mir” with the prefix “mch” for Momordica charantia. For phylogenetic analysis the precursor sequences of homolog miRNA’s were identified, collected, and aligned with identified M.charantia miRNA using ClustalW (Thompson et al., 1994). Phylogenetic analysis of the aligned miRNA sequences were performed with MEGA5 (Tamura et al., 2004). The evolutionary distances were computed using the maximum composite likelihood method (Tamura et al., 2007) and are in the units of the number of base substitutions per site.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Totally 1,05,995 SRA sequences of M.charantia were retrieved from the NCBI and used for prediction of miRNAs. From the present study on computational search for conserved miRNAs, 150 SRA sequences alone were recorded with less than four mismatches with the corresponding miRNA sequences. Further analysis of the sequence using blastx programme revealed presence of 52 non protein encoding ESTs. To be final 24
                     M.charantia pre- miRNAs showing 27 mature miRNA sequences were reported after a careful evaluation of the secondary structure analysis (Figs. 2–8
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     ). For the predicted miRNAs, Table 1
                      provides details such as source sequences, length of precursor sequences, minimum free energies of folded miRNA structure and A+U content. Among the predicted miRNAs, 12 miRNAs were notice in 3’ strand and 15 miRNAs were noticed in 5’ strand. The minimum free energy of the predicted miRNAs was noticed with the range of −18.60 to −73.20kcal/mol with an average of −47.39kcal/mol. On the other hand A+U percentage of the predicted miRNAs ranged from 40.10 to 61.90 % with an average value of 47.89 %. From the total 27 miRNAs predicted, 22 miRNAs revealed 100 % match with their homologue in miRNA database, while five miRNAs (mch-miR156g, mch-miR166i, mch-miR396a-3p, mch-miR399d and mch-miR2111a-3p) shows difference in the mature miRNA sequence.


                     Table 2
                      documented the conservation of the identified miRNA among the various plant species. The miR2915 and miR2018 respectively from Populus euphratica and Vigna unguiculata has not been reported from other plant species till date. As the outcome of the present study, both the miRNAs was reported for the first time from M.charantia. Considering the families of miR156, among 58 plant species selected the miR156d and miR156g has been identified in 27 and 21 plant species respectively. It was observed that the miR166b was the more conserved and was noticed in 38 plant species till date (Fig. 9
                     ).

Based on the developed dendrogram, nine distinct clusters were observed among the 38 plants species (Fig. 10
                        ). The cluster 1 was dominated with 28 plant species used in the phylogeny analysis, which included the M.charantia miR166b. Whereas the Linum usitatissimum was observed as single cluster 2. Sorghum bicolor and Gossypium hirsutum were notices as cluster-3 and cluster 4 was documented with Pinus taeda and Selaginella moellendorffii. All other remaining plant species namely Amborella trichopoda, Brassica napus, Aegilops tauschii, Physcomitrella patens and Picea abies were each resolved as a separate cluster 5–9 respectively. Among the family Brassicaceae, both the species Arabidopsis lyrata and Arabidopsis thaliana were noticed in the large cluster 1, whereas the Brassica napus was observed as a separate cluster 6. All the plant species from the dicotyledonous family Fabaceae and monocotyledonous family Poaceae were documented in the large cluster 1. Thus the present study on phylogenetic analysis of the predicted M.charantia miR166b with other plant species revealed its conservation among the plant species studied.

Unlike the case of miR166b with mixed monocotyledons and dicotyledons plants, phylogeny analysis of miR168 segregated the monocotyledons and dicotyledons into different cluster (Fig. 11
                        ). In case of miR168 all the 8 monocotyledon plants of the family Poaceae were found as cluster 1. The cluster 2 was recorded with a single plant species Amborella trichopoda from the dicotyledon family Amborellaceae. Among the family Fabaceae Glycine max and Vigna unguiculata were noticed as the cluster 3 and the known model plant of the fabaceae was placed as cluster 4. In case of the family Brassicaceae A.lyrata and A.thaliana from the genus Arabidopsis were observed as cluster 5, whereas the B.napus and B.rapa from the genus Brassica were noticed as a separate cluster 11. Ricinus communis from the Euphorbiaceae family was noticed as a separate cluster 12 and two plant species from the Rutaceae family (Citrus clementina and Citrus reticulata) were found in a single cluster 13. Plant species such as Theobroma cacao (Malvaceae), Nicotiana tabacum and Solanum lycopersicum (Solanaceae), Manihot esculenta (Euphorbiaceae) and Populus trichocarpa (Salicaceae) were recorded as distinct clusters 6–10 respectively. Whereas the Malus domestica and Prunus persica from the family Rosaceae were noticed as separate clusters 14 and 15 respectively. The dicotyledons Vitis vinifera (Vitaceae), Acacia auriculiformis (Fabaceae), Linum usitatissimum (Linaceae), 
                           Cynara cardunculus
                         (Asteraceae), Aquilegia caerulea (Ranunculaceae), Cucumis melo and Momordica charantia (Cucurbitaceae) were observed as clusters 16–22 respectively.

Analysis of pre-miRNA sequence of miR396a revealed that it was conserved in majority of the plant species (Fig. 12
                        ). The phylogenetic tree derived from the pre-miRNA sequence resulted in 4 major clusters. The cluster 1 was covered with 27 plant species which included both monocot and dicot plants including M.charantia. Whereas the cluster 2 was reported with a single plant species Amborella trichopoda, which was rare understory shrubs endemic to the main island of New Caledonia, located at southwest pacific ocean. The grasses Brachypodium distachyon and Aegilops tauschii were noticed as clusters 3 and 4 respectively.

Considering the miR2111a, including the present report till date it has been reported specifically from 12 plant species of class Eudicots (Fig. 13
                        ). The phylogenetic analysis revealed that 4 plant species (Arabidopsis lyrata, Arabidopsis thaliana, Brassica napus and Brassica rapa) from the family Brassicaceae were documented in a same cluster 1. Whereas, the cluster 2 was documented with Prunus persica of Rosaceae family, Cucumis melo and Momordica charantia from Cucurbitaceae family. Plant species Glycine max and Medicago truncatula from Fabaceae family was observed as cluster 3 and 5 respectively. The remaining 4 plant species Populus trichocarpa (Salicaceae), Malus domestica (Rosaceae) and Manihot esculenta (Euphorbiaceae) were observed as cluster 4.

Total of 43 targets were predicted for the 27 miRNAs identified from the Cucumis sativus transcriptomic data (Table 3
                        ). Overall targets of the identified miRNAs are noticed to be involved in diverse process ranging from plant development, senescence, fruit ripening, biotic and abiotic stress tolerance. Among the identified miRNAs miR156d, miR159a, miR164d, miR166, miR171d, miR319d, miR394a and miR396a were noticed to be involved in regulation of plant developmental process by down regulating the expression of their respective protein targets, whereas the genes encoding senescence associated proteins were targeted by miR156g and miR172b.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small, non-coding RNA that have ability to bind the 3’ UTR region of target mRNA and regulates its expression either by translational repression or mRNA degradation (Thirugnanasambantham et al., 2013). In this study for the first time we have applied homology based computational approach with M.charantia SRA sequences deposited by Yang et al. (2010) and reported 27 miRNA sequences belonging to 20 different miRNA families from the M.charantia. Detailed sequence analysis of the developed RNA sequence read from developing seeds of M.charantia revealed 50% of the total sequences with length 200nt revealed no homology to the reported proteins sequences from green plants (Yang et al., 2010). The above scenario confirms the presence of miRNA transcripts in transcriptome of developing seed. Among the miRNAs over 65% of the predicted mature miRNAs was noticed with size 21 nucleotides and more than 80% of the premature miRNA sequences were noticed with length ranging from 50 to 150 nucleotides. Similar reports have been reported earlier from various species (Cucumis sativus, Cucumis melo, Citrullus lanatus, Siraitia grosvenorii and Cucurbita pepo) of the Cucurbitaceae family (Hu et al., 2014). The average minimum free energy calculated for the predicted pre-miRNA sequences from the present study was greater than those reported from miRNAs of other Cucurbitaceae family (Hu et al., 2014).

Plant miRNAs are conserved and evolved at different rates with different plant species (Zhang et al., 2006b; Wang et al., 2007). Our study revealed presence/absence of the identified miRNAs varied in wide range of plant species (Table 2). In addition, the phylogenetic tree derived from the above binary data were noticed to be uncertain and biased. Recent study of Thomson et al. (2014) reported that the data on presence/absence of microRNA makes inference of phylogeny to be difficult. Inspite of the problem, sequence based phylogeny analysis of miRNAs could resolve the above difficulties. In our study, phylogenetic analysis of miR166b revealed that it was highly conserved in most of the plant species studied and the obtained clusters were mixed with both monocotyledons and dicotyledons plants. Unlike the miR166b which has been identified from large number of plant species, other isoforms of its family miR166h and miR166i has been identified in 15 and 12 plant species respectively. Whereas, phylogeny analysis of miR168 revealed cluster specific segregation of monocotyledons and dicotyledons. Further, the present phylogeny with pre miR168 sequence revealed genus specific segregation of clusters of family Brassicaceae. Existence of miR168 in Brassicaceae has been reported to have happened at least 40 million years ago and evolutionally maintained in Brassicaceae (Gazzani et al., 2009). Zhao et al. (2012) reported that miRNAs have rapid evolution ratios than ribosomal DNA genes. Though the sequences of mature miRNAs were highly conserved, variation in pre-miRNA sequence confirms the role of miRNA evolution in the regulation of wide biological process/responses of plants (Hu et al., 2014).

MicroRNAs reported from plants were well documented to target the expression of key genes regulating plant developmental process (Hu et al., 2014). Unlike animal miRNAs originated by formation of hairpin structures in the genomes, plant miRNAs are originated by duplication of preexisting miRNA genes or protein-coding genes. The above difference in mode of evolution makes the difference in the binding of target mRNAs and mode of action in plants and animals (Nozawa et al., 2012). Absence of fully annotated M.charantia transcriptomic resource is the bottleneck in identification of M.charantia specific mRNA targets. So we have adopted its close relative Cucumis sativus transcriptomic resource for target prediction. The identified miRNAs were involved in regulation of wide range of biological process (Table 3). The identified miR156d from M.charantia transcriptome was predicted to control the developmental process via targeting the Squamosa promoter-binding-like protein (Yu et al., 2012). While for mch-miR156g three putative targets namely β-galactosidase, early nodulin-like protein and 14 kDa proline-rich protein, playing key role in regulating senescence and fruit ripening, cellular transport, host-bacterial interaction, plant development and root growth were predicted (Figueiredo et al., 2011; Denance et al., 2014; Choi et al., 1996). Since transcription factor MYB29, cell wall protein RBR3, mannan endo-1,4-beta-mannosidase and benzyl alcohol O-benzoyltransferase were observed as targets of mch-miR159a, it could involve in regulation of plant development, biotic stress and fruit ripening (Sonderby et al., 2010; Desvoyes et al., 2014; Cruz-Ramirez et al., 2012; Wang et al., 2014). The mch-miR160a was predicted to target auxin response factor and controls seed germination, post-embryonic root development and growth (Liu et al., 2007). Endoribonuclease dicer regulating feedback regulation of miRNA activity and isoflavone 2′-hydroxylase involving in antimicrobial isoflavonoid synthesis were predicted as targets of mch-miR162 (Xie et al., 2003; Akashi et al., 1998). NAC domain-containing protein has been identified as a target of mch-miR164d, which revealed the involvement of miR164d in abiotic stress tolerance and development (Fang et al., 2014). Further Jasinski et al. (2010) reported importance of miR164 gene evolution in evolution of leaf shape and carpel closure in the angiosperms. All three subfamilies of miR166 identified in the present study was predicted to target mRNA encoding histone deacetylase, homeobox-leucine zipper protein, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide transporter and abscisic acid insensitive protein involved in biological process such as leaf development, seed development, secondary growth and redox balance of plant development (Ueno et al., 2007; Ko et al., 2006; Palmieri et al., 2009; Brocard et al., 2002).

Two important transcription factors namely ERF and JUNGBRUNNEN 1-like protein involved in signaling pathway related to development and stress response were predicted as targets of mch- miR172b (Thirugnanasambantham et al., 2014; Wu et al., 2012). Similarly mch-miR319d targeted transcripts encoding glucan endo-1,3-beta-glucosidase, β-d-xylosidase, transcription factors GAMYB, TCP2 and MYB29 involving in regulation of plant development, biotic and abiotic stress responses (Beffa et al., 1993; Goujon et al., 2003; Li and Lu., 2014; Woodger et al., 2003). Transcription factor MYB3 responsible for developmental and defense response regulation was predicted as target of mch- miR396a (Yanhui et al., 2006).

In conclusion the present study reported 27 mature miRNAs from developing seed specific transcriptome of bitter melon. Identified miRNAs were reported to hold sequence conservation in mature miRNAs and the detailed phylogeny analysis of pre-miRNA sequences revealed genus specific segregation of clusters. The predicted targets of the identified miRNAs from the developing seed transcriptomic resource clarified the importance of miRNA in seed development. Further extended study could explain evolutionary importance of mircoRNA in economically important M.charantia and its related plant species.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

All the authors are thankful to the Pondicherry Centre for Biological Sciences (PCBS) for providing the necessary facility. Financial support as start-up loan from the State Bank of India (RASMECC), Pondicherry, India, to establish the PCBS is also gratefully acknowledged. KT is a recipient of Young Scientist grant (SB/FT/LS-382/2012), Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB), Department of Science and Technology, Government of India, and their financial support is duly acknowledged.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

