@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Structure-based design and confirmation of peptide ligands for neuronal polo-like kinase to promote neuroregeneration

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           The intramolecular KD–PBD interaction in nPLK is investigated at structural level.


                        
                        
                           
                           Two continuous peptide fragments are identified as hot spots at the interaction interface.


                        
                        
                           
                           One of the two fragments is potential as self-inhibitory peptide to target nPLK.


                        
                        
                           
                           The peptide is structurally optimized to derive several mutants with improved activity.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Neuronal polo-like kinase

Self-inhibitory peptide

Molecular recognition

Neuroregeneration

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               Abstract
               
                  Neuronal polo-like kinase (nPLK) is an essential regular of cell cycle and differentiation in nervous system, and targeting nPLK has been established as a promising therapeutic strategy to treat neurological disorders and to promote neuroregeneration. The protein contains an N-terminal kinase domain (KD) and a C-terminal Polo-box domain (PBD) that are mutually inhibited by each other. Here, the intramolecular KD–PBD complex in nPLK was investigated at structural level via bioinformatics analysis, molecular dynamics (MD) simulation and binding affinity scoring. From the complex interface two regions representing separately two continuous peptide fragments in PBD domain were identified as the hot spots of KD–PBD interaction. Structural and energetic analysis suggested that one (PBD peptide 1) of the two peptides can bind tightly to a pocket nearby the active site of KD domain, which is thus potential as self-inhibitory peptide to target and suppress nPLK kinase activity. The knowledge harvesting from computational studies were then used to guide the structural optimization and mutation of PBD peptide 1. Consequently, two of three peptide mutants separately exhibited moderately and considerably increased affinity as compared to the native peptide. The computationally modeled complex structures of KD domain with these self-inhibitory peptides were also examined in detail to unravel the structural basis and energetic property of nPLK-peptide recognition and interaction.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The neural signaling network is orchestrated by various functional proteins involved in nervous system. An important among these neuroproteins is the neuronal polo-like kinase (nPLK), which is a Ser/Thr protein kinase that plays critical roles in nerve cycle and proliferation. Accumulated evidences suggested that nPLK is a central mediator of activity-dependent change in molecular composition and morphology of synapses, which can be dynamically regulated in neurons by synaptic activity at mRNA and/or protein levels; induction of nPLK may cause global dampening of synaptic strength following heightened neuronal activity (Seeburg et al., 2005). Currently, nPLK has become a well studied neurokinase because of its tight association with diverse neurological disorders; overexpression and activation of nPLK in central nervous system (CNS) are involved in the aberrations of cell cycle control in neurological pathogenesis. For example, increased nPLK implicates aberrations in cell cycle control in Alzheimer’s disease (Harris et al., 2000) and inhibition of the kinase can considerably reduce β-amyloid-induced neuronal cell death in this disease (Song et al., 2011). In addition, nPLK has been found as a dominant kinase involved in the phosphorylation of α-synuclein in Lewy bodies, which are one of the hallmarks of Parkinson’s disease neuropathology (Aubele et al., 2013). Thus, targeting nPLK has been established as a promising therapeutic strategy to treat neurological disorders (Garuti et al., 2012) and to promote neuroplasticity, neurogenesis and neuroregeneration (Seeburg et al., 2008; Seeburg and Sheng, 2008). Although a number of chemical inhibitors such as NMS-P937 (Beria et al., 2011) and PL-2 (Ahn et al., 2015) have been successfully developed to target and suppress the kinase, most of them exhibited low selectivity and high toxicity. In addition, frequently observed somatic mutations in nPLK kinase domain may also cause drug resistance to these small-molecule agents (Simizu and Osada, 2000). Instead, biologic therapeutics has recently been raised as a promising strategy to target protein kinases with good biocompatibility and low risk of side effect (Grant, 2009).

The nPLK contains an N-terminal kinase domain (KD) and a C-terminal Polo-box domain (PBD) that are mutually inhibited by each other. Crystallographic study revealed that the PBD binds and rigidifies the hinge region of the KD in a distinct conformation from that of the phosphopeptide-bound PBD, which sheds light on the autoinhibitory mechanism of the kinase (Xu et al., 2013). Based on the crystal structure of nPLK in autoinhibitory state we herein performed bioinformatics analysis to dissect the structural basis and energetic property of intramolecular interaction between the KD and PBD. Several protein fragments were derived from the interaction site of PBD that can be considered as self-inhibitory peptides to target KD, which were then computationally modified and optimized to improve their binding capability. We also employed fluorescence-based assays to determine the binding affinity of few promising candidates to KD.


                        KFC2 (Zhu and Mitchell, 2011): The KFC2 is a knowledge-based hot spot prediction method based on interface solvation, atomic density and plasticity features, which utilized supervised learning approach to provide a set of hierarchical rules for hot spot classification (Darnell et al., 2008). Here, we employed KFC2 to identify hot-spot residues at the KD–PBD interaction interface of nPLK crystal structure. These residues will be used to define key peptide fragments that are able to bind at the interface independently.


                        GalaxyPepDock (Lee et al., 2015): The peptide docking method GalaxyPepDock was proposed recently by Lee et al. to model the binding mode of flexible peptide ligands to their protein receptors based solved protein–peptide complex structures. The method performs similarity-based docking by finding templates from experimentally determined structures and building models using energy-based optimization in consideration of flexibility. Here, the method was employed to redock those key fragments defined by KFC2 to the interface regions of KD.


                        FlexPepDock (London et al., 2011): The FlexPepDock is a high-resolution protein–peptide complex refinement protocol implemented within the Rosetta environment (Raveh et al., 2011), which has been shown to be able to accurately refine the peptide structure starting from the initial position nearby its native conformation, allowing full flexibility to the peptide and side-chain flexibility to protein receptor (Raveh et al., 2010). Here, the method was used to refine the coarse-grained structure models of redocked KD–peptide complexes.


                        QSAR-improved PPRCP (Han et al., 2013): The QSAR-improved PPRCP was designed for general-purpose scoring of protein–peptide binding affinities based on their complex structures, which combines unsupervised knowledge-based statistical potential derived from hundreds of interfacially diverse, non-redundant protein–peptide complex structures and supervised quantitative structure-activity relationship (QSAR) modeling trained by known protein–peptide affinity data. Here, we employed the scoring function to explore KD–peptide binding potency in a high-throughput manner.

Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of KD–peptide complexes were performed using GROMACS package (Hess et al., 2008) with Amber03 force field (Duan et al., 2003). Complex was dissolved in a TIP3P solvent environment (Jorgensen et al., 1983) with periodic boundary conditions. Default protonation states were assigned for all ionizable residues in the complex system. Counter-ions of Na+ were added to keep neutralization of the system. For each simulation, the complex structure was first relaxed by steepest-descent and conjugate-gradient energy minimizations. Then, the system was equilibrated with 1-ns MD simulations under a constant volume ensemble (NVT) with a harmonic position restraint applied on heavy atoms of the solute and 1-ns simulations under a constant pressure ensemble (NPT) without any restraint. Subsequently, 50-ns production simulations were carried out under NPT ensemble (Yu et al., 2014). The linear constraint solver (LINCS) algorithm (Hess et al., 1997) was employed to constrain all covalent bonds containing hydrogen atoms. Berendsen’s coupling algorithm (Berendsen et al., 1984) was used to maintain temperature and pressure. The long-range electrostatic interactions were treated by particle mesh Ewald (PME) strategy (Darden et al., 1993), while the van der Waals interactions were calculated at a cutoff of 15Å.

The molecular mechanics-generalised Born/surface area (MM-GB/SA) method (Guimarães and Cardozo, 2009) was employed to conduct binding free energy analysis of KD–peptide complexes based on 250 snapshots extracted evenly from the last 25-ns production simulations. The total binding free energy (ΔG
                        ttl) can be decomposed into intermolecular interaction energy (ΔE
                        int) between KD and peptide as well as polar (ΔG
                        plr) and nonpolar (ΔG
                        nplr) contributions from desolvation effect due to removal of water molecules from the complex interfaces.

Peptide binding assays were performed using a fluorescence-based protocol modified from a previous report (Zhang et al., 2007). Briefly, fluorescein-labeled peptides were diluted in a buffer containing 20mM Tris, 20mM NaCl, and 2mM DTT (pH 7.5). Fluorescence titration was performed with increasing amounts of unlabeled nPLK KD protein and constant amounts of FITC-labeled peptide at 25°C. For the competition assays, the labeled peptide and protein were mixed and titrated with unlabeled competitor peptide. The fluorescence anisotropy at each titration step was monitored, and the titration curves were fitted with MicroCal Origin software.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

The crystal structure of intramolecular KD–PBD complex of nPLK has been solved by Xu et al. using X-ray crystallography (PDB: 4J7B). In the structure the KD and PBD are mutually inhibited and the PBD binds to and rigidifies KD in a distinct conformation, forming an intensive noncovalent network across complex interface (Xu et al., 2013). Here, we employed the KFC2 server (Zhu and Mitchell, 2011) to analyze the intramolecular contacts between the two domains and to identify those hot-spot residues at the interface. Considering that we attempted to derive KD inhibitory peptides from the PBD domain, only the hot-spot residues in PBD are visualized in Fig. 1
                        . It is evident that the PBD hot-spot residues are clustered into two regions at complex interface, separately corresponding to two successive peptide fragments in PBD domain, namely, 392EDPACIPV399 and 490PREGDELTR498, which can interact directly with the hinge region and C-terminus of KD domain, respectively.

London et al. have suggested that self-inhibitory peptides deriving from protein–protein complex interfaces could inhibit the interactions of their origin complexes by mimicking its mode of binding to cognate partners (London et al., 2010). In this respect, we considered the two peptide fragments as potential self-inhibitory peptides to target and disrupt the native KD–PBD interaction in nPLK. However, by analyzing the crystal structures of various peptide-mediated protein complexes Stein and Aloy found that the context of peptide motifs in complex interfaces plays a crucial role in peptide interaction stability and specificity (Stein and Aloy, 2008), suggesting that the binding behavior of a peptide fragment to its protein partner may differ significantly from it in protein context. In this respect, the two fragments (i.e. PBD peptides 1 and 2) were split from PBD domain and redocked to KD domain using the peptide docking server GalaxyPepDock (Lee et al., 2015). Considering that the redocked conformations generated from the fast docking are coarse-grained results that are only the approximately optimal solution for KD–peptide binding, we further employed the FlexPepDock method and MD simulations to, respectively refine and equilibrate the redocked KD–peptide complex systems. Here, the crystal, redocked, refined and equilibrated conformations of the two peptides were superposed to each other and shown in complex with KD domain in Fig. 2
                        , and the structural and energetic parameters of the two peptides in different conformations are listed in Table 1
                        .

As can be seen, the redocked conformations are deviated largely from their crystal counterparts with root-mean-square deviations (rmsd) of 2.56 and 3.17Å (calculated using SPDBV program (Guex and Peitsch, 1997)) for the two peptides. The findings support that split peptide fragments would bind to their protein partners in a different way from that in protein context. In contrast, the redocked, refined and equilibrated conformations are basically consistent, although moderate variations among them with rmsd <1Å can be observed in the superposed systems. In addition, MM-GB/SA analysis revealed that the peptide binding capability is improved considerably by splitting them from protein context; the binding free energy of the two peptides to KD domain exhibits a consistent increase from crystal to remodeled conformations, suggesting that the split peptides would be better binders of KD domain than them in integrated state.

By comparing the modeled complex structures of PBD peptides 1 and 2 with KD domain (Fig. 2), it is clearly seen that the PBD peptide 1 locates nearby the active site of kinase domain and exhibits a tight interaction mode with the domain, while the PBD peptide 2 is bound at the surface of KD C-lobe and only slight contacts can be observed between them. The findings can be solidified by MM-GB/SA analysis; the binding free energies for PBD peptide 1 in different conformations range between −3.57 and −15.76kcal/mol, which are better than that (between 2.76 and −2.45kcal/mol) of PBD peptide 1. In addition, the interface areas (514.5–656.4Å2) of KD–PBD peptide 1 complexes are also larger significantly than that (321.7–370.2Å2) of KD–PBD peptide 2 complexes (calculated using PISA server (Krissinel and Henrick, 2007)). All these come together to suggest that, as compared to PBD peptide 2, the PBD peptide 1 is a good binder of KD and could be used as a potent inhibitor to suppress nPLK kinase activity. Thus, only the PBD peptide 1 will be considered in subsequent analysis.

The equilibrated complex structure of KD domain with PBD peptide 1 is shown in Fig. 3
                        . It is seen that the peptide exhibits a ployproline-II helix (PPII) structure (Adzhubei et al., 2013) due to the conformational restriction introduced by the two proline residues in the peptide. In addition, the peptide adopts its C-terminus inserting into KD active site and, in this way, directly inhibits the kinase activity by competitively blocking the catalytic region. By visually examining peptide binding pocket it is found that most residues composing the pocket are nonpolar amino acids such as Leu, Val and Phe, with few polar or charged residues embedded within them. The N-terminus of PBD peptide 1 is composed of two negatively charged amino acids Asp and Glu, which are out of the pocket and far away from the active site, thus considered to contribute moderately to peptide binding. In contrast, the central part and C-terminus of the peptide contain a number of small, nonpolar amino acids such as Val, Cys and Ile, exhibiting a good complementarity with the hydrophobic pocket.

In order to explore the relative importance of the eight residues in PBD peptide 1, we have decomposed the total binding free energy of the peptide to each residue by using MM-GB/SA method, and obtained results are shown in Fig. 4
                        . In fact, the sum of decomposed energies is not equal accurately to the total binding free energy; this is reasonable because some factors such as the flexibility interactive effect between peptide residues are not considered in the decomposition. As might be expected, the relative importance of residues in KD–peptide binding roughly increases from the N- to C-terminuses of PBD peptide 1; this is in line with the structural dissection of KD–peptide complex as shown in Fig. 3. The three C-terminal nonpolar I397, P398 and V399 appear to play an essential role in peptide binding; each of them contributes more than −3kcal/mol to the total binding free energy, while the N-terminal N392 and central A395 seem to contribute marginally to the binding, with decomposed energy less than −2kcal/mol.

Next, in order to determine the favorable, unfavorable and neutral amino acids in at each position of PBD peptide 1, the eight residues in the peptide were one-by-one mutated to other 19 amino acid types. Then, we calculated free energy change ΔΔG upon the mutation using QSAR-improved PPRCP scoring function, resulting in an amino acid substitution matrix that characterizes the favorable (ΔΔG
                        <−1kcal/mol), unfavorable (ΔΔG
                        >1kcal/mol) and neutral substitutions (−1kcal/mol<ΔΔG
                        <1kcal/mol) of native residue at a specific position of the PBD peptide 1 by other 19 amino acid types. It worth noting that the two native proline residues P394 and P398 in PBD peptide 1 may play an important role in maintaining the PPII helix conformation of the peptide, we herein did not consider to mutate them. As can be seen in Fig. 5
                        , most mutations are neutral or unfavorable, although a majority of them only lead to a moderate change in peptide binding free energy. In addition, few mutations are associated with a significant free energy change relative to native peptide. The large loss in peptide binding energy is observed due to the substitution of PBD peptide 1 residues by charged amino acids such as Asp, Glu, Lys and Arg, which are thought to be electrostatically unfavorable to the binding. However, only very few mutations at specific positions show considerable free energy changes (ΔΔG
                        >1 or<–1kcal/mol), indicating that these mutations would influence peptide binding significantly.

Here, we only selected those mutations with ΔΔG
                        <–1kcal/mol at specific positions of PBD peptide 1. According to the IBS hypothesis proposed by Parker et al. (1994), each amino acid residue binds independently of the rest of the peptide. Therefore, these selected favorable amino acids may work together to promote peptide binding, although they were derived in an independent manner. In this way, a combination of these favorable amino acids as well as native residues at each position (except P394 and P398) of peptide can generate totally 4×3×4×3×2×4=1152 peptide mutants, and their complex structures with KD domain were then modeled through SCRWL virtual mutagenesis (Canutescu et al., 2003) based on the template of KD–PBD peptide 1 complex structure. Subsequently, the binding affinities of these mutants to KD domain were calculated using QSAR-improved PPRCP scoring function (Han et al., 2013) based on their complex structures, from which most of mutant were predicted to weaker binders of KD domain as compared to the native PBD peptide 1, while only few have increased theoretical affinity. Here, three structurally diverse mutants with top scores were selected to determine their binding affinity using fluorescence-based assays, and obtained data are listed in Table 2
                        . As expected, the mutants 1 and 3 were measured to have an increasing affinity to KD domain as compared to the native PBD peptide 1, with K
                        d values changing from 56.7 to 17.3 and 42.1μM. Although the affinity improvement for the mutant 3 seems to be modest, the mutant 1 is indeed a stronger binder than PBD peptide 1. In contrast, the mutant 2 was determined as a nonbinder of KD domain; this is not unexpected if considering that some other factors such as peptide flexibility and interactive effect between different residues are not involved in theoretical analysis that may cause significant bias to the design.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENT@&#

This work was supported by the Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated Sixth People’s Hospital.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

