@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Prediction and verification of microRNAs related to proline accumulation under drought stress in potato

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           miR172, miR396a, miR396c and miR4233 may regulate P5CS gene.


                        
                        
                           
                           miR2673 may regulate P5CR gene.


                        
                        
                           
                           miR6461 may regulate ProDH gene.


                        
                        
                           
                           miRNAs regulate proline enrichment of potato under drought stress.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

MircoRNA

Potato

Computer prediction

Proline accumulation

Drought stress

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Proline is an important osmotic adjusting material greatly accumulated under drought stress and can help plant to adapt to osmotic stress. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small, endogenous RNAs that play important regulatory roles in plant development and stress response by negatively affecting gene expression at post-transcriptional level. Three genes of pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthetase (P5CS), pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductase (P5CR) and proline dehydrogenase (ProDH) are regulating proline metabolism. Until now, little is known about miRNAs regulating proline accumulation. In this work, in order to understand whether miRNAs related to mRNAs of enzymes to regulate proline enrichment under drought stress, we used mRNAs of related enzymes as the targets of miRNAs to search miRBase using BLAST and find many query miRNA sequences. After a range of filtering criteria, 11 known miRNAs classified into 6 miRNA families were predicted. The result from qRT-PCR assay showed that 10 out of 11 predicted miRNAs were successfully detected including 9 down-regulated miRNAs and one up-regulated miRNA. Based on expression and functional analysis, we identified miR172, miR396a, miR396c and miR4233 may regulate P5CS gene, and miR2673 and miR6461 may regulate P5CR and ProDH gene, respectively. The findings can help us make a good understanding of the roles of miRNAs in regulation of proline accumulation and provide molecular evidence for involvement process of drought tolerance in potato.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Potato account for one third of primary crop production in the world and is receiving additional attention for its function in stabilizing world food security and for its potential use in future biofuel development (Gerbens-Leenes et al., 2009). But the growth and productivity of potato depend largely on their vulnerability to environmental stresses. Drought is one of the most frequently occurred environmental stresses that limit agricultural production (Sahi et al., 2006). Plants respond to drought with an array of biochemical and physiological adaptations. One of the most prominent adaptive responses to drought stress and other abiotic stresses that result in decreased water availability is the accumulation of proline (Lehmann et al., 2010; Szabados and Savoure, 2010). Several functions also are proposed for the accumulation of proline exposed to abiotic stresses, including abiotic osmotic adjustments, detoxification of excess ammonia, stabilization of proteins and/or membranes, scavenger of free radicals (Yang et al., 2009; Fabro et al., 2004). Proline is also an essential metabolite for protein synthesis and contributes in antique way to protein folding, structure and stability. Plant accumulation of proline under stress environment could be due to either its de novo synthesis or decreased degradation or both. In plants, there are two routes of proline biosynthesis: (1) the glutamate route and (2) the ornithine route. Previous studies showed that glutamate was mostly converted to proline in the plant cells under drought stress by the sequential reactions of pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthetase (P5CS) and pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductase (P5CR) (Lehmann et al., 2010). Many studies have indicated that P5CS is the critical enzyme in proline biosynthesis under salt and water stress (Kishor et al., 1995; Yamada et al., 2005), and P5CS is also regulated by osmotic and salt stresses (Yoshiba et al., 1995). Proline is oxidized by action of proline dehydrogenase (ProDH), which converts proline to pyrroline-5-carboxylate (P5C) and D1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate dehydrogenase (P5CDH) (Verbruggen et al., 1993). However, why proline is so prominent in plant stress biology and its detailed regulation mechanisms of metabolism is incompletely understood.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small, endogenous RNAs that play important regulatory roles in plant stress response by negatively affecting gene expression post-transcriptionally (Voinnet, 2009), which can degrade the target transcript (Llave et al., 2002) and/or attenuate translation (Chen, 2004). Until now, thousands of miRNAs have been found and majority of those target genes have been identified encoding transcriptional factors or important enzymes that play important roles in plant development and responses to various biotic and abiotic stresses (Jones-Rhoades et al., 2006), which including leaf development, floral development (Chen, 2004; Palatnik et al., 2003), stem development (Mallory et al., 2004), root development (Guo et al., 2005), and auxin responses (Wang et al., 2005), signal transduction (Rhoades et al., 2002), phase change (Lauter et al., 2005) and responses to disease stress (Chapman et al., 2004) and different environmental stresses. For example, miR395 was shown to be activated to cope with sulfur deficiency (Chiou, 2007), miR399 was under close regulation to maintain a balance of phosphorus status in vivo (Doerner, 2008), and miR398 was induced to enhance adaptation to oxidative stress (Dugas and Bartel, 2008). Despite of this, mainly research of them was focused on model plants, such as Arabidopsis thaliana and rice (Oryza sativa) (Bartel and Bartel, 2003; Bonnet et al., 2004; Sunkar et al., 2005; Griffiths-Jones et al., 2006). A few of miRNAs have been identified responses to drought stress and other abiotic stresses in potato (Hwang et al., 2011a, 2011b). Moreover, miRNAs is little known to regulate proline accumulation in plant. It is validated that in the plant kingdom miRNAs bind to target mRNAs with near-perfect complementarity and miRNAs are evolutionarily conserved from ferns and mosses to higher flowering plants (Rhoades et al., 2002; Zhang et al., 2006b; Floyd and Bowman, 2004). miRNA genes in one species may exist homologs or orthologs in other species. Based on this observation, computational prediction of proline-metabolic miRNAs is come in true.

In the present work, to test whether proline-metabolism is regulated by miRNAs under drought stress, we analyzed mRNAs of genes involved in proline metabolism in order to gain miRNAs regulating proline metabolism. We used mRNAs of proline metabolism related genes as the target of miRNAs to search miRBase using BLAST to find query miRNA sequences. A total of 876 previously known plant miRNAs were found, which can bind to those mRNAs. After a range of filtering criteria, 85 conservative miRNA sequences were identified. Those 85 miRNA sequences were further subjected to a BLAST search for a similarity against the potato expressed sequence tag (EST), genomic survey sequence (GSS) and nucleotide (nr) databases and predicted secondary structures (Zhang et al., 2006a, 2006b, 2007). 11 potential miRNAs were successfully identified in potato. Based on expression and functional analysis, 6 miRNAs were identified which may regulate proline enrichment under drought stress, and further conformed that those miRNAs may play an important role in regulation of proline accumulation under drought stress in potato.

mRNA sequences of genes P5CS, P5CR and ProDH were retrieved from NCBI GenBank (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank). All of plant mature miRNA sequences were obtained from the miRNA registry miRBase (http://microrna.sanger.ac.uk/) (miRBase Release 18.0, November 4, 2011). Potato EST, GSS, and nr databases were obtained from NCBI GenBank nucleotide databases (http://www.ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov). The software EditSeq was used to obtain reverse sequence of mRNAs, and UNAFold (http://www.bioinfo.rpi.edu/applications/mfold/) was used to online predict the secondary structure and stability of RNAs.

Previous studies showed that three genes of P5CS, P5CR and ProDH were related to proline metabolism in plant under drought stress (Usha and Malik, 2012). Until now, all of 27 mRNAs of P5CS, 7 mRNAs of P5CR and 38 mRNAs of ProDH gene were submitted for land plant in GenBank (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank). However, none of potato mRNA of those three genes were submitted in GenBank. Depend on genes in one species may exist homologs or orthologs in other species, we used the 7 mRNAs of P5CR gene and selected 7 mRNA sequences of P5CS and ProDH genes as the target of miRNAs from Dicotyledons respectively to reach for potential miRNAs in miRBase. Briefly, the software EditSeq was used to obtain reverse sequences of mRNAs. Then, the reverse sequences were subjected to a BLAST search against all the mature sequences of plant known miRNAs (http://www.mirbase.org/search.shtml). The criteria were as follows: (1) BLAST with mature miRNAs; (2) E-value cutoff was set at 10; (3) maximum number of hits was set at 100; (4) known Viridiplantae miRNAs were used as query sequences to search using BLAST. If one miRNA was obtained from same gene more than two species, it was deemed to be a potential miRNA and used for further analysis.

The predicted miRNAs in potato was analyzed using the method described by Zhang et al. (Zhang et al., 2006a, 2006b, 2007). The procedure and general strategy for the potential RNA prediction are shown in Fig. 1
                        . Briefly, previously predicted 85 sequences of conservative miRNAs were used as query sequences to search against the databases of potato EST, GSS and nr using BLAST program. Adjusted the parameter settings were as follows: select potato EST, GSS or nr database; max target sequences were set at 1000; expect values were set to 1000; the remainder parameters were default. All of the repeat EST, GSS and nr sequences were removed from the resulting hits which were obtained from the BLAST search. All of remainder sequences were saved for further secondary structure analysis.

The selected non-redundant EST and GSS sequences with 4 or fewer mismatches with previously known mature miRNAs in other plants were then carefully predicted and generated by the secondary structures using the web-based software UNAFold that is publicly available at the website (http://www.bioinfo.rpi.edu/applications/mfold/old/rna/). The combination of BLAST parameters were as follows: folding temperature was fixed at 37°C; ionic conditions were set at 1M NaCl and with no divalent ions; the other parameters were used the default parameters. The sequences were then further screened with the following criteria: (1) pre-miRNA sequence can fold into an standard hairpin secondary structure that contains the mature miRNA sequence within one arm of the hairpin structure; (2) mature miRNAs were allowed to have only 0–3 nucleotide mismatches in sequence with all previously known plant mature miRNAs; (3) miRNAs had less than six mismatches with the opposite miRNA* sequence in the other arm; (4) the secondary structures of predicted pre-miRNA had higher MFEI and negative MFE, greater than 60nt with a minimum free energy (MFE) of lower than −15kcal/mol were accepted as being potential miRNA precursor sequences (Zhang et al., 2006a, 2007); (5) no loop or break in miRNA sequences was allowed. (6) an A+U content filter and a loop-length filter were applied to obtain the hairpin structures, and only hairpins with 20–22 mature nucleotide sequences with a C+G-content of 50% or less were further analyzed. If one sequence has met all of these criteria, we considered it as one miRNA. The BLAST and predicted results were exported to an excel Table 1
                         for further analysis.

Four potato varieties (‘Xindaping’, ‘Favorita’, ‘Qingshu 9’ and ‘Longshu 3’) were grown in pot in standard greenhouse facility of Gansu Agricultural University. Six pots of each variety were grown in parallel. Three replicate pots per treatment were arranged in a completely randomized block design. When the plant were 20cm long, deficit irrigation treatments were applied by withholding watering on the stressed pots while the other three pots were grown under normal condition, which is without suffering drought stress caused by withholding of water as in the treatments. Two weeks late, fresh leaves were collected from both treatment and control potato plants. Leaves of each variety was collected in duplicate and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and was stored at −80°C for further use. Proline contents were measured using a part of samples to identify proline-enrich sensitive materials under drought stress; another part was used to extract RNA for qRT-PCR analysis for expression level of miRNAs.

The content of proline was determined with the modified acid ninhydrin method (Bates, 1973). Briefly, 0.3g of leaf samples from control and treatment of potato samples were homogenized with 5ml of 3% sulfosalicylic acid. After centrifugation, the clear supernatant was reacted with the same volume of acetic acid and acid ninhydrin solution (2.5% ninhydrin in 6M phosphoric acid and 60% acetic acid) by boiling the mixture for 10min. After extraction with toluene, the clear organic phase was recovered and estimated spectrophotometrically at 520nm using the ninhydrin method. Purified proline was used for standardization.

Total RNA was extracted from samples using TRIzol Total RNA Reagent (Tiangen, China) according to the manufacturer's protocol. RNA sample was quantified and assessed for quality using IMPLEN Nanophotometer (Pearl) and then stored at −80°C for further use. Reverse transcription was carried out in 20μL reaction mixture. Briefly, 1μg of total RNA of each sample was used to generate a single-stranded miRNA cDNA using the One Step PrimeScript® miRNA cDNA Synthesis Kit (TaKaRa, Dalian, China). SYBR® Premix Ex TaqTM II was used to detect and quantify potato miRNAs according to the manufacturer's protocol. The expression levels of 11 predicted potato miRNAs were analyzed in both control and treatment samples using qRT-PCR and miRNA specific primers, which included miR156a, miR156b, miR172, miR396, miR396a, miR396b, miR396c, miR2673, miR4233, miR5658, miR6461. The PCR amplification was set at 40 cycles of denaturation at 95°C for 10s, annealing at 60°C for 30s, and extension at 72°C for 1min (Feng et al., 2009), reverse primers and Uni-miR qPCR primers provided with the kit, and the miRNA-specific primers were as following Table 2
                        .

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

Drought stress is one of the major factors limiting the growth of plants, which affects plant physiology and biochemistry and causes a decrease in the efficiency of product and plant growth. Tolerance of potato variety is crucial for crop growth and development through the whole season under water-limited condition. The osmotic adjustment contributes to the maintenance of pressure during the drought period. The accumulation of proline under abiotic stress conditions varied depending on the species. Proline-enrich sensitive plant has more ability to regulate expression of related genes to adapt drought stress.

The four potato varieties were treated with drought. Two weeks late, treatment plants expressed typical stress symptoms, such as leaf rolling, while control plants growth normally. Then leaves collected from both treatment and control plants were used to measure of proline content. The results showed that proline content of all potato varieties were increased significantly under drought stressed. However, different varieties displayed different ability to accumulate proline in response to drought stress (Table 3
                        ). Comparative variation (fold-change) showed that potato variety ‘Xingdaping’ is a proline-enrich sensitive material in response to drought stress and using for further study, which is also agreement with the previous study that ‘Xingdaping’ is a drought-tolerance potato variety.

Depend on potato genes of P5CR, P5CS and ProDH are evolutionary conserved with other plants, and miRNAs bind to target mRNAs with near-perfect complementarity, we used the 7 reverse sequences of mRNA of each gene in different species as the miRNAs targets to search by BLAST for known plant miRNAs database, all of 456 miRNAs of 227 miRNA families were obtained from 7 mRNAs of P5CS gene; 237 miRNAs of 77 miRNA families from P5CR gene and 456 miRNAs of 227 miRNA families from ProDH gene. After removing those obtained miRNAs without conserved in different species (less than 2), 97 conserved miRNAs of 14 miRNA families, 83 conserved miRNAs of 34 miRNA families and 38 conserved miRNAs of 23 miRNA families were obtained from P5CR, P5CS and ProDH genes, respectively. All of those conserved miRNAs numbers and families of each gene were shown in Fig. 2
                        . Those conserved miRNAs were analyzed by BLAST and remove repeats. All of 85 unique miRNAs sequences were obtained for further study.

Based on the result, we used those identified 85 unique miRNA sequences to search for a similarity against the potato databases of EST, GSS and nr using BLSAT. After the first round of BLSAT, a total of 24 miRNA sequences were obtained similar with database sequences, of which, 17 miRNA candidates were identified in EST search, 12 in GSS search and 6 in nr search. After predicting the RNA secondary structure of the 24 miRNAs sequences using mFold software, 11 potential miRNAs classified into 6 miRNA families were obtained which can be folded to the typical secondary structure of the miRNA family (Fig. 3
                        ). Among those predicted 11 miRNAs, miR156a and miR172 had been predicted in potato in previous study (Zhang et al., 2009); miR2673, miR4233 and miR5658 are the newly found families in potato that have not been published before; other 6 miRNAs are new numbers of predicted miRNAs families in potato. miR172, miR396a, miR396c, miR4233 and miR5658 were obtained from P5CS gene; miR2673 from P5CR gene; miR156a, miR156b, miR396, miR396b and miR6461 from ProDH gene, respectively. The length of miRNA precursors varied from 80 to 182 nucleotides, which was similar to know plant miRNAs (Griffiths-Jones, 2006). The sequences of the miRNA precursors have G+C content ranging from 28.5% to 48.3% (Table 1), which is in agreement with the notion that miRNA precursors and mature miRNAs contain less G+C nucleotides than A+U (Guddeti et al., 2005). All data of these 11 predicted miRNAs are shown in Table 1.

To confirm the prediction of miRNAs in potato, Applied Biosystems SYBR® Premix Ex TaqTM II Assays were used to detect and quantify predicted miRNAs for both control and treatment samples of proline-enrich sensitive potato variety ‘Xingdaping’ according to the manufacturer's protocol. One common primer and one miRNA-specific primer was used to amplify the predicted miRNA in each PCR reaction. Each sample has three repetitions. The results showed that 10 out of 11 identified miRNAs were successfully detected. Those miRNAs included miR156a, miR156b, miR172, miR396, miR396a, miR396b, miR396c, miR2673, miR4233 and miR6461 (Fig. 4
                        ). Only miR5658 could not be detected under the conditions of the present study. The reason for it may result from the facts: (a) miR5658 was not presence in potato; (b) the abundance of miR5658 might be too low to be detected; (c) it might be inducible miRNAs whose expression is under the control of other factors; or (d) the miR5658 was not amplified because of lack proper primer. For amplified miRNAs, most of them were down-regulated under drought stress, included miR156a, miR156b, miR172, miR396, miR396a, miR396b, miR396c, miR2673, miR4233, and only miR6461 was up-regulated. The different expression levels of each miRNAs under drought stress may be related to their particular functions in regulating proline accumulation.

To understand the roles of miRNAs which regulate the accumulation of proline under drought stress, we should analysis the expression level of miRNAs and action of those target enzymes. Generally, plant regulating the accumulation of proline could be due to either its de novo synthesis or decreased degradation or both. Previous studies showed that proline biosynthesis is controlled by the activity of P5CR and P5CS genes, and oxidation is controlled by sequential action of ProDH (Lehmann et al., 2010; Verbruggen et al., 1993). The fact is that expression level of miRNA is up-regulation and activity of their target is decreased, or vice versa based on these result and previous computational prediction. In this study, we identified 6 miRNAs may regulate proline enrichment under drought stress. Among them, 4 miRNAs including miR172, miR396a, miR396c and miR4233 may regulate P5CS gene. The miR172 has been verified by experimentally target mRNAs coding for APETALA2-like transcription factor regulating development of flowering time and floral organ in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana (mouse-ear cress) (Aukerman and Sakai, 2003; Wollmann et al., 2010). miR172 also have been experimentally identified responding to drought stress in potato (Hwang et al., 2011a). Therefore, we supposed that miR172 may have important role in regulatory network in plant development, metabolism and stress response. However, function of other three miRNAs miR396a, miR396c and miR4233 has not been identified. Only miR2673 may regulate P5CR gene. All of those miRNAs were down-regulated under drought stress. So, the action of those target genes P5CR and P5CS were increased. miR6461 may regulate ProDH gene. In this study, miR6461 was up-regulated under drought stress, which can restrain the expression of ProDH to help decreased degradation and achieve enrichment of proline content. Notably, many studies have indicated that P5CS is the critical enzyme in proline biosynthesis under salt and water stress (Llave et al., 2002; Chen, 2004). Therefore, regulation of P5CS may be the key for regulatory proline accumulation. We identified 4 miRNAs regulate P5CS gene and all of those miRNAs were down-regulated under drought stress. These results suggested that convergent multi-miRNA targeting of P5CS gene may regulate proline-enrich under drought stress.

In conclusion, our study preliminarily elucidated that drought stress could induce the changes of miRNAs expression level related to proline accumulation. The decreased expressions of the miRNAs related to P5CR and P5CS genes could increase expression of their target genes P5CR and P5CS which were closely bound up with the proline enrichment under drought stress in potato. The up-regulated expression of the miR6461 may lead to decreased expression of relevant target gene ProDH, which decreased oxidation of proline under drought stress. Either de novo synthesis or decreased degradation or both, the content of proline will been accumulated. The result could provide molecular evidence that miRNAs play critical roles in proline accumulation of plant under drought stress.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This research program sponsored by Gansu Key Laboratory of Aridland Crop Science of Gansu Agricultural University (No. GSCS-2010-01), and in part by Specialized Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education of China (No. 20106202120003).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

