@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Analysis of image-based phenotypic parameters for high throughput gene perturbation assays

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Image-based multiplexing assay was attempted for siRNA library screening.


                        
                        
                           
                           Diverse orthogonal phenotypic parameters were retrieved from a single screening.


                        
                        
                           
                           Image-based cell count provided better resolution than the viability measure.


                        
                        
                           
                           Geneset analysis revealed biological implications of various image-based parameters.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

siRNA screening

Gene perturbation

Image-based assay

Phenotypic parameter

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Although image-based phenotypic assays are considered a powerful tool for siRNA library screening, the reproducibility and biological implications of various image-based assays are not well-characterized in a systematic manner. Here, we compared the resolution of high throughput assays of image-based cell count and typical cell viability measures for cancer samples. It was found that the optimal plating density of cells was important to obtain maximal resolution in both types of assays. In general, cell counting provided better resolution than the cell viability measure in diverse batches of siRNAs. In addition to cell count, diverse image-based measures were simultaneously collected from a single screening and showed good reproducibility in repetitions. They were classified into a few functional categories according to biological process, based on the differential patterns of hit (i.e., siRNAs) prioritization from the same screening data. The presented systematic analyses of image-based parameters provide new insight to a multitude of applications and better biological interpretation of high content cell-based assays.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

High throughput cell-based screening is useful for identifying the effect of individual gene knockdowns or compound treatments on target samples (Rausch, 2006). It is also a useful tool for identifying key genes that contribute to phenotypic changes through other interactions (Zhang and Boutros, 2013). In cell-based high throughput assays, biological readouts can be measured by biochemical methods such as cell viability or apoptosis assays, or by quantifying imaging data. In recent reports, the most widely accepted methods to measure biological endpoints are fluorescence-, luminescence-, or absorbance-based viability assays, in addition to simple cell or nucleus counting methods (Gilbert et al., 2011). However, image-based assays can produce various simultaneous measures of phenotypes from a single screening, whereas biochemical assays have limitations in high content screening (Carpenter et al., 2006; Fuchs et al., 2010; Gilbert et al., 2011).

Several studies have reported multiparametric analyses following siRNA-mediated gene knockdown. Image parameters revealed correlations between morphological focal adhesion features by gene perturbation and uncovered signaling mechanisms that regulate the formation of integrin adhesions (Winograd-Katz et al., 2009). Genes in discrete mitotic processes were identified using ontology annotations for siRNA datasets (Rines et al., 2008). The genetic interactions among various phenotypes were described, such as cell count, cell eccentricity, nuclear major axis, and nuclear area from single cell phenotyping (Simpson et al., 2008; Bai et al., 2011; Laufer et al., 2013). In addition, phenotypic profiles including cell cycle phases, migration, and cell death were generated from automated time-lapse imaging using high throughput siRNA screening (Neumann et al., 2006, 2010; Failmezger et al., 2013). However, understanding the interactions among cellular phenotypes, genes, and biological functions remains a challenge.

In this study, we tried to analyze the relationship between an image parameter and a functional group of gene knockdown, which might be varied depending on tested cell lines and experimental conditions. A single image gave a lot of cellular phenotypic information for multiple levels of visible and hidden changes (Hamilton 2009; Harma et al., 2014). The cellular phenotypes reflect the total changes of complex biological pathways and those phenotypic parameters are closely related with each other (Feng et al., 2009). Therefore, it is possible to understand a variety of phenotypic changes through geneset-based analysis (Rappaz et al., 2014). We demonstrated how diverse image parameters obtained from a single assay could be used for the interpretation of various phenotypic aspects resulted from diverse gene knockdown.

Furthermore, we attempted to analyze the resolution and reproducibility as well as the biological implications of various phenotypic parameters in image-based high throughput siRNA screening. In addition, experimental factors such as cell plating density and incubation time were taken into consideration for the optimization of cell-based assays. Automatic imaging systems were used to acquire images, which were quantified for phenotypic changes induced from gene perturbation using gene-specific siRNAs. From these data, we were able to analytically classify image-based parameters based on their patterns of hit enrichment. In addition, geneset-based clustering analysis highlighted the interactions between image parameters and the physiological implications of individual gene perturbation.

@&#MATERIAL AND METHODS@&#

A549 cells were maintained in RPMI 1640 medium containing 10% fetal bovine serum (GIBCO), 20U/ml penicillin, and 20μg/ml streptomycin. The cells were maintained under a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2 and 95% air at 37°C. The culture medium was refreshed every two to three days.

The cells were assayed using CellTiter-Blue cell viability kit (Promega), according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Plates were read on a SpectraMax M5 plate reader (Molecular Devices).

After the cell viability assay, cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde, stained with Hoechst 33342 (Sigma–Aldrich) and the plates were imaged on Cytation™ 3 (BioTek Instruments, Inc.) using a 4× objective.

A549 cells were reverse-transfected with pooled siRNAs in triplicates, incubated for 72h and subsequently prepared for the aforementioned two cell viability assays. For each 384-well plate, the siRNA library set had one negative control (siNC) with 16 wells and two positive controls (siPLK1 and siUBB) with 8 wells for each control.

The siRNA screen was performed using four pooled siRNAs to target each of the 4786 genes in the human drug target library (ONTARGETplus SMARTpool; Thermofisher Scientific). Reverse transfections were performed using a MultiFlo™ microplate dispenser (BioTek Instruments, Inc.) with siRNAs (final concentration 40nM) and DharmaFECT 1 (0.05μl per well; Thermofishser) diluted in OptiMEM-I (invitrogen) in black 384-well plates (Costar). Each plate was supplemented with non-targeting siRNA and positive control siRNA (NXF1).

After 72h, cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde and stained with DraQ5 (Biostatus). To measure the phenotypic parameters of the cells, fluorescence images were acquired with an Operetta imaging system (PerkinElmer) at 20× magnification. Images were captured from 3 non-overlapping fields per well, which covered the majority of the area of each well.

For the high-content screening image analysis, over the last decade years we have developed a dedicated in-house software, called IM, which allows viewing images after image acquisition with a high content imaging instrument and analyzing the images to quantify individual cells in each experiment. We developed an in-house imaging analysis algorithm to distinguish live and dead cells after siRNA transfection. The comparison of the developed software with existing open-source analogues was given in Supplementary Table 1.

For the image processing, the Gaussian smoothing algorithm with sigma set to 1.5 was used. Then, the detection of cell was made using the Gradient Vector Flow algorithm (Xu and Prince, 1998). The algorithm analyzes the intensity gradients on the smoothed image and performs segmentation and splitting of clustered cells by tracking direction of the intensity changes. The vector field of gradients and borders of resulting segments were additionally smoothed using parameters, which were set to 4 and 0.4, respectively. To exclude background pixels from the image analysis and detection of cells, a foreground detection was performed by K-Means algorithm with K
                        =3. After the segmentation objects smaller than 50 pixels were removed from the segmented image to discard false detection.

The imaging analysis was done with multiparametric analysis measuring different features of cells such as cell count, cell area, cell intensity, circular variance and principal axes ratio. Average intensity reflected average expression level in the cell while cell area reflected the size of the cell. The principal axes ratio, which represents the ratio between the lengths of the major and minor axes of an ellipse, approximates the cell shape. The circular variance (or circularity ratio) shows how far the points on the boundary of the cell deviate from the boundary of the circle. The difference between the two is that the principal axes ratio corresponds to the elongation of the cell shape, whereas the circular variance describes the irregularity of the cell shape. Thus, the principal axes ratio might be close to 1 for star- or crescent-shaped cells.

For each feature, the mean, standard deviation and quartiles were calculated to characterize features distribution in the collected images. Also, the mean, standard deviation and quartiles were calculated for the intensity of every pixel in the image to incorporate overall imaging conditions.

Raw data were normalized in two steps: (1) log2 transformation of percent of control=Xi/average of negative controls per plate, where Xi is a measured value of each phenotypic parameter for each gene (sample) and the negative control is mock transfection; (2) calculation of z score=the difference between the sample value and the average of all measurements in all plates divided by the standard deviation of all measurements in all plates. Differences in z scores between a sample value and negative controls were expressed as fold changes. Statistical significance was calculated by two-sample t-test. This normalization was done for all image parameters.

Genes were selected as being related to decreased phenotype if they satisfied the conditions of fold change <−1, p-value<0.05, and z score<0. On the other hand, genes related to increasing phenotype were selected if they satisfied the conditions of fold change>1, p-value<0.05, and z score>0.

The GSEA (Gene Set Enrichment Analysis) method was used to interpret siRNA screening data for each image parameter (Subramanian et al., 2005). We collected 1274 genesets in MSigDB v3.1 (http://www.broadinstitute.org/gsea/msigdb), which were derived from the Biocarta (http://www.biocarta.com), KEGG (Kanehisa et al., 2008), PID (Schaefer et al., 2009), and Reactome (Haw and Stein, 2012) databases. The gene list was sorted in ascending order to highlight decreasing phenotype. Genesets with p-value<0.05 were selected from the top and the bottom of the GSEA results to represent up- and down-regulated genesets along with decreasing phenotype, respectively.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

Cell-based assays require optimal cell plating density in order to achieve maximal resolution in the readout. In the preliminary assays with culture duration of up to 72h, we observed the maximal width of viability measure for A549 cells when the initial seeding density was 1250 cells per plate (Fig. 1
                        A). As the seeding number increased, the viability measure decreased because of cells overgrowth in the limited plate area. The indicator dye resazurin (blue) was used for the viability measure. The signal decrease from the overgrowth of cells was due to the extensive reduction of resazurin into hydroresorufin as a final nonfluorescent product (O’Brien et al., 2000). Therefore, it is important to define the optimal cell plating density to minimize loss of sensitivity (i.e., resolution) in the viability assay. However, the pattern of resolution change was similar when the measurement assay was for image-based cell counting (Fig. 1B). The count of cell number gradually decreased as the seeding cell number increased over 1250. This result indicated that the reduced sensitivity on the viability measure for >2500 plating densities in Fig. 1A was partly due to cell growth interruption. Both the viability measure and cell counting methods were optimized with ∼1250 cell plating number for the maximal resolution of the measurement in A549 cell line samples. In order to sensitively compare the assay results between the two methods, we utilized 1000 cells/well cell plating density in the main screening.

In analyzing the main screening result, we first compared the readout of the positive control siRNAs (siPLK1 and siUBB) by the viability and cell count methods (Fig. 1C). In general, siPLK1 showed greater inhibitory effect (lower % measure) on A549 cells than siUBB in both methods. Cell counting returned slightly more sensitive results for both positive control siRNAs than the viability assay. This implies that cell counting potentially provides better resolution for hit identification than the viability measurement assay. Likewise, in the assessment of Z′-factor, which quantitatively describes the differential readout between a negative control (siNC) and a positive control (siPLK1), the cell count assay showed 0.66±0.07 for average Z′ while the cell viability measure was 0.55±0.12 (Fig. 1D). In most of the 54 384-well plates screened, cell count provided better Z′ values than the cell viability assay. The range of Z′-factor is negative infinity to one, with >0.5 indicating an excellent assay and >0 a borderline assay (Kumar et al., 2013). Although the two measures showed similar sensitivity ranges with diverse cell plating densities (Fig. 1A and B), cell count provided better resolution in the assay by maximizing the difference between siNC and positive controls (Fig. 1C and D).

During quantification of image, an average value of three images per well was computed. The cell population density and imaging conditions were not varied much within a well. Therefore the quantification variability was insignificant, and data from three fields were used in this study. Fig. 2
                         shows images (A) cells stained with DraQ5 and (B) detected cell segments.

A total of 31 image-based parameters including cell count, were quantified from the screening. In general, most parameters showed >0.7 correlations across 3 repeats, indicating that the reproducibility of these parameters was significant. The three parameters with lower than 0.7 correlation were removed from further analyses. As a result, a total of 28 parameters are analyzed and classified into 8 groups of intensity-based or geometrical (shape) measures (Fig. 3
                        ). Cell principal axes ratio (reflects cell shape elongation), circular variance (roughness and irregularity of the cell shape compared to a circle), and cell area were classified as geometrical features. The principal axes ratio and circular variance features were robust for the scale, translation and rotation of cells, while the cell area was translation and rotation invariant. These features allowed for the estimation of cell morphology and population density changes for the fixed magnification factor. The intensity features allowed for estimating the DNA amount and signal-to-noise ratio. Except for image intensity, cell area ratio and cell count, all other parameters were measured for each individual cell. For most of the intensity and geometry features, the 25- and 75-percentiles and the median value were computed for each image to assess the shape of the feature distribution. Although the cell count was the typical measure from the image data, other parameters showed wider measurement variability (z-score) than cell counting for 4786 different siRNA treatments. The lower limit of readouts in the cell counting was greater than the other image parameters. Thus cell count might provide an advantage for identifying a small number of hit siRNAs with significant changes in the target samples. However, other parameters provided better resolution in the measure for 25–75% siRNAs. This feature might be useful for the pathway-level interpretation of the screening result including whole siRNAs.

We further analyzed the correlation between every pair of 8 representative image-based parameters (Fig. 4
                        A). As a result, the 8 parameters were classified into 3 different groups. Any pairs with high positive or negative correlation (>0.5 or <−0.5) were displayed in a correlation network (Fig. 4B). Cell count showed a high positive correlation with cell area ratio and strong negative correlation with cell intensity ratio. The principal axes ratio showed a significantly negative correlation with circular variance. In general, many of the parameters showed independent measuring patterns for the 4786 siRNA probes, implying that these parameters represent different aspects of the physiological response in diverse gene perturbations.

To further analyze the biological implication of diverse measures from 8 different image parameters, we selected hit genes from the screening based on common criteria (2-fold, p
                        <0.05) for all parameters. A total of 2853 genes were selected, satisfying the criteria for at least one of the 8 different parameters. The selected target genes for each image parameter are listed in Supplementary Table 2. When we clustered these genes using the 8 different measures (Fig. 5
                        A) and parameters were found to be classified into 3 groups in the same manner as the correlation-based clustering in Fig. 4A. The distribution of genes that were significantly up- or down-regulated was highly varied among 3 groups, indicating that measures from different parameters capture unique phenotypical outcomes caused by the perturbation of different classes of genes.

Consequently, we further analyzed the functional categories of hit genes. Among 1274 available genesets in MSigDB, a total of 227 genesets were significantly up- or down-regulated (p
                        <0.05) in one of the 8 different measures (Fig. 5B). Interestingly, in the geneset-based clustering, the 8 parameters were classified into 2 groups that generally exhibited opposite enrichment patterns for the 227 genesets. Many of the genesets related to transcriptional regulation (Category IV) were uniquely up-regulated by parameters in the cell count cluster. Cell area ratio showed common patterns with cell count in both gene- and geneset-based enrichment. However, image intensities and principal axes ratios that showed very different patterns of up-regulated genes (Fig. 5A) actually enriched common functional categories with cell count. This observation implies that these four unique phenotypic parameters may represent common cellular processes although they are measures of different types of gene perturbation. On the other hand, cell intensity and cell intensity ratio were sensitive parameters for detecting up-regulation of the circadian clock, neuronal system and organismal system (Category I). Genesets in human diseases and cell cycle were up- or down-regulated in a diverse way among the 8 parameters.

In this study, we comparatively analyzed diverse image-based phenotypic parameters to determine their reproducibility, similarity and functional implications. We found that they were sensitively affected by different types of gene knockdown. Furthermore, they were shown to have diverse implications in cellular physiological change upon individual gene knockdown. Since the measurement of image parameters used in this study are generally achievable from other types of cell lines, this approach can be adapted to diverse screening projects using different types of cell line samples. Thus, interpretation of phenotypic assays using various image-based parameters may provide a powerful tool for multitudinal applications of a single screening result.

None.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This work was supported by grants from the National Research Foundation of Korea (KRF), including the Bio & Medical Technology Development Program (NRF-2012M3A9B6055398), the NLRL program (NRF-2011-0028816) and Basic Science Research Program (NRF-2013R1A1A2059115), funded by the Korean government (MEST).

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2015.07.005.

The following are Supplementary data to this article:
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

