@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Identification and characterization of potential drug targets by subtractive genome analyses of methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus
            

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Subtractive genomics strategy was employed on genomes of two strains of MRSA.


                        
                        
                           
                           The strategy resulted in short listing of few non-homologous/hypothetical and essential proteins as potential therapeutic targets.


                        
                        
                           
                           Shortlisted sequences were then characterized for their druggability potential by Drug Bank database.


                        
                        
                           
                           The protocol is validated by identifying one of the confirmed drug targets against MRSA.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#




                     S. aureus




                  

Subtractive genome

Proteome

Methicillin resistant

Druggability

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) causes serious infections in humans and becomes resistant to a number of antibiotics. Due to the emergence of antibiotic resistance strains, there is an essential need to develop novel drug targets to address the challenge of multidrug-resistant bacteria. In current study, the idea was to utilize the available genome or proteome in a subtractive genome analyses protocol to identify drug targets within two of the MRSA types, i.e., MRSA ST398 and MRSA 252. Recently, the use of subtractive genomic approaches helped in the identification and characterization of novel drug targets of a number of pathogens. Our protocol involved a similarity search between pathogen and host, essentiality study using the database of essential genes, metabolic functional association study using Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes database (KEGG), cellular membrane localization analysis and Drug Bank database. Functional family characterizations of the identified non homologous hypothetical essential proteins were done by SVMProt server. Druggability potential of each of the identified drug targets was also evaluated by Drug Bank database. Moreover, metabolic pathway analysis of the identified druggable essential proteins with KEGG revealed that the identified proteins are participating in unique and essential metabolic pathways amongst MRSA strains.
                  In short, the complete proteome analyses by the use of advanced computational tools, databases and servers resulted in identification and characterization of few nonhomologous/hypothetical and essential proteins which are not homologous to the host genome. Therefore, these non-homologous essential targets ensure the survival of the pathogen and hence can be targeted for drug discovery.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Human health is in constant threats posed by the emergence of resistant strains of various infectious agents. The challenge turns more alarming due to the fact that majority of infectious agents are now resistant to more than one drugs. Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) is one among other multiple drug resistant (MDR) bacterial pathogens. S. aureus causes both nosocomial and community acquired infection (Kuroda et al., 2001). Pathogenicity of infection may vary from mild skin infection to chronic fatal necrotizing pneumonia. Treatment may include β-lactam antibiotics, sulfa drugs, clindamycin and tetracycline (MP, 1961; Projan and Novick, 1997; Lowy, 1998; Cheung, 2002; DeLeo et al., 2010). Lately, Staphylococcus aureus acquired resistance to several antibiotics, including powerful modern penicillin's (such as methicillin), resulted in emergence of subtype known as methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) (Kuroda et al., 2001; Kuehnert et al., 2006; Chambers and DeLeo, 2009; DeLeo et al., 2010). Worldwide rate of morbidity and subsequent mortality with MRSA infection has shown a marked increase since it was first reported, back in 1961 (MP, 1961; Klevens et al., 2007; Feil et al., 2008; Gotuzzo, 2010; de Kraker et al., 2011).

Two types, amongst others, i.e. MRSA ST398 and MRSA 252 are well known and reported to have roles in mild to moderate serious infection in human. It was reported that MRSA ST398 clonal type has role in livestock-associated MRSA (LA-MRSA) while MRSA 252 causes serious hospital acquired infections in humans (Herold et al., 1998; Kock et al., 2009; Van Duijkeren et al., 2009).

Newer antibiotics and other regimens were proposed during last decade but with their anticipated adverse effects (Ippolito et al., 2010). The usual treatment regimen is depending upon older concept of therapy with antibiotics, which include glycopeptides, lincosamide and sulfa drugs (Nicolle, 2006; Siegel et al., 2007). Among various available antibiotics, ditomycin, moxifloxacin HCL, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (Moellering; Tally), linezolids were well thought out and relatively more effective treatment. However, the treatment deteriorates due to fast growth of resistant strains and hence, the situation is alarming for health practitioners (Nicolle, 2006; Gorchynski and Rose, 2008).

Discovery of novel drug candidates is not an easy task in early stages and it is the same time expensive and laborious. The situation poses challenge for the researchers to come up with the alternative and inexpensive methods for proposing new drug candidates against deadly infections such as MRSA (Hellerstein, 2008). A useful method to eradicate the infections is the identification of unique drug targets amongst the pathogens, particularly for the resistant ones. Information about essentiality of genes and its products are considered as potential drug targets for the discovery of antibiotics. Gene knockouts, RNA interference and conditional knockouts are the available experimental methods for finding gene essentiality, however, labor intensive, time consuming and costly. Complete genomes of 1000 pathogenic bacteria were made available from National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) genome database. It is unlike of very few pathogenic-bacteria-gene-essentiality data from experimental methods which is only 20, so far (Galperin and Koonin, 1999; Butt et al., 2012a,b). This huge available genomic information needs to be dealt with efficient computational algorithm. Available technology for the analyses of genomic data has revealed the characteristics of essential genes which include following: higher rate of evolutionary conservation, strand-bias, patterns of protein-interaction networks, high expressivity, codon usage, GC content, length of proteins, and subcellular localization (Rocha and Danchin, 2003; Gustafson et al., 2006; Saha and Heber, 2006; Deng et al., 2011). Recent advances in computational biology have enabled the identification and characterization of essential protein targets sites more rapidly than the conventional methods. Simultaneous advances in the areas of genomic and/or proteomic allowed functional predictions of possible drug targets with much accuracy. Combining of these two concepts, furnishes a new approach for identification of novel drug targets using in silico bioinformatics tools and databases, and have revolutionized the drug discovery process.

Current study is an application of relatively newer approach of subtractive genome analyses, applied to identify essential genes for the survival of pathogen and at the same time non-homologous to the human genome (Khalida et al., 2012). These non homologous essential genes, therefore can serve as potential drug targets for the future drug development phase. Various literature reported the applicability of successful predictions using this approach (Allsop et al., 1995; Sakharkar et al., 2004; Anishetty et al., 2005; Dutta et al., 2006; Perumal et al., 2007; Singh et al., 2007; Sharma et al., 2008; Barh and Kumar, 2009; Rathi et al., 2009; Amineni et al., 2010; Gupta et al., 2010; Abadio et al., 2011; Butt et al., 2011, 2012a,b; Reddy et al., 2011). Search of new drug candidates against such therapeutic targets are then assumed to minimize the pathogen's ability to resist against available treatments which may lead to decrease the side effects. Although few efforts on similar strategy and with MRSA have been reported in literature (Haag et al., 2011; Hossain et al., 2013) but here we presenting the strategy applied on two MRSA types simultaneously, and with a validation method which was lacking in earlier reports.

The standalone release of NCBI BLAST+ version 2.2.26 was obtained from NCBI (Altschul et al., 1990) (ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast/executables/blast+/LATEST/) and installed on a Linux workstation with Intel Xeon quad core processor. The overall workflow of current study is presented in Fig. 1
                     .

ExPASy (Expert Protein Analysis System) proteomics server contains the HAMAP (Gasteiger et al., 2003) which provides complete proteome and annotated protein records in UniProtKB format. The complete proteomes of MRSA ST398, MRSA 252 and H. sapiens were retrieved from the HAMAP (High-quality Automated and Manual Annotation of Proteins) on September 4, 2012.

Paralogous or duplicate protein sequences were identified by using CD-HIT (Li et al., 2001) with sequence identity cut off of 0.8 (80%). Paralogous sequences were screened out from complete proteome of both types resulted in non-paralogous sequences only.

For this study, the non-paralogous sequences were subjected to BLASTp against homo sapiens (Gasteiger et al., 2003) using threshold expectation value (E-value 10−3) (Haag et al., 2011; Kerfeld and Scott, 2011). The resultant sequences were consisted of homologous sequences (significant similarity with Human host) and non-homologous sequences (no hit found). Sequences which showed significant similarity with the human host were removed leaving only the non homologous sequences for subsequent analysis.

Essential genes are the ones which need to support basic cellular functions of micro-organisms and therefore, essential for survival of the pathogen. Database of essential gene (DEG) (Zhang et al., 2004; Zhang and Lin, 2009) containing essential genes and their expressed proteins curated from literature along with experimental methods and analysis report from 20-Gram positive and Gram-negative bacteria (Table S5). The DEG version 6.8 was downloaded from the DEG website (http://www.essentialgene.org/). Non homologous protein sequences were then subjected to BLASTp against DEG with an expectation value (E-value 10−5). Resultant sequences represented both putative and hypothetical non homologous essential proteins among both types (i.e. MRSA ST398 and MRSA 252).

KEGG provides a biological system of molecular interaction network along with complete functional annotation (Kanehisa et al., 2012). To identify metabolic pathway using KEGG, a popular sever KAAS (KEGG Automated Annotation Server) (Moriya et al., 2007) was used which performs a BLASTp similarity searches of all non homologous essential protein against periodically updated KEGG database. KAAS outputs not only metabolic pathways but also provide different features of information such as KO list assignment and alternative pathways along with enzymes and Enzyme Commission (EC) numbers. The results helped to predict metabolic pathways of potential drug targets out of the subjected protein sequences.

PSORTb v.3.0. is the most popular computational tool for predicting the localization of unknown proteins. All non homologous essential proteins were subjected to the prediction of subcellular localization by using PSORTb v.3.0 (Nancy et al., 2010). The main principle is to use Sub Cellular Localization BLAST (SCL BLAST), which takes all non homologous essential protein sequences and run BLASTp against database of proteins of known subcellular localization. PSORTb not only predicts membrane proteins but it may also identify proteins to which particular regions or compartments of the cells the proteins reside. PSORTb algorithm with significant high accuracy includes new analytical module intended to take advantage of new discoveries and surveillance in protein sorting and profit from a training of over 1600 proteins of known location that also help to predict the hypothetical (unknown) proteins as well. PSORTb define prediction results for different subcellular localization and it may include cytoplasm, cytoplasmic membrane, cell wall and extracellular and unknown.

The shortlisted hypothetical proteins sequences were passed through the SVMProt (Cai et al., 2003) server in order to predict the functional family classes of all non-homologous hypothetical protein sequences. SVMProt is a server for the classification of a protein into functional class from its primary sequence including all major classes of enzymes, receptors, transporters, channels, DNA-binding proteins and RNA-binding proteins.

Furthermore, screening of all non homologous hypothetical essential proteins was assessed by BLASTp comparison against Drug Bank database (Knox et al., 2011) which contains number of protein targets with respect to the drug IDs approved by FDA. In order to reach the novel drug targets default parameter values with E-value 10−3 was used in BLASTp search against the Drug Bank database.

To validate the protocol described in current study, we gathered all information reported in literature depicting the experimentally validated essential drug targets. One of the most recently identified drug target from MRSA was pyruvate kinase (Zoraghi et al., 2011). The pyruvate kinase sequence was retrieved from the complete proteome of MRSA and mixed with all identified non homologous hypothetical essential protein sequences. The mixed sequences were then subjected to a BLASTp search against DEG and Drug Bank databases with E-value 10−5 and 10−3, respectively.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

The objective of current study was to identify the essential and new drug targets against methicillin resistant S. aureus (MRSA) for proposing the alternative potential therapeutics. To identify the unique therapeutic targets against the MRSA, we employed subtractive genomic approach which has been reported in literature as a powerful method of identification of unique yet uncharacterized sequences as possible therapeutic targets (Dutta et al., 2006; Sharma et al., 2008; Amineni et al., 2010; Georrge and Umrania, 2011; Reddy et al., 2011; Khalida et al., 2012). Complete flowchart of the work done is presented in Fig. 1 and Table 1
                      summarizes the output numbers of sequences at each step.

Out of various available strains of MRSA, two types (i.e. MRSA ST398 and MRSA 252) were selected owing to their most commonly occurrences. Complete proteomes of both types (i.e. MRSA ST398 and MRSA 252) of methicillin resistant S. aureus (MRSA) were retrieved from High-quality Automated and Manual Annotation of Proteins (HAMAP) of expasy server (Gasteiger et al., 2003). 2648 protein sequences were found in MRSA ST398 while MRSA 252 had 2659 protein sequences. The method comprised of two major steps: one was to identify the essential genes for the survival of pathogens and the other to find those pathogen's genes which were absent in human host. Availability of complete human genome made the latter step feasible. In order to remove the paralogous sequences, we used CD-hit algorithm (Li et al., 2001) which resulted in reduction of the total number of sequences to 2598 with MRSA ST398 and 2579 with MRSA 252. Resulted dataset of sequences were BLASTed against complete human proteome retrieved from HAMAP (Gasteiger et al., 2003) and resulted in identification of non-homologous sequences that were absent in human host. Total number of non-homologous sequences was 1825 in MRSA ST398 and 1826 in MRSA 252. To find out essentiality, the sequences output from last step were BLASTed against the Database of Essential Gene (DEG) (Zhang et al., 2004; Zhang and Lin, 2009) with an E-value cutoff of 10−5 which was resulted in 696 sequences of MRSA ST398 and 686 of MRSA 252. Previous step ensured that the shortlisted sequences are essential for the survival of pathogen and hence could be considered as drug targets in order to find cure of MRSA given their druggability potential has performed.

An important aspect of possible drug target is its localization. Proteins must need to be at appropriate compartment of the cell for performing their functions optimally. Localization of the drug target is essential to know because of the fact that a drug needs to meet up with the target in order to exert action and the target whereabouts in cell will eventually help to design appropriate drug compound. Subcellular localization of non-homologous protein sequences was performed with each of the strains by PSORT (Nancy et al., 2010). Results with both strains have shown that most of the proteins (i.e. 55%) were localized in cytoplasmic region of the cell. Next bigger fraction (i.e. 31% and 32%) was predicted as localized in the cytoplasmic membrane region. Rest fractions were distributed as following: the extracellular fraction was 1% while the cell wall contributes to 1% with the case of MRSA 252 and 2% with the case of MRSA ST398. Some fractions were identified as ‘unknown’ for whom the whereabouts cannot be predicted by PSORT method. Fig. 2
                         showed the graphical depiction of PSORT results.

Functional classification of the sequences was done by SVMprot method. SVMProt outputs the accuracy of expected classification by P value in terms of percentage. 73 uncharacterized proteins with the case of MRSA 252 while 46 with the case of ST398 were predicted with SVMProt method. Fig. 3
                         showed the results of this step. Various functional classes of proteins were predicted for the query sequences including magnesium binding, transferases, zinc binding, trans-membranes, etc. Tran-membranes proteins could be considered as potential drug targets. Complete lists were provided as supplementary information (Tables S1 and S2).

The resulted outcome from DEG step was subjected to an online server KEGG Automated Annotation Server (KAAS) to decipher the involvement in various essential metabolic pathways in KEGG. The results were reported in Fig. 4a and b. Corresponding tables were submitted as supplementary information (Tables S3 and S4).

Briefly, 464 protein sequences were passed through the KAAS server with the case of ST398. Out of total 464 protein sequences, 57 were found as a part of carbohydrate metabolism, 30 were shown as part of energy metabolism, 15 were taken part in lipid metabolism, 31 in nuculeotide metabolism, 67 in amino acid metabolism, etc.

With the case of MRSA 252, 452 essential protein sequences were passed through the KAAS server and resulted in identification of 57 in carbohydrate metabolism, 30 in energy metabolism, 15 in lipid metabolism, 32 in nucleotide metabolism, 59 in amino acid metabolism, etc.

We also have compared our results with earlier reports and found few proteins matched with the identified genomes in earlier reports [Becker, 2005 #82; Lee, 2009 #83; Shen, 2010 #84]. Those matched proteins were highlighted in supporting information (Tables S3 and S4).

Current study was further augmented by screening out the druggabaility potential of every shortlisted sequence of essential proteins. It leads to the identification of 6 proteins with the case of ST398 while 21 with the case of MRSA 252, which shared similarity with the available targets of FDA approved drugs in the Drug Bank database. Details of selected proteins with target IDs were presented in Tables 2a and 2b
                        
                        .

Those potential drug targets when checked with the available Drug Bank database we found that they were similar to ATP-binding protein HI0065, sugar phosphatase supH, nicotinate-nucleotide adenylyltransferase, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl CoA synthase and transcription antiterminator with the case of ST398. While with the case of MRSA 252 it was observed that the potential drug targets were found similar to enoyl-(acyl-carrier-protein) reductase, DNA polymerase III subunit epsilon, nicotinate-nucleotide adenylyltransferase, 4-oxalocrotonate tautomerase, protein methyltransferase hemK, hemK protein, phosphomethylpyrimidine kinase, pyridoxamine kinase, ribokinase, general secretion pathway protein E, Cag-alfa, UPF0067 protein yebR, N-acylamino acid racemase, thiosulfate sulfurtransferase glpE, tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase, cytoplasmic, phenylalanyl-tRNA synthetase beta chain, S-adenosyl-l-methionine-dependent methyltransferase mraW, siroheme synthase, cocaine esterase, FcbC1 protein, 4-hydroxybenzoyl-CoA thioesterase, UPF0079 ATP-binding protein HI0065, thiamin pyrophosphokinase 1, probable pyruvate-flavodoxin oxidoreductase, pyruvate-ferredoxin oxidoreductase, and putative GTP pyrophosphokinase.

It is interesting to notice that all essential non-homologous but uncharacterized proteins were found similar to metabolically active enzymes in bacterial pathogens. This indicates the possibility of detailed study of each of the shortlisted sequences as potential drug targets. All abovementioned possible drug targets could be used as starting point for discovering novel drug candidates against each of the two types of MRSA given their structures were modeled. To do this, homology modeling of each protein is underway and will be communicated shortly in near future.

To validate the applied protocol in current study, we employed a recently identified pyruvate kinase which reported in literature as confirmed drug target against MRSA (Zoraghi et al., 2011). Pyruvate kinase considered as essential hub in the interactome which plays a vital role in biological processes. The idea is to use this available information and to check the performance of DEG and Drug Bank database that both of these databases should identify pyruvate kinase as essential and as drug target protein indicating essential need for the survival of pathogen. To check this, we incorporated pyruvate kinase sequence into the identified non-homologous hypothetical and essential proteins and subsequently subjected to BLASTp against DEG and Drug Bank database (DBD) using E-value 10−3. The results of BLAST against DEG identified the pyruvate kinase as essential protein ascertaining the applied protocol. The detailed BLAST output from the DEG step is submitted as blast text file in supporting information (DEG-Validation.fasta). Furthermore, the BLASTp search against Drug Bank resulted in the identification of one of the isoform of pyruvate kinase as essential therapeutic target. Result from the Drug Bank was presented in Fig. 5
                        . The whole procedure has helped us to become more confident that the applied protocol and predicted results of all non homologous hypothetical proteins are effective enough to prioritize the potential dug targets against MRSA.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

Different computational tools and up-to-date protein databases were applied in current study to shortlist few essential non-homologous potential drug targets against two types of MRSA out of a large number of protein sequences. Identified drug targets were either hypothetical or putative and never been characterized for having potentials as drug targets. Current study is an attempt to characterize the potential of shortlisted sequences as possible drug targets using advanced subtractive genomic approach. Protocol was validated using available known drug target (i.e. pyruvate kinase) which was recently identified from MRSA. Most important information we gained from current study was those few shortlisted sequences which were non-homologue to human host, participating in unique pathogen's metabolic pathways and at the same time essential for the survival of pathogen. Therefore, it is concluded that these essential proteins could be targeted for discovery of potential therapeutic drug candidates against MRSA given their structures and functions were further confirmed in follow up analyses by structure based methods. Nevertheless, the initial hints we obtained by current study will help us to prioritize the potential drug targets for antimicrobial therapy against MRSA.

Currently we are working on each identified essential, non-homologue sequence of both types for their structure building by homology modeling. After which we can decipher the functions by using structure based methods. These steps will open further avenues of proposing new chemical entities as MRSA growth modulators also known as inhibitors.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENT@&#

Fruitful discussion with Ms. Nadia Rasheed from Baqai University, Karachi is gratefully acknowledged.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2013.11.005.

The following are the supplementary data to this article:
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

