@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Homology modelling and molecular docking studies of human placental cadherin protein for its role in teratogenic effects of anti-epileptic drugs

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Teratogenic effects of AEDs is predicted to be elevated when the pregnant woman is subjected to Ca-rich diet or Ca-supplements.


                        
                        
                           
                           hp-Cadherin is involved in teratogenic effects caused by 04 major marketed AEDs- Gabapentin, Pregabalin, Remacimide and Vigabatrin.


                        
                        
                           
                           hp-Cadherin is observed to have negligible role in the teratogenic effects of VPA.


                        
                        
                           
                           The major binding pockets for AEDs in hp-cadherin are, in general composed of charged, polar and aliphatic amino acids like Isoleucine, Tyrosine, Glutamate etc.


                        
                        
                           
                           Observation beckons a novel biochemical link of AEDs teratogenicity with placental cadherin and invites further investigation.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Cadherin

AEDs

Docking

MD simulation

Homology Modelling

Teratogenicity

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Anti-epileptic drugs (AEDs) have high risk of teratogenic side effects, including neural tube defects while mother is on AEDs for her own prevention of convulsions during pregnancy. The present study investigated the interaction of major marketed AEDs and human placental (hp)-cadherin protein, in-silico, to establish the role of hp-cadherin protein in teratogenicity and also to evaluate the importance of Ca2+ ion in functioning of the protein. A set of 21 major marketed AEDs were selected for the study and 3D-structure of hp-cadherin was constructed using homology modelling and energy minimized using MD simulations. Molecular docking studies were carried out using selected AEDs as ligand with hp-cadherin (free and bound Ca2+ ion) to study the behavioural changes in hp-cadherin due to presence of Ca2+ ion. The study reflected that four AEDs (Gabapentin, Pregabalin, Remacimide and Vigabatrine) had very high affinity towards hp-cadherin and thus the later may have prominent role in the teratogenic effects of these AEDs. From docking simulation analysis it was observed that Ca2+ ion is required to make hp-cadherin energetically favourable and sterically functional.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Epilepsy is the malfunctioning of the brain that disturbs the normal brain electrical activity between nerve cells and generate seizures (Jefferys, 2010; Scharfman, 2007). A list of structurally diverse anti-epileptic drugs (AEDs) is presently used for clinical therapeutic application for this disorder (Stafstrom, 2010). Despite the wide variety of available treatments, approximately 30% of people with epilepsy fail to respond satisfactorily to first line anti-epileptic drugs (Remy and Beck, 2006). There is, therefore, an important unmet clinical need for new antiepileptic therapeutics with more specific mechanisms of action, fewer side effects and increased potency. However, the clinical use of AEDs are associated with one life threatening side effect i.e., teratogenicity (Tomson and Battino, 2009). Epileptic pregnant women with AEDs medication may incur the possibility of fetal abnormalities. On the other side, discontinuation of medication may lead to the uncontrolled condition for both mother and child. Thus the risk associated with uncontrolled seizures has to be balanced against the teratogenic risks imposed by the AEDs (Eroglu et al., 2008). Crucial Developmental process from fertilization till the end of gastrulation phase can be altered and may result in structural abnormalities. Multiple congenital anomalies arising from developmental defects are results of fetal exposure to antiepileptic drugs (Hill et al., 2010). They are the leading cause of infant mortality in the first year of life (Martin et al., 2004). The activities of placental proteins may lead to the fetal exposure to AEDs and thus causes teratogenicity (Atkinson et al., 2007). Teratogenicity depends upon the ability of the agent to cross the placenta during rapid differentiation phase (Darsow et al., 2012). Placenta produces a variety of proteins that have specific spatiotemporal attributes. These proteins aid in development of fetus from the blastocyst implantation till the natality (Takahashi et al., 2013). There are various kinds of proteins that bind firmly to the placenta. Placental transport proteins regulate absorption, distribution, and excretion of drugs and thus influence drug disposition, therapeutic efficacy and adverse drug reactions in the human (fetal) body (ITC et al., 2010).

Cadherins are calcium dependent cell–cell adhesion protein with prominent expression in neural tissue. Their extracellular portions is conserved having calcium binding domains that contains 5–34 definitive Ca2+ binding domains repeat of ∼110 residues (Angst et al., 2001). The adhesion is mediated by a homophilic mechanism that is cadherin–cadherin binding and the specificity of this binding is determined by the amino terminal homologues repeat segment (Shinoura et al., 1995). The dysfunctioning of cadherins based adhesive system may alter functional connectivity and coherent information processing in the human brain resulting in neurological disease. Several studies have been reported about the upregulation of E-cadherin expression due to interactions AEDs with epigenomic factors (Zhang et al., 2011; Rafal and Henley, 2007; Nam et al., 2004) but there is paucity of information about AEDs interacting directly with cadherin proteins, particularly placental cadherin and thus involved in teratogenicity. Therefore the present study focussed on defining the mode of potential interactions of AEDs with human placental (hp)-cadherin protein, using molecular docking studies, to delineate the AEDs having maximum interaction with hp-cadherin protein. Also, the study involved investigation into the molecular dynamics of hp-cadherin protein to decipher the role of Ca2+ ion for its functioning.

The 3D-strucutre of hp-cadherin was constructed using homology modelling method, the same being unavailable in Protein Data Bank. For homology modelling, the sequence of hp-cadherin was retrieved from the NCBI protein sequence database and template was identified using PSI-BLAST against the RCSB protein data bank (PDB). The 3D-structure was built using Swiss-Model server in template mode (Arnold et al., 2006). The modelled structure was subjected to validation and assessment using protein structure and model assessment tools at Swiss-Model server using different estimation patterns. The selected model was validated for packaging quality using Anolea plot (Melo and Feytmans, 1998) while Qmean (Benkert et al., 2009) score count was used for local and global analysis of different regions within the model. Gromos MD simulation plot was applied on selected model for analysis of experimentally obtained conformations (Van Gunsteren, 1996) while PROCHECK (Ramachandran plot) was used to analyze the stereochemical and overall quality of the structure (Laskowski et al., 1993). Removal of unfavourable non-bonded contacts was done by energy minimization using GROMOS96 force field in Swiss PDBViewer.

The best model structure selected from homology modelling was further refined by explicit solvent MD-simulation of hp-cadherin was performed using OpenMM Gromacs (Eastman et al., 2013). The starting structure was solvated in a rectangular box of TIP3P (three-site models have three interaction sites, corresponding to the three atoms of the water molecule) and sodium ions were also added to produce a net neutral system by replacing randomly chosen waters with ions. The missing atoms were constructed using Modeller script of OpenMM Gromacs. The .top and .gro files were generated using GUI interface of OpenMM Zephyr (Friedrichs et al., 2009). Electrostatic interactions were calculated using the Particle Mesh Ewald (PME) formalism. The Langevin dynamics, for constant temperature control, was applied on non-hydrogen atoms at 310K with friction coefficient of 1ps−1. The pressure of the system was controlled by Langevin piston at 1.01bar with an oscillation time of 200fs and damping time constant of 100fs. AMBER99SB force–field parameter set was used for simulating the system. The system was then minimized for 10,000 steps and then equilibrated for 10,000 steps. The coordinates and velocities were stored every 25ps. The simulated and refined structure of hp-cadherin thus obtained was used for further investigation.

The structure files (pdb-format) of 21 major marketed AEDs (Supplementary data Fig. S1) were collected from DrugBank (Wishart et al., 2008) and were used for molecular docking studies against modelled hp-cadherin protein using Autodock 4.2.5.1 (Morris et al., 2009). Lamarckian model of genetics were used in which environmental adaptations of an individuals phenotypes are reverse transcribed into its genotype and become heritable traits. Only polar hydrogen was added to the protein and Kollman and Gastegier charges were assigned. The spacing between grid points was set to default value of 0.375Å. The grid box was set to 480Å×260Å×280Å (x, y and z axis) to include all the amino acid residues that were present in protein. The study was focussed primarily on deciphering the binding domain search of each AED and hence blind docking was used for the purpose. The grid size selected for docking was huge to include all the domains of protein. A total of 50 independent runs were performed with a step sizes of 0.2Å for translations and 50 for orientations and torsions. The maximum number of generations was set to 1000 and maximum number of top individuals that automatically survived was set to 1 with mutation rate of 0.02, crossover rate of 0.8, cluster tolerance 0.5Å, external grid energy 1000.0.

Supplementary material related to this article found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2015.11.003.


                        
                           
                              
                                 Fig. S1. Structures of 21 marketed AEDs selected for study.
                              
                              
                           
                        
                     

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS@&#

The target sequence of human placental cadherin (CADH3) having 829 amino acid was retrieved from the NCBI protein database with accession no. P22223.2. PDB-1Q55 was identified as template using PSI-BLAST having 54% identity and 98% query coverage. The structure was modelled using Swiss model online server. The structures generated were assessed using Protein Structure and Assessment Tools at Swiss Model server. The selected model (Fig. 1
                        ) had the predicted Dfire energy (Zhou and Zhou, 2002) and QMEAN6 score −535.99 and 0.590kJmol−1 respectively.

The DFIRE energy statistical energy provides an accurate loop prediction at a fraction of computing cost required for more complicated physical based energy functions. The predicted Z-score for model was −2.04. The Anolea, Qmeand and Gromos plots (Fig. 2
                        ) reflected the quality and acceptability of the modelled structure. The green colour in the plot represented favourable energy whereas red colour represented unfavourable energy environment. PROCHECK (Ramachandran Plot) depicted 76.4% in core regions (Fig. 3
                        ) and was above the optimal score.

The energy computation was done in vacuum with GROMOS 96 43B1 parameters set, without reaction field and was minimized to −16693.734kJ/mol−1. The validated and energy minimized structure of hp-cadherin was used for further study.

An explicit solvent MD simulation for modelled structure of hp-cadherin was performed using OpenMM Gromacs with Amber force field. The energy profiles of the simulations were including total energy, kinetic energy and potential energy were obtained. The receptor protein molecule was subjected to molecular dynamic simulation upto 4×107 steps. The trajectory was obtained for overall energy minimization of hp-cadherin protein for 25ps and it revealed that the overall energy stabilized after a peak of 12,251.8kJ/mol at 50ps and remained almost in plateau phase for rest of the period. Almost similar trajectories were obtained for the plots of different energy contributors against simulation run time. The contribution of other parameters like kinetic energy, potential energy and temperature was found maximum at 25,401.2 and −13,149.4 at 299K, respectively, which were further stabilized further to stationary phase for the rest of the period similar to the trajectory pattern of overall energy curve (Fig. 4
                        ). These trajectory patterns supports and validates the stabilized simulation profile of hp-cadherin protein.

Docking studies was carried out for calcium bound cadherin and calcium free cadherin against major 21 AEDs. The binding energy, inhibition constant, hydrogen bond forming residues and interacting residues of hp-cadherin (free or bound with Ca2+) when docked against selected 21 AEDs is as given in Table 1
                         and Table 2
                        . The binding energy for hp-cadherin (bound with Ca2+) range from −4.63 to −9.17 kCal/mol and for hp-cadherin (Ca2+ free) ranges from −3.96 to −7.64kCal/mol, with VPA having the highest binding energy thus indicating that VPA has lowest affinity towards the placental cadherin. This suggests that placental cadherin has a negligible role in the teratogenic effects of VPA.

The statistical analysis of dock scores indicated that there was common trend of binding energy (dock score) when AEDs were docked against both hp-cadherin (free or bound with Ca2+) but 04 AEDs (Gabapentin, Pregabalin, Remacimide and Vigabatrin) were found to dock with comparatively lower binding energies than other AEDs (Fig. 5
                        ) and thus can be predicted to have higher probability to influence the activity of hp-cadherin. As a corollary, hp-cadherin can be a key protein during fetal development that influences the teratogenic effects of these AEDs. Also, the difference in the binding energy (when docked against Ca2+ bound cadherin and Ca2+ free cadherin) of these AEDs were observed to be significant (Fig. 6
                        ), thus supporting the fact that hp-cadherin may have important role in the teratogenic effects of these AEDs. Thus the teratogenicity of these AEDs may be elevated when the pregnant woman is subjected to Ca-rich diet or Ca-supplements as a general practice. The interaction site analyses of Gabapentin, Pregabalin, Remacimide and Vigabatrin (Supplementary data Fig. S2) reflects that the binding site remained same for Gabapentin for both hp-cadherin (free or bound with Ca2+) and number of interacting residues decreased when hp-cadherin was bound with Ca2+ ion due to the inclusion of Phenylalanine at the interacting site. On the contrary, the binding site remained same when Pregabalin, Remacimide and Vigabatrin were docked against both hp-cadherin (free or bound with Ca2+) and number of interacting residues increased when hp-cadherin was bound with Ca2+ ion. GLY, ASP and GLU for Pregabalin; GLU for Remacimide and LYS for Vigabatrin were observed to common interacting residues of the protein when these AEDs were docked against both hp-cadherin (free or bound with Ca2+). Also, the docking site analyses revealed that most of the studied AEDs bind to hp-cadherin on third domain (DIII) while domain DI was observed to be the binding site of Methsuximide, Phenytoin and VPA. Only Pregabilin was found to bind to domain DV of hp-cadherin (Supplementary data Fig. S3).

Supplementary material related to this article found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2015.11.003.


                        
                           
                              
                                 Fig. S2. Docking site images of selected AEDs (a,e: Gabapentin; b,f:Pregabalin; c,g: Remacimide; d,h: Vigabatrin) against hp cadherin (Ca2+ bound-a/b/c/d and free-e/f/g/h).
                              
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              
                                 Fig. S3. Human placental cadherin with five domains DI to DV, showing binding sites of 21 major marketed AEDs (1. Carbamazepine; 2. Clonazepam; 3. Ethosuximide; 4. Felbamate; 5. Gabapentin; 6. Lacosamide; 7. Lamotrigine; 8. Leviteracitam; 9. Methsuximide; 10. Phenobarbital; 11. Phenytoin; 12. Pregabalin; 13. Primidone; 14. Remacimide; 15. Rufinamide; 16. Stiripentol; 17. Tiagabalin; 18. Topiramate; 19. Valproic acid; 20. Vigabatrine; 21. Zonisamide) as revealed in molecular docking analyses.
                              
                              
                           
                        
                     

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The present study was carried out to examine the probable role of hp-cadherin protein in teratogenic effects of AEDs. No X-ray crystal structure of hp-cadherin was available at PDB. Hence, homology modelling approach was used to obtain the 3D-structure of hp-cadherin protein using the structure of placental cadherin of Mus musculus as a template. The modelled structure was subjected to energy minimization and refinement using MD simulation to exhibit all possible energy conformations. The refined model when subjected to molecular docking against 21 major marketed AEDs reflected that four AEDs (Gabapentin, Pregabalin, Remacimide and Vigabatrin) docked against hp-cadherin with high free energy and thus it can be postulated that hp-cadherin is one of the protein involved in teratogenic effects caused by these AEDs. Conversely, the low binding affinity predicted for VPA suggests that hp-cadherin may not play a role in VPA-induced teratogenic activity. The interacting residue analysis of docked structures revealed that charged, polar and aliphatic amino acids form the major binding pockets for AEDs in hp-cadherin. The current study provides a good platform for further investigation into the possible involvement of other placental surface proteins in teratogenicity.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The authors wish to thank Bioinformatics Facility, M.D. University, Rohtak, to provide computational facility for the present study. Also, financial support extended to SP, VS and RRKN from DST-INSPIRE Fellowship, New Delhi, DBT, New Delhi and UGC, New Delhi respectively, is acknowledged.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

