@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Gene cloning, homology comparison and analysis of the main functional structure domains of beta estrogen receptor in Jining Gray goat

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We firstly cloned Jining Gray goat ERβ gene with a complete ORF.


                        
                        
                           
                           The nucleotide and amino acids homologies of ERβ between animals’ species were analyzed.


                        
                        
                           
                           The main functional structural domains of Jining Gray goat ERβ were predicted.


                        
                        
                           
                           The tertiary structures of DBD and LBD in both different goats were compared.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Jining Gray goat

Beta estrogen receptor (ERβ)

Homology comparison

Functional structure domains

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  To clarify the molecular evolution and characteristic of beta estrogen receptor (ERβ) gene in Jining Gray goat in China, the entire ERβ gene from Jining Gray goat ovary was amplified, identified and sequenced, and the gene sequences were compared with those of other animals. Functional structural domains and variations in DNA binding domains (DBD) and ligand binding domains (LBD) between Jining Gray goat and Boer goat were analyzed. The results indicate that the ERβ gene in Jining Gray goat includes a 1584bp sequence with a complete open-reading-frame (ORF), encoding a 527 amino acid (aa) receptor protein. Compared to other species, the nucleotide homology is 73.9–98.9% and the amino acid homology is 79.5–98.5%. The main antigenic structural domains lie from the 97th aa to the 286th aa and from the 403rd aa to the 527th aa. The hydrophilicity and the surface probability of the structural domains are distributed throughout a range of amino acids. There are two different amino acids in the DBD and three different amino acids in the LBD between Jining Gray and Boer goats, resulting in dramatically different spatial structures for ERβ protein. These differences may explain the different biological activities of ERβ between the two goat species. This study firstly acquired the whole ERβ gene sequence of Jining Gray goat with a complete open reading frame, and analyzed its gene evolutionary relationship and predicted its mainly functional structural domains, which may very help for further understanding the genome evolution and gene diversity of goat ERβ.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Jining Gray goats are widely distributed in the Jining and Heze regions in Shandong Province of China and are noted for the wavy patterns of their kid-pelts, which are a traditional commodity in international markets and a significant display of sexual precocity, year-round estrus, and high prolificacy. It has been reported that Jining Gray goats reach sexually mature at 60–90 days after birth, produce 2–3 pregnancies per year, and have a lamb rate of 204–326% per pregnancy. Jining Gray goats were selected as one of important state-protected breeds in China [Tu, 1989]. The Boer goat is recognized as a meat-type goat, with an average sexual maturity at 6 months and a lambing rate of 162–164% [Greyling, 2000]. Yunling Black goat, another famous goat breed in the Southwest of China, is also a meat-type goat species and has a reproduction performance similar to that of the Boer goat (1.0–1.5 pregnancies per year, sexually mature at approximately 6 months of age, and a lambing rate of 104–189%) [Tu, 1989]. The genetic mechanism underlying the breeding performance of these three different goat species is a very interesting and significant subject of study.

Estrogen receptor β (ERβ) belongs to the steroid/thyroid hormone receptor superfamily and regulates gene transcription by binding to specific response elements. ERβ plays an important role in follicular maturation [Emmen et al., 2005] and is one of the key receptors that determine high prolificacy or reproductive function in mammals [Gibson and Saunders, 2012]. The ERβ genes of some animal species, such as rat, human, bovine, mouse, sheep, swine, and chicken, have been cloned since ERβ was first reported in mice in 1996 [Kuiper et al., 1996]. Previously, published goat ERβ whole gene sequences only included Africa Boer goat and Chinese Yunling Black goat (GenBank #EU847291 and #EU847286); the ERβ whole gene sequence of Jining Gray goat has not been reported. The gene sequence homology and differences in the functional protein domains have not been compared and analyzed, limiting the understanding of the ERβ gene and protein diversity in goats. The objectives of this study were to first obtain the gene sequence of goat ERβ, analyze its homology with other animals and make predictions about the main functional protein domains, and then to analyze the amino acid (aa) variations in DBD and LBD between Jining Gray and Boer goats and discuss the biological significance of these variations.

Ovary samples were collected from six different Jining Gray goats (Jining Gray goats breeding and conservation base, Jining region, Shandong Province, PR China). Samples were homogenized in Trizol Reagent (Invitrogen, CA, USA) and total RNA isolation was completed following the manufacturer's protocol. The extracted RNAs were treated with 1.2% formaldehyde, analyzed with 1% agarose gel, quantitatively measured using an ultraviolet spectrophotometer (Shimadzu, Japan), and then stored at −80°C.

According to the published ERβ whole gene length from other animals (approximately 1600bp), the whole gene of Jining Gray goat could not have been cloned using only one pair of primers. As shown in Table 1
                        , two pairs of continuous primers (ERβ1 and ERβ2) were designed according to the ERβ gene sequences in other species available in GenBank (NM_001009737.1) using Primer 5.0 software and were synthesized by Shanghai Biological Engineering Technology Services Limited Co. The first-strand of cDNA was synthesized according to the PrimeScript® RT Reagent Kit protocol. The RT-PCR product was stored at −20°C.

The cDNA was then used as a template for the subsequent PCR reactions according to the High Fidelity Taq enzyme protocol. PCR was performed by mixing 2μL of cDNA, 2μL of dNTPs (2.5mM each), 1μL (20pM) each of forward and reverse primers, 0.25μL (5U/μL) of High Fidelity Taq enzyme (TAKARA BIO Inc., Dalian, China), 5μL of 10× PCR buffer (Mg2+ plus) and 36.75μL of sterilized and double distilled water in a 50μL volume. Touchdown PCR reactions of ERβ1 gene were performed using a Mastercycler_5333 (Eppendorf AG, Hamburg, Germany) under the following conditions: at 94°C for 3min (initial denaturation), 94°C for 30s, 65°C for 30s (decrease by 0.5°C per cycle); 30 cycles of at 72°C for 50s, 94°C for 30s, 45°C for 30s; and 15 cycles of 72°C for 50s, 72°C for 10min and 4°C for 30min. Touchdown PCR reactions of ERβ2 gene were performed under following conditions: 94°C for 3min (initial denaturation), 94°C for 30s, 65°C for 30s (decrease by 0.5°C per cycle); 30 cycles with 72°C for 75s, 94°C for 30s, 50°C for 30s; and 15 cycles with 72°C for 75s, 72°C for 10min and 4°C for 30min. One fifth of each PCR reaction was electrophoresed on a 1.0% agarose gel, stained with ethidium bromide, and visualized under UV light.

The PCR products of ERβ1 and ERβ2 were extracted with Agarose Gel DNA Fragment Recovery Kit Ver. 2.0 protocols (TaKaRa, Dalian, China) and inserted into pMD18-T Simple Vectors (TaKaRa, Dalian, China) according to the provided protocols. The recombinant plasmids were transformed into competent E. coli Top10 cells. Positive cells were cloned at 37°C for 8h, and the positive recombinant plasmids were extracted with a Plasmid Extraction Kit (OMEGA) and digested with double enzymes: EcoR I/Hind III and BamH I/Hind III (TaKaRa, Dalian, China). After preliminary identification using PCR, the positive plasmids were named pMD18-T-ERβ1 and pMD18-T-ERβ2 and sequenced using two-way sequencing method by Beijing Liuhe Huada Gene Co. Ltd. (Beijing, China).

The nucleotide and amino acid sequences of Jining Gray goat ERβ were compared with those published for other species, including Capra hircus breed Boer (EU847291.1), Capra hircus breed Yunling Black (EU847286.1), Ovis aries (NM_001009737.1), Bos taurus (NM_174051.3), Sus scrofa (AF267736.1), Homo sapiens (AF060555.1), Mus musculus (BC145329.1), and Gallus gallus (NM_204794.1), using DNAstar Lasergen7.0 software. The amino acid sequence alignments of Jining Gray goat ERβ and other species were constructed using software Clustal X (1.83). The neighbor-joining phylogenetic tree of ERβ among these animal species was constructed by MEGA (4.0) software (http://www.megasoftware.net), and the bootstrap values to support the nodes of the tree were based on 1000 iterations of the heuristic search [Sullivan and Joyce, 2005; Zhang, 1999]. The evolutionary kinship was clarified according to the results of the comparison.

The main antigenic domains (MAD) of ERβ in Jining Gray goat were predicted using Jameson-Wolf methods [Jameson and Wolf, 1988]. The hydrophilic and transmembrane domains of the ERβ protein were predicted using Plot-Kyte–Doolittle online methods (http://www.expasy.Org/tools/protscale.html and http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/TMHMM-2.0/) [Kyte and Doolittle, 1982]. The surface probability domains were predicted with seven amino acids residues as a group scheme according to the Plot-Emini principle [Emini et al., 1985]. The specific amino acid residues in the structure were calculated using Garnier–Robson methods [Garnier et al., 1978]. The secondary structures of the ERβ protein were predicted by Chou–Fasman from amino acid residues in the crystal structure [Zhang et al., 2010]. The protein backbone flexibility was predicted with Karplus–Schultz methods [Karplus and Schulz, 1985]. The three-dimensional structures of the mature ERβ peptides in Jining Gray goat and Boer goat were predicted using the Swiss-model web server (http://swissmodel.expasy.org/) according to the human ERβ three-dimensional structure obtained using X-ray diffraction analysis as the model [Peitsch, 1996].

@&#RESULTS@&#

Total RNA, including three bands of 28S, 18S and 5S, was successfully extracted from Jining Gray goats’ ovaries. Two pairs of independent primers were used to obtain the cDNA of ERβ using the PrimeScript® RT Reagent Kit, and two different cDNA bands with sizes of approximately 640bp (Fig. 1
                        A, ERβ1) and 1000bp (Fig. 1B, ERβ2) were obtained. ERβ1 and ERβ2 gene fragments were inserted into the pMD18-T vector and amplified using E. coli. Top 10 cells to obtain two bands with sizes of 640bp and 1000bp and identified using plasmid extraction kits and EcoR I/Hind III enzymes.

The cDNA sequences of the Jining Gray Goat ERβ gene with the full-length opening reading frame were obtained after splicing with two sequenced gene fragments (ERβ1 and ERβ2) of the target genes. The whole gene sequence includes 1584bp and encodes 527 amino acids, and the molecular weight of the encoded receptor protein is 58.98kD with an isoelectric point (pI) of 7.0. We submitted the nucleotide and amino acid sequences of the protein to the Genbank database (JQ806058).

Homology analysis of the ERβ nucleotide and amino acid sequences between Jining Gray goat and different species, including Capra hircus breed Boer (goat), Capra hircus breed Yunling Black (goat), Ovis aries (sheep), Bos taurus (bovine), Sus scrofa (swine), Homo sapiens (human), Mus musculus (mouse), and Gallus gallus (chicken) was conducted using DNAstar Lasergen7.0 software and the amino acid sequence alignment was acquired (Fig. 2
                        ). These results indicate that its nucleotide homology ranges from 98.9% to 73.9% and the amino acid homology ranges from 98.5% to 79.5% (Table 2
                        ).

The evolutionary kinship in the phylogenetic tree (Fig. 3
                        ), according to the open-reading-frame amino acids sequences of ERβ in nine animal species, indicates that Yunling Black goats in southwest China have the closest genetic relationship to Boer goats in Africa, but Jining Gray goats have the same genetic relationships with Yunling Black goats, Boer goats and Ovis aries (sheep). This relationship shows the specific gene evolution of Jining Gray goat ERβ among different animal species.

The main antigenic domains of ERβ were predicted with Jameson–Wolf methods and were analyzed with DNAstar software. The results indicate that these main antigenic domains lie from the 97th aa to the 286th aa and from the 403rd aa to the 527th aa (Fig. 4
                           ). This predicted result may help for selecting goat ERβ antigenic epitopes to prepare antibodies for testing the tissue distribution of ERβ in vivo.

The hydrophilic domains of ERβ predicted using Plot-Kyte–Doolittle methods and DNA star Protean software indicate that they are different on the 13 sites (Fig. 5
                            and Table 3
                           a).

The surface probability of specific functional domains distributed on goat ERβ was predicted using the Plot-Emini principle, and 24 domains have been found (Fig. 6
                            and Table 3b).

The secondary structures of ERβ protein are not consistent using different prediction methods; there are some differences in the number and location of alpha helices, beta folds and irregular coils (Fig. 7
                           ). The result predicted using Garnier–Robson methods indicates that the ERβ protein of Jining Gray goat has 25 alpha helices, 11 beta folds and irregular coils and 42 T corners; using Chou–Fasman methods it has 19 alpha helices, 13 beta folds and irregular coils and 40 T corners; and there are same 19 alpha helices and 4 beta folds and 24 T corners predicted using both methods (Table 3c). There are 34 flexible domains of the ERβ protein backbone predicted using Karplus–Schultz methods (Table 3d).

The ERβ tertiary structures of Jining Gray goat, including two main functional domains (DBD (145–214aa) and LBD (259–497aa)) were predicted and compared to those of Boer goat (Figs. 8 and 9
                           
                           ). The results indicate that eight amino acids (Gly, Arg, Met, Ala, Leu, Gly, Leu, and Ser) at the sites of 211, 224, 407, 453, 456, 525, 526, and 527 in Boer goat are replaced by Met, Leu, Lys, Asp, Pro, Gln, Ala, and Gln in Jining Gray goat, respectively; two of them are in the DBD, and three are in the LBD. In the former, the polar amino acids Gly and Arg are replaced with the non-polar amino acids Met and Leu; this results in a different ERβ tertiary structure (Fig. 10
                           ) and most likely affects the affinity of the ERβ receptor protein for DNA during gene transcription. In the latter, two of the three different amino acids change from non-polar amino acids (Met and Ala) in Boer goat to polar amino acids (Lys and Asp) in Jining gray goat, which changes the spatial conformation of the ERβ protein (Fig. 11
                           ) and most likely affects the affinity of ERβ to a ligand (such as estrogen). Simultaneously, although the Leu amino acid at the site of 456 in Boer goat ERβ and the Pro amino acid at the same site in Jining Gray goat are both non-polar, the former is an aliphatic amino acid and the latter is a heterocyclic amino acid, which most likely affects the affinity of the receptor for estrogen.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Some studies have suggested that ERβ, an important nuclear receptor, could be a marker of animal genome evolution [Escriva et al., 2003; Feng et al., 2009]. In this study, ERβ nucleotide and amino acid homology analyses indicate that Jining Gray goat has the highest homology with Boer goat compared with other animals. The phylogenetic tree of the ERβ gene indicates that Yunling Black goat has the closest genetic evolutionary relationship with Boer goat, but Jining Gray goat has an almost identical genetic evolutionary relationship with Yunling black goat (or Boer goat) and with Ovis aries (sheep). The affinity relationship among these different breeds may results from the geographical distribution and environmental conditions for Jining Gray goats. Jining Gray goat survives in the north of China and in the areas with higher latitude, which is very different from that of Yunling Black goats (mainly in the south of China) and Boer goats (mainly in Africa); additionally, the climate condition with low temperature may affect the evolution of ERβ gene in Jining Gray goat. Therefore, the analysis of the Jining Gray goat ERβ gene in this study may provide important scientific support for the interpretation of goat genome evolution.

The main antigenic domains lie from the 97th aa to the 286th aa and from the 403rd aa to the 527th aa. These two domains are mainly composed of hydrophilic amino acids (95–128aa, 135–144aa, 172–251aa, 406–424aa, 442–453aa, 463–476aa, and 474–527aa) and lie on the surface of the ERβ structure. These domains include the entire DNA binding domains (145–214aa) and part of the ligand binding domains (259–497aa). Information on these functional domains will assist with further research, including the study of ERβ distribution and biological function in vivo. According to the predicted results, we obtained a multi-cloned antibody against Jining Gray goat ERβ by immunizing rabbits with a recombinant protein containing 327 amino acids (from the 201st aa to the 527th aa) of the antigenic domains and set up the specific immunohistochemical assay mediated by the rabbit's antibody [Liu et al., 2013].

The estrogen receptor has a crucial role in animal reproductive performance [Wang, 2005; Wu et al., 2006] and has been accepted as a candidate gene for the evaluation of animal breeding performance or reproductive rate [Ding et al., 2002]. Mammals have two subtypes of ERs: ERα and ERβ. ERβ plays important roles in ovarian follicle development, maturation and ovulation [Emmen et al., 2005; Wang, 2005]. It is a member of a nuclear receptor superfamily and shares a similar overall protein domain structure with other members of the superfamily [Gigue‘re et al., 1998]. Starting from the N-terminal end, there is the first transactivational domain (AF-1) followed by the DNA binding domain (DBD) with a dual zinc finger motif. Next is the hinge (H) domain with a nuclear localization signal (NLS). Following this is the ligand binding domain (LBD) together with the second transactivational domain (AF-2), whose activity, in contrast to AF-1, is ligand dependent [Enmark and Gustafsson, 1999; Lewandowskia et al., 2002]. Differences in the domain sequence homology, particularly in AF-1 and AF-2, result in differential functions. The structure of the ERβ AF domains, particularly the C-terminal part of the second AF domain, which is named helix 12, determines the protein's ability to interact with ligands [Barkhem et al., 1998; Leung et al., 2006]. The variation of the critical functional domains of ERβ may result into differences in biological activities [Ascenzi et al., 2006; Helsen et al., 2012]. This study predicts the amino acid composition and spatial structure of the main functional domain of ERβ from Jining Gray Goat, and compares the amino acids (aa) composition and conformation of DBD and LBD between Jining Gray goat and Boer goat. In the DBD, two polar amino acids in Boer goat are replaced with two nonpolar amino acids in Jining Gray Goat, changing the hydrophobicity and spatial structure of the core DBD. Several studies have noted that the hydrophobic structure of two α helices formed in the DNA-binding receptor may affect the DNA transcription of the estrogen-receptor combination [Melvin et al., 2004; Chandra et al., 2008; Helsen et al., 2012]. Therefore, it can be deduced that the variation of the ERβ DBD in Jining Gray Goat could promote increased DNA transcription efficiency and result in higher reproductive performance, although more research is necessary to confirm this hypothesis.

Among three varying amino acids in the ERβ LBD zones, two nonpolar amino acids are replaced by two polar amino acids in Jining Gray goat, and the proline (Pro) is replaced by leucine (Leu), resulting in great differences in the structure and conformation of the receptor-ligand binding domain. According to previous findings [Barkhem et al., 1998; Ascenzi et al., 2006; Leung et al., 2006], these differences could influence the efficiency of receptor-ligand (such as estrogen) binding.

There are 51 goat varieties in China, and 20 of them, including the Jining Gray goat and Yunling Black goat, have been accepted into the book of sheep breeds in China [Tu, 1989]. By environmental choice and long-term evolution, these species have developed different biological characteristics. These goat breeds, primarily distinguished by physical features and production performance, have not yet been analyzed by their respective genotypes; however, Jining Gray goats, as a good scientific species, have been widely utilized as transgenic animals in goat breeding improvement and animal multiple birth gene analysis [Zhu et al., 1999; Guo et al., 2002]. However, its estrogen receptors, especially beta estrogen receptor structure, characteristics, distribution and function in the body tissues are still unclear. This study will provide the basis for further studies concerning these subjects.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

This study firstly acquired the whole ERβ gene sequence of Jining Gray goat with a complete open reading frame, and analyzed its gene evolutionary relationship and predicted mainly functional structural domains and secondary structures and tertiary structures of DBD and LBD, and compared the spatial conformation difference of DBD and LBD between Jining Gray and Boer goats. These biological informations may help for further understanding the genome evolution of ERβ and the genetic diversity of goats.

None of the authors of this manuscript have a financial or personal relationship with people or organizations that could inappropriately influence or bias the content of the manuscript.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The present study was supported by funding from the Excellent Young Scientist Research Award Fund of Shandong Province (2008BS07005) and special bonus funding for postdoctoral innovation projects in Shandong Province (200803026).The authors also thank Dr. Qiuling Hou and Prof. Jianzhu Liu for reading the manuscript.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

