@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Involvement of non-polyalanine (polyA) residues in aggregation of polyA proteins: Clue for inhibition of aggregation

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Aggregating residues in polyA proteins.


                        
                        
                           
                           NonpolyA residues.


                        
                        
                           
                           Hydrophobic interaction.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

PolyA aggregation

Hydrophobic interaction

Docking

HSP40

HSP70

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Presence of polyalanine (polyA) stretches in some proteins is found to be associated with their aggregation, which causes disorders in various developmental processes. In this work, inherent propensities towards aggregation of some residues, which are not part of the polyA stretches, have been identified by using the primary sequences of seven polyA proteins with the help of Betascan, PASTA and Tango programs and explored unambiguously. This provides a basis for proposing molecular mechanism of this type of aggregation. Reported suppression of aggregation of polyA proteins by chaperones like HSP40 and HSP70 is substantiated through molecular docking. The hydrophobic residues of identified aggregating region are found to be interacting with hydrophobic surface of chaperones. This suggests a crucial clue for possible way to inhibit the aggregation of such proteins.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Expansion of trinucleotide repeats has been found to lead various human diseases like neurodegenerative and developmental disorders (Ranum and Day, 2002; Cummings and Zoghbi, 2000). Although the most common and well-known trinucleotide expansions are translated to polyglutamine (polyQ), several earlier findings also reported the expansion of polyalanine (polyA) stretches in various developmental abnormalities summarized in Table 1
                      (Goodman et al., 1997, 2000; de Baere et al., 2001; Mundlos et al., 1997; Stromme et al., 2002; Laumonnier et al., 2002; Brais et al., 1998). In all these cases, polyA expansion occurs in transcription factors having fundamental role in early development with an exception of PABPN1 (polyadenylate-binding protein 2). PABPN1 (Fig. 1
                     ) is basically a polyadenylation factor and found to be involved in regulation of transcription in skeletal muscle (Kim et al., 2001). Expansion of alanine stretch was first reported as involved in the disease synpolydactyly syndrome (SPD) (Muragaki et al., 1996). Further, comprehensive reviews on polyA expansions and associated diseases were published elsewhere (Amiel et al., 2004; Albrecht and Mundlos, 2005). Two different mechanisms namely polymerase slippage and equal allelic homologous recombination were suggested behind polyA aggregation diseases (Amiel et al., 2004). From the previous works on polyA, a correlation was also noticed between the size of alanine stretch expansion and phenotype severity in case of SPD (Goodman et al., 1997). PolyA tract expansion beyond a certain threshold can induce protein misfolding, which may lead to unusual protein aggregation resulting partial to complete loss of function or other dominant negative effects (Messaed and Rouleau, 2009).

A recent study pointed out that the formation of coiled-coil structure by polyA repeats can start protein aggregation and thereby related toxicity (Pelassa et al., 2014). Another in silico simulation study suggested various structural rearrangements and transitions are involved during aggregation of polyA peptide to form its fibril structure (Phelps and Hall, 2012). In general, polyA peptides have a tendency to form insoluble protein assembly such as amyloid fibrils (Blondelle et al., 1997; Shinchuk et al., 2005; Giri et al., 2007). Even under physiological conditions, in vitro, polyA aggregates show extreme stability against chemical denaturation and enzymatic degradation (Forood et al., 1995). Most of these studies consider the aggregation of only polyA peptides and not the full proteins. The molecular mechanism of aggregation occurred in polyA proteins is still largely unknown and is not very clearly understood from existing literature. This paper aims to provide a basis of mechanistic view point on these diseases for future experimental studies.

In this context it may be considered that in polyA proteins, there may be a significant involvement of the domains other than polyA to control and promote the aggregation process. It is evident from some earlier results that over-expression of PABPN1, which lacks entire polyA in N-terminus, can also induce protein aggregation in vivo and in vitro (Chartier et al., 2006). Missense mutation in another polyA protein FOXL2 also results protein aggregation in vitro, which is completely independent of polyA expansion (Beysen et al., 2008). These observations definitely indicate the presence of some non-polyA residues in those proteins, which have intrinsic propensity towards aggregation. This makes the basis of our study to predict the molecular mechanism of aggregation of different polyA proteins. In an earlier report by our group (Ghosh, 2013), it was also shown that in six different aggregating proteins, the flanking residues attached to polyQ have inherent propensities towards aggregation. These non-polyQ flanking residues were found to play critical role in stimulation of protein aggregation (Thakur et al., 2009; Ignatova et al., 2007; de Chiara et al., 2005; Ellisdon et al., 2006; Lakhani et al., 2010; Liebman and Meredith, 2010). Considering all these findings PASTA, Betascan and Tango programs have been used to find out the regions having propensity towards aggregation in PABPN1 and six other polyA proteins. Application of these programs for predicting residues involved in protein aggregation were also employed earlier (Sahin et al., 2011), where the predictions match well with the experimental observations.

It is also reported that the protein aggregates formed by different polyA proteins such as PABPN1, ARX, etc. can sequester ubiquitin, proteosome and molecular chaperones (Abu-Baker et al., 2003; Nasrallah et al., 2004). Molecular chaperones like HSP70 and HSP40 independently or in conjugation can significantly reduce the aggregation of polyA protein like PABPN1 and its associated cellular toxicity (Abu-Baker et al., 2003; Wang et al., 2005). On the other hand, chemical chaperone like trehalose can also delay the pathological toxicity in a transgenic mouse model of oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD), associated with PABPN1 aggregation (Davies et al., 2006). Our results clearly indicate the role of non-polyA residues in aggregation and the hydrophobic residues among them are found to be interacting with the hydrophobic patch on the surface of chaperones and thereby the chaperones are able to show the inhibition activity.

@&#METHODS@&#

To find out potential aggregation sites in seven aggregating proteins (containing polyA tracts) PASTA, Betascan and Tango programs were used by inputting amino acid sequences (Supplementary Table S1) of those proteins. PASTA2.0 (prediction of amyloid structure aggregation) predicts an aggregation profile for a given primary sequence considering β-pairing between neighbouring strands (Walsh et al., 2014). PASTA generates propensity sets (based on pair-wise energy function) for the residues of the input sequence. On the other hand, Tango uses statistical mechanics algorithm for predicting aggregation. Tango scans a given amino acid sequence and evaluates the probability for each residue to adopt the β-aggregate structure, while the algorithm considers protein stability, other intrinsic factors (hydrophobicity, electrostatic interaction, hydrogen-bonding, etc.) and extrinsic factors (pH, ionic strength, etc.) (Fernandez-Escamilla et al., 2004; Linding et al., 2004). Whereas based on pair-wise probabilistic analysis, Betascan predicts the residues which can form β-amyloid (Bryan et al., 2009). For each probable strand-pair formed between two same sequences, a score is determined based on the correlation observed in parallel β-sheets. Finally, hill climbing algorithm determines all local maxima of strand pair formation propensity and presents a score ordered list of all locally optimal strand-pairing as an output.


                     BLAST search of the fragments identified as aggregating regions (Table 2
                     ) in PABPN1, HOXA13, SOX3 and HOXD13 proteins show 100% identity in sequence with available 3D structure in protein data bank (PDB) (3B4D-chain A, 2L7Z-chain A, 1O4X-chain B, and 2L7Z-chain A, respectively) (Supplementary Table S2). Therefore, 3D structures of the predicted aggregating regions in PABPN1, HOXA13, SOX3 and HOXD13 were downloaded from PDB for further studies. But the identified aggregating residues in FOXL2, RUNX2 and ARX do not show complete identity with any available sequence having 3D structure (Supplementary Table S2). Therefore, based on significant identities in amino acid sequences and e-values as obtained from BLAST search, homology model structures of the identified peptide fragments for FOXL2, RUNX2 and ARX have been made using available PDB structures as templates (1D5V-chain A, 1LJM-chain A, and 3A01-chain B respectively). SWISS-MODEL work space (Arnold et al., 2006; Kiefer et al., 2009) was used for making homology model structures for further studies. After generating homology model structures, it is essential to assess their structural quality. The structures made for FOXL2, RUNX2 and ARX were tested using QMEAN server for model quality estimation (Benkert et al., 2009). QMEAN provides two scoring functions namely QMEAN score and QMEAN Z-score for the quality estimation of model protein structure. The QMEAN score ranges between 0 and 1 with higher value for the better model (Benkert et al., 2008). The QMEAN Z-score indicates the absolute quality of the model (Benkert et al., 2011).

Solvent accessible surface area (ASA) of the amino acid residues of both aggregating proteins and HSP were calculated through NACCESS (Hubbard and Thornton, 1993). For aggregating proteins, ASA of the residues was calculated using either the structures directly downloaded from PDB (for PABPN1, HOXA13, SOX3 and HOXD13) or their homology model structures (for FOXL2, RUNX2 and ARX). Docking was carried out using Autodock 4.2 Lamarckian Genetic Algorithm and the docked structures were rendered using PyMol.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

Aggregation-prone regions presents in the seven aggregating proteins were initially identified using PASTA. Aggregation profiles obtained from PASTA of these proteins (Fig. 2
                     A and Fig. S1A (I–VI)) identify the amino acid residues having propensity towards aggregation. The aggregating regions within the protein sequences were also identified through Tango algorithm as shown in Fig. 2B and Fig. S1B (I–VI). Whereas, Betascan identifies the amyloid propensity of residues in a given sequence as shown in Fig. 3
                      and Fig. S2 (I–VI) by a color gradient from yellow (zero propensity) to red (maximum propensity). Therefore, the residues having high propensity will be the part of the predicted aggregation site of the respective proteins. The residues in these seven proteins having potential propensity towards aggregation as predicted by PASTA, Betascan and Tango are listed in Table 2. The residues with high aggregation propensity as depicted by the three programs match significantly for all seven proteins. For PABPN1, HOXA13, FOXL2, RUNX2 and HOXD13 the amino acids showing highest aggregation propensity in the all three programs were matching almost exactly. For ARX and SOX3, the residues showing significant aggregation propensity and mutually matching in all the three programs were taken.

Several hydrophobic residues have been identified in the predicted aggregation region for all these proteins. This may cause homologous hydrophobic–hydrophobic interactions between protein molecules leading to aggregation. This is supported by an earlier result, which showed that replacement of a glutamine tract by an artificial alanine tract in a gluco-corticoid receptor (GR) can inactivate transcription. But the threshold in the number of alanines necessary to inactivate GR is lowered when polyA stretch is flanked with hydrophobic residues (Lanz et al., 1995). Another striking observation from molecular dynamics simulation also revealed that the aggregation of polyA is favored in hydrophobic environment (Soto et al., 2006). These observations suggest that hydrophobic residues may be closely associated with the aggregation process in the polyA proteins and our results also reflect the same. Generally higher solvent accessibility of hydrophobic residues play crucial role in protein aggregation. But from the primary sequence, we can only predict the residues and cannot comment on the accessible surfaces of those residues. Hence 3D structures of those peptide fragments have been made and analyzed.

As mentioned in earlier section, homology model structures of FOXL2, RUNX2 and ARX were generated and the quality of the model structures was verified by QMEAN server. The QMEAN score for FOXL2, RUNX2 and ARX models is 0.577, 0.749 and 0.733, respectively and QMEAN Z-score for FOXL2, RUNX2, ARX is −1.39, 0.07, 0.19, respectively (Supplementary Table S2). QMEAN scores of the model structures are in between 0 and 1, which suggests that the model structures are reliable and of good quality. Further, we have calculated the ASA of the residues of the identified sequences for all the seven proteins using either the downloaded structures from PDB or the homology model structures. It is noted that most of the hydrophobic residues in the identified aggregating regions of all these proteins are solvent accessible. Therefore, mutual interactions between hydrophobic residues may lead to protein aggregation.

Considering the involvement of hydrophobic interactions, use of chaperones would be a natural way to inhibit the aggregation of polyA proteins as observed earlier (Abu-Baker et al., 2003; Wang et al., 2005). To substantiate the inhibition of aggregation of PABPN1 by small heat shock proteins like HSP40 and HSP70, molecular docking was performed. The peptide fragment having residues 196 to 205 of PABPN1 was docked individually with HSP40 and HSP70. It is observed that the hydrophobic residues in PABPN1 is interacting with the major hydrophobic patch on the surface of both HSP40 (composed of Ile 246, Ile 260, Leu 262, Ile 321, Phe 322 and Phe 326) and HSP70 (composed of Phe 21, Val 26, Tyr 183 and Ile 363) respectively (Fig. 4
                     A and B). Prominent interactions between hydrophobic residues of PABPN1 such as Val 201, Ile 203 and Cys 205 with HSP40 have been noticed. Whereas, in the docked structure of PABPN1 peptide fragment with HSP70, the hydrophobic residues of PABPN1 like Val 198, Val 201 and Ile 203 are found to be interacting. The distances between PABPN1 residues with the interacting residues of HSP40 and HSP70 are given in Table 3
                     .

This hypothesis on aggregation of polyA proteins can be validated by experiments such as comparing the aggregation rate of only polyA peptide and polyA peptide fused with the identified aggregation prone residues. If the aggregation rate for the later is faster than only polyA peptide, our hypothesis will be supported. One can confirm the aggregation mechanism of polyA fused with the identified residues by comparing the aggregation rates of polyA only, polyA fused with the identified residues and the peptide fragment made of aggregation prone residues. In this regard experimental techniques such as time course measurement, microscopy and changes/transitions in secondary structure can lead to conclusion.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENT@&#

Authors are grateful to Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB), under Department of Science and Technology, Govt. of India for funding through their sanctioned project (No. SB/FT/LS-277/2012).

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2014.11.003.

The following are Supplementary data to this article:
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

