@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#
               In silico characterization and evolutionary analyses of CCAAT binding proteins in the lycophyte plant Selaginella moellendorffii genome: A growing comparative genomics resource

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           NF-Y TFs encoded by HAP gene family bind to the CCAAT-containing promoter sequences.


                        
                        
                           
                           We characterize duplicated HAP genes in Selaginella moellendorffii.


                        
                        
                           
                           Evolutionary relationships of LEC1-type of HAP3 genes have been studied.


                        
                        
                           
                           Detect thermodynamically stable conserved RNA secondary structures.


                        
                        
                           
                           Identified several conserved motifs in LEC1 proteins among all plant lineages during evolution.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Gene duplication

HAP gene family




                     In silico characterization

Molecular evolution




                     Selaginella moellendorffii




                  

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  NF-Y transcription factors encoded by HAP gene family, composed of three subunits (HAP2/NF-YA, HAP3/NF-YB and HAP5/NF-YC), are capable of transcriptional regulation of target genes with high specificity by binding to the CCAAT-containing promoter sequences. Here, we have characterized duplicated HAP genes in Selaginella moellendorffii and explored some features that might be involved in the regulation of gene expression and their function. Subsequently, the evolutionary relationships of LEC1-type of HAP3 genes have been studied starting from lycophytes to angiosperm to reveal the details of conservation and diversification of these genes during plant evolution. Computational analyses demonstrated the variation in length of cis-regulatory region of HAP3 duplicates in S. moellendorffii containing three thermodynamically stable and evolutionarily conserved RNA secondary structures. The homology modeling of NF-Y proteins, secondary structural details, DNA binding large positive patches, binding affinity of H2A–H2B interactive residues of NF-YC subunits on the duplicated NF-YB subunits, conserved domain analyses and protein structural alignments indicated that gene duplication process of HAP genes in S. moellendorffii, followed by structural diversification, provide specific hints about their functional specificity under various circumstances for the survival of this lycophytic plant. We have identified several conserved motifs in LEC1 proteins among all plant lineages during evolution.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

CCAAT box-binding factor (CBF/NF-Y) is a conserved heterotrimeric transcription factor distributed in all eukaryotes and is found to modulate gene expression in a highly controlled manner (Siefers et al., 2009; Laloum et al., 2013). NF-Y is comprised of three different subunits: NF-YA (HAP2 or CBF-B), NF-YB (HAP3 or CBF-A) and NF-YC (HAP5 or CBF-C), that interact to form a heterotrimeric complex, each subunit of which is required for DNA binding, subunit association and transcriptional regulation of target genes (Laloum et al., 2013). The previous report suggested that the NF-Y complex in vascular plants is generally encoded by gene families (Riechmann and Ratcliffe, 2000). A complete functional plant NF-Y complex remain yet to be resolved elaborately, but the individual subunits were proposed to play crucial roles in a number of important physiological processes, such as specific developmental processes and in response to environmental stimuli (Siefers et al., 2009; Laloum et al., 2013).

Duplication of individual genes, chromosomal segments or entire genomes (polyploidization) followed by the subsequent modification of duplicated genes that have undergone natural selection are considered as crucial driving forces of plant evolution (de Bodt et al., 2005). These processes produce novel genetic variants that stimulate genetic innovation (Conrad and Antonarakis, 2007). The fate of a gene that suffers duplication events include its functional category (Kondrashov and Koonin, 2004), degree of conservation (Jordan et al., 2004; Braybrook and Harada, 2008), sensitivity to dosage effects (Kondrashov and Koonin, 2004), as well as its regulatory and architectural complexity (He and Zhang, 2005). Recent duplication events have occurred independently within different plant lineages, especially in vascular plants, resulting in the variation of the number of genes encoding different NF-Y subunits. The appearance of multiple genes for each subunit in the plant genome has been positively selected during evolution, pointing towards the specificity of subunit interaction that would be ascertained by preferential protein–protein interaction, tissue or cell-specific expression of each gene or a combination of both (Yazawa and Kamada, 2007). The existence of the large number of possible combinations of plant NF-Y complexes demonstrated that they might act in a more intricate system than in vertebrates and yeast, which have only one gene that encodes each HAP subunit (Yazawa and Kamada, 2007). More importantly, occurrence of multiple copies for each NF-Y subunit has evoked a question whether a particular NF-Y subunit interacts with any other two NF-Y subunits or with only specific member(s) of the other two subunits (Thirumurugan et al., 2008).


                     Selaginella (spike moss) is an extant genus of the lycophyte clade that have diverged immediately while the plants colonized the terrestrial environment, in course of which they have gone through intensive selection pressure, thereby adopting numerous important features (Banks, 2009; Saha et al., 2013). Xie et al. (2008) recognized ten HAP3-like sequences in the Selaginella moellendorffii genome, which were grouped into 5 pairs with high level of sequence similarity and were also assumed to be the products of two different alleles of HAP3 gene. When we searched for the Expressed Sequence Tags (ESTs) for the HAP gene in the S. moellendorffii, we noticed that duplicated genes of HAP family was isolated from the mixed tissues (whole juvenile plants with roots and reproductive stems with developing strobili of S. moellendorffii) depicting their influential role in adaptation to the changing environment (Hughes, 2005). Our in silico molecular characterization of HAP gene family within S. moellendorffii enlightens the fact as to how selective constraint has been operative during evolution in regulating their expression and function. In addition, the structural features that we have predicted in these analyses provide clues regarding their functions that can be used by the future researchers to proceed further to investigate their specific roles that are essential to regulate various physiological and developmental processes involved in lycophytic growth.

We retrieved the mRNA and amino acid sequences of HAP gene family in lycophytic genome (S. moellendorffii) from National Centre for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Genbank/index.html). To explore the divergent pattern of LEC1-type gene evolution we searched for the existence of LEC1-type gene in various plant genomes, including 7 pteridophytic genera (Selaginella davidi, Selaginella sinensis, S. moellendorffii, Isoetes sinensis, Isoetes yunguiensis, Isoetes orientalis, Adiantum capillus-veneris), 3 gymnosperm genera (Picea abies, Pinus sylvestris and Pseudotsuga menziesii), 6 dicot genera (Pistacia chinensis, Dimocarpus longan, Jatropha curcas, Arabidopsis thaliana, Brassica napus, Kalanchoe daigremontiana) and 3 monocot genera (Zea mays, Glycine max and Oryza sativa Indica cultivar). The GenBank accession numbers and the length of nucleotide and amino acid sequences are given in supplementary Table S1. Multiple sequence alignment was executed using ClustalW software (http://www.genebee.msu.su/services/phtree_reduced.html) to perform optimum alignment for sequences. For each codon of HAP3 duplicated genes in S. moellendorffii, we have investigated the number of synonymous (s) and non-synonymous (n) substitutions which are presented along with the number of sites that are estimated to be synonymous (S) and non-synonymous (N). There were a total of 125 positions in the final dataset. These were produced using the Joint Maximum Likelihood reconstructions of ancestral states under a Muse–Gaut model (Muse and Gaut, 1994) of codon substitution and Hasegawa–Kishino–Yano model (Hasegawa et al., 1985) of nucleotide substitution.

5′ and 3′ untranslated region of HAP3 mRNA sequences of S. moellendorffii were obtained using UTRdb and UTRsite (Grillo et al., 2010). We performed RNAz analysis to detect thermodynamically stable and evolutionarily conserved RNA secondary structures using multiple sequence alignments of HAP3 sequences of S. moellendorfii with default parameters (Gruber et al., 2007). Three-dimensional structure of NF-Y proteins were predicted with the help of PS2 server (Chen et al., 2006) and the structural alignment between protein pairs were performed using TM-align: a protein structure alignment algorithm based on the TM-score (Zhang and Skolnick, 2005). Positively charged electrostatic patches on 3D protein surfaces were determined as an indicator of nucleic acid binding interfaces using PFplus server (Shazman et al., 2007). The peptide binding sites of HAP3 proteins for the HAP5 subunits were detected using PEPsite (Petsalaki et al., 2009). The conserved domain structures of proteins and the secondary structural details were predicted using Scan-Prosite (http://prosite.expasy. org/scanprosite/) and ProFunc (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/thor-nton-srv/databases/profunc/index. html) respectively.

Multiple sequence alignment obtained from ClustalW were used to construct Neighbor-Joining phylogenetic tree for LEC1-type CCAAT binding protein on the basis of the number of amino acid substitutions per site between sequences within different plant genomes using MEGA 5.05 software (Tamura et al., 2011; Saha et al., 2013) with a Poisson correction model (Zuckerkandl and Pauling, 1965) and bootstrap test using 1000 replicates (Felsenstein, 1981). We have searched for the conserved motif of LEC1 type protein among the plant lineages using MEME package (Bailey et al., 2009).

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

The sequence characterization of 5 pairs of mRNA of HAP3 gene family in S. moellendorffii is given in Table 1
                        . Difference in length in UTR region among the duplicated genes even within the two alleles of same gene in the 5′ and 3′ untranslated region of HAP3 mRNA sequences of S. moellendorffii were identified using UTRdb and UTRsite. The highest sequence divergence was observed within two alleles of gene SmHAP3A (90%). In addition, variance in length of Polyadenylation Signal (PAS) at the 3′ UTR region of SmHAP3B gene was noticed. GC (%) content was found to be lowest in SmHAP3D (∼54.2%) and highest in SmHAP3A (∼64%).

The test statistic dN–dS is used for detecting codons of HAP3 duplicated genes that have undergone positive selection, where dS is the number of synonymous substitutions per site (s/S) and dN is the number of non-synonymous substitutions per site (n/N). In this case, the probability of rejecting the null hypothesis of neutral evolution (P-value) is calculated (Kosakovsky et al., 2005). Values of P less than 0.05 are considered significant at a 5% level. Maximum likelihood computations of dN and dS were conducted using HyPhy software package (Sergei et al., 2005). More positive value for the test statistic indicates an overabundance of non-synonymous substitutions that could have been instrumental in the functional divergence of NF-YB duplicates within Selaginella genome during evolution (Saha et al., 2013) (Fig. 1
                        ).

Previous study suggested that 5 pairs of HAP3 gene sequences represent 2 different alleles of each copy of the HAP3 gene (Xie et al., 2008). RNAz analysis of duplicated HAP3 mRNA sequences of S. moellendorffii revealed two conserved secondary structure within 3′ UTR region of SmHAP3C1 and SmHAP3C2 duplicates, with the alignment score >0.5 (P
                        =0.98 and 0.79 respectively) indicating that the 120bp long stretch of sequence of these two allele of HAP3C gene might have some functional constraints (Fig. 2
                        ). In addition to that we have identified one thermodynamically stable and conserved RNA secondary structure within the 5′ UTR region of SmHAP3B2, SmHAP3D1 and SmHAP3D2 of S. moellendorffii with the alignment score >0.5 (P
                        =0.95). Mean pairwise identity, Mean z-score, Structure Conservation Index (SCI) and Consensus Minimum Free Energy (MFE) for each of the conserved secondary structure are represented in Table 2
                        . Previous report indicated that the protein-coding sequences and cis-regulatory regions of some duplicated genes can evolve independently, shortly after duplication process (Wagner, 2000). Alternatively, the diversification of cis-regulatory motifs in the promoter-proximal region has been attributed to the differential expression pattern within the duplicated genes (Conrad and Antonarakis, 2007). Functional RNA secondary structures have been found in untranslated regions of mRNAs that are reported to be involved in various cellular processes and often form interaction with other protein partners regulating the gene expression (Mignone et al., 2002). The variation in the length of identified untranslated region (UTR) within duplicated HAP3 genes and predicted evolutionary conserved and thermodynamically stable RNA secondary structure within the cis-regulatory region of HAP3 genes seems in agreement with the above fact. It is thus reasonable to conclude that these conserved secondary structures in untranslated region (UTR) of HAP3 genes might have some functional importance in their respective gene regulation of lycophytic plant lineages (Fig. 2) (Table 3
                        ).

We have modeled 5 pairs of NF-YB and 2 pairs of hypothetical NF-YC proteins of S. moellendorffii using homology template by PS2 server. We have not found any homology template for the NF-YA subunit indicating that S. moellendorffii NF-YA have undergone great diversification during evolution. However, two distinct functional domains are identified in NF-YA (HAP2) protein using Scan-prosite (Fig. 3
                        ): an N terminal region that is required for NF-YB and NF-YC association and a C-terminal region required for DNA-binding (Maity and de Crombrugghe, 1992). We have identified a conserved signature motif [CVSEFIS/CFI/VTG/SE/IAS/A/NDK/RC] within the NF-YB/HAP3 domain of all the SmHAP3 duplicates and Histone H2A signature motif [AGLQFPV] within NF-YC subunits of S. moellendorffii, obtained by Scan-prosite (yellow highlighted region in Fig. 4
                         and square marked region in Fig. 5
                         respectively). PFplus server showed large electrostatic patches of amino acid sequence at the N terminal region of NF-YB and NF-YC subunits of Selaginella with the variation in amino acid composition (red colored amino acid residues of Figs. 4 and 5 respectively). The predicted DNA-binding positively charged electrostatic patches on 3D structures of NF-YB and NF-YC subunits of Selaginella have been shown in supplementary Fig. S1 and S2 respectively. ProFunc analyses of SmHAP3 and SmHAP5 gene demonstrated two different secondary structural topology (see supplementary Fig. S3 and Fig. S4 respectively). Moreover, the secondary structural details of NF-YB and NF-YC of S. moellendorffii are represented using ProFunc server (see supplementary Table. S3 and S4 respectively). SmHAP3A, SmHAP3B, SmHAP3D, SmLEC1 consists of 3 helices and 1 β turns. The exception is the absence of helix 4 in SmHAP3C containing ‘AEH’ peptide (Fig. 4). SELMODRAFT_166626 and SELMODRAFT_ 73637 of hypothetical NF-YC protein in S. moellendorffii have exhibited 5 helices and 2β turns, while SELMODRAFT_76653, SELMODRAFT_170948 have shown 6 helices and 3β turns (Fig. 5). Interestingly it has been observed that SmHAP3C1 and SmHAP3C2 allele of gene HAP3C produce Tm-Score less than 1.00 (Tm-Score=0.963) unlike the other intra-allelic protein that have shown a perfect Tm-Score of 1.00 (see supplementary Fig. S5). Interestingly, PEPsite predicted significant peptide binding score in SmHAP3C gene (p-value=0.0310) indicating highest probability of interacting with different NF-YC subunits, whereas the peptide binding score of other members of HAP3 gene have been found to be >0.05 generating false prediction value. The lower peptide binding score represents the accuracy of the prediction because of having stronger signal. However, even if the prediction does not produce any reliable score, this method performs with the efficiency of 55% of correct prediction (Petsalaki et al., 2009) (Table 4
                         and Supplementary Fig. S6). Our computational biology data indicate that the duplicated proteins have passed through several insertion, deletion and key substitutions in the amino acid sequences which might have taken place independently resulting into the acquisition of new gene function, thus providing a strong support regarding the asymmetric evolution of certain duplicates of NF-YB and NF-YC subunits coupled with the asymmetric divergence in gene function (Yang et al., 2005; Yamamoto et al., 2009). It has been proposed that large patches of positive charges on protein surfaces are indicative of protein–nucleic acid interfaces (Stawiski et al., 2003; Bhardwaj et al., 2005). PFplus server predicted large positive electrostatic patches on NF-YB and NF-YC duplicated gene architecture indicating the divergence in DNA-binding region among the NF-Y proteins that might have reflected in the functional diversification of the duplicated HAP gene family in S. moellendorffii. 
                        Li et al. (1992) reported the highly conserved domain at the C terminus of NF-YA; in the central part of NF-YB; and at the N-terminus of NF-YC. This scenario is consistent with our finding for the conserved domain search of NF-Y subunits of S. moellendorffii (Figs. 3–5). Both NF-YB and NF-YC subunits are structurally similar to core histone subunits H2B and H2A, respectively and could mimic the interaction of the nucleosome core with genomic DNA demonstrating that the NF-YA/NF-YB/NF-YC trimer or the NF-YB/NF-YC dimer can bind to H3/H4 tetramer during nucleosome assembly (Caretti et al., 1999). When we searched for the peptide binding probabilities of interactive residues of NF-YC on the NF-YB subunits we observed that there is variation in peptide binding score. Thus, it seems to be reasonable to speculate that multiple NF-Y subunits in vascular plants may associate with each other in various combinations to provide similar level of combinatorial diversity for transcriptional fine-tuning (Siefers et al., 2009). In addition, duplicated gene architecture has passed through independent evolution of protein-binding domains, thus facilitating the protein network divergence during evolution.

Appearance of a LEAFY COTYLEDON-1 (LEC1) type HAP3 gene is being reported for the first time in the seed-free lycophyte S. moellendorffii that was earlier proved to be up-regulated under drought stress. LEC1 is involved in the vegetative desiccation tolerance in these non-seed plants (lycophytes) and have been assumed to be co-opted with the seed desiccation protection mechanism in the early stages of seed plant evolution by integrating the LEC1-type HAP3 gene into a novel network governing seed development and maturation (Xie et al., 2008). LEC1 has been reported to play a specialized roles not only due to its developmentally regulated expression but also because of its distinct molecular activity, as the in vivo function of LEC1 cannot be replaced by other non-LEC1-type NF-YB subunits, except for the most closely related Leafy Cotyledon 1 Like (L1L) protein in A. thaliana (Kwong et al., 2003; Lee et al., 2003; Yamamoto et al., 2009). We used the NJ method to construct unrooted phylogenetic tree based on the LEC1-type amino acid sequences (Fig. 6A) of different plant lineages starting from lycophytes to angiosperm. The LEC1 proteins from the same plant lineages tended to be clustered within same clade. We made MEME search to find out conserved protein motifs and the results revealed some conserved motifs among several plant lineages (Fig. 6B). Proteins in same clade have shared similar number of conserved motifs with same patterns. The sequence logos were shown for the top three conserved motifs, arranged in the order of motif 2, motif 3 followed by motif 1 and these motifs have been found to be shared by all the plant lineages under study (Fig. 7
                        ). Motif 4, 5 and 6 were observed among the pteridophytic plant except S. sinensis (motif 6 absent) and A. capillus-veneris (motif 5 and 6 absent). Motif 7 was found to be present at the C-terminus of gymnospermic LEC1 proteins whereas its existence was found at the N-terminal region of J. curcas, A. thaliana, B. napus (Dicots) and G. max (monocot). Motif 8 found in the N-terminal region of gymnospermic plant lineages has been found to be retained in Isoetes through the evolution but gradually removed within Selaginella and A. capillus-veneris. Motif 9 has also originated at the C-termini of GmLEC1-B, GmLEC1-A (G. max), DlLEC1 (D. longan) and JcLEC1 (J. curcas). Motif 10 has arisen at the C-terminal region of NF-YB9 (A. thaliana) and BnLEC1 (B. napus). OsLEC1-A has shown a long C-terminal tail region followed by further diversification exhibiting motif 9 in ZmLEC1 (Z. mays) and OsLEc1-B (O. sativa Indica cultivar). The NJ tree topology and the corresponding phylogenetic relationships indicated that all proteins from pteridophytes, gymnosperm and angiosperm were grouped into separate clades. This scenario is congruent with the phylogenetic tree of LEC1 protein derived from the nucleic acids codes for the conserved B-domain (Uddenberg et al., 2011). The phylogenetic analysis, based on the comparison of LEC1 amino acid sequences of Selaginella with the higher plant lineages could open new doors for better understanding of how this protein have diversified within pteridophyte, gymnosperm and angiosperm over the past million of years. Our analysis demonstrate that LEC1 gene have undergone diversification in all species during evolution. The phylogenetic tree revealed that LEC1 gene from same lineage tended to be clustered together indicating that they might have originated after the divergence of the lineages such as pteridophytes, gymnosperms and angiosperms (Fig. 6A).

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The difference of gene structure and the divergence of amino acid sequence among the duplicated genes of HAP family within S. moellendorffii indicate that the Selaginella NF-Y transcription factors might have performed a variety of physiological functions, required for their survival due the course of evolution. To date, several important biological processes regulated by CCAAT-binding genes have been reported, such as pollen tube development and control of pollen tube orientation in Picea wilsonii (Yu et al., 2011), drought resistance in maize and lycophytes (Xie et al., 2008), reduced drought susceptibility, anthocyanin production and stomatal aperture in maize (Li et al., 2008), photoperiod-regulated flowering (Siefers et al., 2009), chloroplast development in rice (Yazawa and Kamada, 2007) and embryo development (Braybrook and Harada, 2008). Our analysis enlightens the fact that the ability of existence of a species with the changing environment has arisen from the duplication and adaptive specialization processes of pre-existing genes that have undergone mutation, drift and natural selection process during evolution. We have paved the way for the molecular characterization of NF-Y genes in S. moellendorffii, through our computational biology approaches, that will offer new insights regarding the regulation of the duplicated NF-Y genes, specially the HAP3 duplicates, during lycophytic evolution and provide clues how the structural diversification might be reflected in the functional diversification of various NF-Y genes. The evolutionary analysis of LEC1-type HAP3 genes in different phylogenetic groups starting from lycophytes to angiosperms reveal how the LEAFY COTYLEDON1 gene gradually evolved within different plant lineages and their conserved motif search stipulate their structural and functional integrity that have been maintained during evolution with changing environment.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The authors acknowledge the support of technical facilities available at Presidency University, Kolkata. Financial assistance from Department of Biotechnology (RGYI) (Govt. of India) and Department of Science and Technology (Govt. of West Bengal) to B.G. and K.G. and Department of Science and Technology-SERB (Govt. of India) to K.G. is gratefully acknowledged. We would like to thank the editorial board and the anonymous reviewers for their time, patience and comments about our research article. The authors are also grateful to Dr. Sugopa Sengupta of Presidency University for her critical comments during revision of the manuscript.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2013.08.001
                  


                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

