@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Transcriptional over-expression of chloride intracellular channels 3 and 4 in malignant pleural mesothelioma

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           CLIC3 and CLIC4 gene expression is induced in malignant pleural mesothelioma.


                        
                        
                           
                           CLIC3 and CLIC4 gene expressions are significantly positively associated.


                        
                        
                           
                           Functional Enrichment for GO reveals a role in EMT pathways and water transport.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Chloride

Gene expression

Ion Channel

Mesothelioma

Transcitpromics

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Background
                  Chloride Intracellular Channels (CLICs) are contributing to the regulation of multiple cellular functions. CLICs have been found over-expressed in several malignancies, and therefore they are currently considered as potential drug targets. The goal of our study was to assess the gene expression levels of the CLIC’s 1–6 in malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) as compared to controls.
               
               
                  Methods
                  We used gene expression data from a publicly available microarray dataset comparing MPM versus healthy tissue in order to investigate the differential expression profile of CLIC 1-6. False discovery rates were calculated and the interactome of the significantly differentially expressed CLICs was constructed and Functional Enrichment Analysis for Gene Ontologies (FEAGO) was performed.
               
               
                  Results
                  In MPM, the gene expressions of CLIC3 and CLIC4 were significantly increased compared to controls (p
                     =0.001 and p
                     <0.001 respectively). A significant positive correlation between the gene expressions of CLIC3 and CLIC4 (p
                     =0.0008 and Pearson’s r
                     =0.51) was found. Deming regression analysis provided an association equation between the CLIC3 and CLIC4 gene expressions: CLIC3=4.42CLIC4–10.07.
               
               
                  Conclusions
                  Our results indicate that CLIC3 and CLIC4 are over-expressed in human MPM. Moreover, their expressions correlate suggesting that they either share common gene expression inducers or that their products act synergistically. FAEGO showed that CLIC interactome might contribute to TGF beta signaling and water transport.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Malignant pleura mesothelioma (MPM) is a rare and aggressive form of cancer that develops in the mesothelial pleural membrane that surrounds the lungs and chest wall. Exposure to asbestos is the main causative agent that leads to mesothelioma and therefore it is considered an occupational disease (Carbone et al., 2012). The incidence of malignant mesothelioma is expected to increase the next 10 years, while in industrialized Western nations currently nearly 8000 patients die due to MPM per year (Carbone et al., 2012). Although a lot of efforts have been underway aiming at identifying the best possible targets for novel therapies no actual progress has been made in prolonging the median survival of 1 year after diagnosis for MPM patients (Carbone et al., 2012). On the other hand it is very important to discover effective biomarkers for the early diagnosis of MPM and transcriptomic studies along with computational biology analysis seem to be a very powerful tool (Gordon et al., 2005; Jagirdar et al., 2013).

Over the last decade, ion channel biology has become an area of interest in oncology given that several ion channels have been shown to regulate specific stages of tumor progression and they have been implicated in several molecular mechanisms such as cell proliferation, invasion, cell circle regulation and metastatic spread (Prevarskaya et al., 2010). Moreover, deregulation of ion and water channels have been demonstrated in many primary human cancers and their blockade has shown tumor suppressing effects, both in vivo and in vitro (Prevarskaya et al., 2010).

Chloride intracellular channels (CLICs) are a family of ion channels that have been shown overexpressed in several malignancies. Although no data exist on the potential expression or role of CLIC members in MPM, it has been demonstrated that especially CLIC1 and CLIC4 have significant roles in cancer and more specifically in tumor metastasis, tumor aggressiveness, apoptosis evasion, cell proliferation and epithelial to mesenchymal transition (Peretti et al., 2015).

In this study we opted to assess the gene expression of CLICs in patients diagnosed with MPM as compared to healthy tissue and report that CLIC3 and CLIC4 are significantly overexpressed. Additionally, we found a linear association between the gene expression of the two and after constructing a network with their interactors we conducted a functional genomic analysis that revealed important roles of the CLIC3 and CLIC4 interactome that are pertinent to epithelial to mesenchymal transition as well as to water transporting properties. Our results provide a solid basis for future experiments in order to dissect the role of CLICs in MPM.

We used data derived from the Oncomine Cancer Microarray database (http://www.oncomine.org/) in order to investigate the expression profiles of CLICs in MPM in comparison to healthy tissue that served as control. All analyses were performed during February of 2013. In order to compare the differential gene expression of CLIC genes in MPM ensuring that the data are adequate and were produced with the same methodology, we selected gene expression data from one study, the Gordon Mesothelioma study (Gordon et al., 2005). In this study samples from 40 MPM patients and 9 healthy samples (5 pleural and 4 lung derived) were assessed. The following relevant genes of the family were assesses in this study: CLIC1 (chloride intracellular channel 1), CLIC2 (chloride intracellular channel 2), CLIC3 (chloride intracellular channel 3), CLIC4 (chloride intracellular channel 4), CLIC5 (chloride intracellular channel 5), CLIC6 (chloride intracellular channel 6). CLIC6 data were not available in the study interrogated. The gene expression data were log transformed, median centered per array, and the standard deviation was normalized to one per array as described previously (Rhodes et al., 2004). Genes were considered to be over- or under- expressed when the fold change in a given group was significantly higher or lower compared to controls (p
                        <.05). For further validation the false discovery rates (FDR; expressed as Q statistic) were calculated to further corroborate the validity of the results. The calculation of the Q statistic was based on the formula given by Rhodes and coworkers (Rhodes et al., 2004).

The gene interaction networks of significantly differentially expressed members of CLICs were constructed in String 9.1 software. String 9.1 is a database of known and predicted protein–protein interactions including both direct and indirect associations by quantitatively integrating interaction data from various sources (Franchescini et al., 2013). A Venn diagram was constructed using online tools in order to highlight common elements between the two lists. The goal of the network construction of significant CLICs was to extract their interactome in order to proceed to functional enrichment analysis of gene ontologies (GO).

The functional enrichment analysis of GO was performed with the use of the GeneMania software (Zuberi et al., 2013). GeneMania finds genes that are related to a set of input genes through a large set of functional association. However, its main strength is that it has an option to produce predictions of functional relationships between genes by mapping known relationships from other organisms via orthology.

The results were analyzed using GraphPad Prism 4.0 for Mac (GraphPad Software, San Diego, USA). Values that are negative reflect under-expression of a gene and values that are positive reflect over-expression of a gene. Normal distribution of the data was performed by application of the D’Agostino & Pearson omnibus normality test. Comparisons of gene expressions were performed with one-tailed Unpaired t-test for parametric data and with Mann–Whitney test for non-parametric data. Correlations between significantly differentially expressed genes were performed by the calculation of the Pearson (r) correlation coefficient. Deming regression analysis among the same genes was performed in order to assess cause-and-effect relationships among significant genes. This type of regression is used when experimental error is assumed for both X and Y variables. Differences were deemed significant with a p value less than 0.05.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Only two genes of the CLIC family were significantly over-expressed (Fig. 1
                        ), while the rest three genes were not differentially expressed between normal controls and MPM. As shown in Fig. 1A, the gene expression of CLIC3 was significantly increased compared to healthy controls (p
                        =0.0007). Similarly, the gene expression of CLIC4 (p
                        =0.0003; Fig. 1B) was significantly over-expressed in MPM. Calculation of the Q values further validated the strength of significance of our results (CLIC3, q
                        =0.007; CLIC4 q
                        =0.019). The gene expressions of CLIC1 (p
                        =0.18), CLIC2 (p
                        =0.11), and CLIC5 (p
                        =0.40) did not differ significantly between the two sample categories.

The expression of CLIC3 was significantly correlated with CLIC4 MPM patients. More specifically, CLIC3 expression was found to correlate positively with CLIC4 expression (p
                        =0.001 and Pearson r
                        =0.51; Fig. 1C). Deming linear regression analysis provided cause-and-effect relationship between the expression of the two genes given by the following equation: CLIC3
                        
                        =4.42CLIC4-10.07. In all other comparisons among CLIC genes no significant correlations occurred.

The interrogation of the STRING 9.1 software revealed the 3 genes (DNM1, EZR and MAPK15) interacting with CLIC3 (Fig. 2
                        A (i)) and 12 genes (DNM1, CO, ACTB, HRH3, SLC16A8, YWHAZ, HIVEP1, HIVEP2, SSTR2, PPM1A, BMPR2, SMAD2) interacting with CLIC4 (Fig. 2A (ii)). As shown in the Venn diagram in Fig. 2A (iii) there is only on element common, DNM1 (dynamin 1 gene) between the interactomes of CLIC3 and CLIC4.

In order to identify the potential roles that the CLIC3 and CLIC4 interactome might mediate we interrogated GeneMania, a tool for Functional Enrichment Analysis of GO (FEAGO) terms in two different ways: As shown in Fig. 2B the orthogonal FEAGO that included interrogation of the co-expression, co-localization, genetic, physical, pathway and shared protein domains interactions, revealed a central role of biological processes pertinent to BMP, TGF-beta and the serine threonine kinase pathways. The second analysis that performs prediction of GO terms based on properties of gene orthologs in other organisms revealed enrichment of processes pertinent to transmembrane water transport and actin remodeling (Fig. 2C).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

In this study we have shown that CLIC3 and CLIC4 gene expressions are up-regulated in MPM as compared to controls. Moreover, we demonstrated that their gene expressions are associated in a linear manner. In our study we did not detect differences in the gene expression of CLIC1, CLIC2, and CLIC5 between healthy and MPM tissues. CLIC1 has been studied extensively in several cancers and has been found overexpressed in gastric carcinoma, colorectal cancer, gallbladder carcinoma, nasopharyngeal carcinoma, lung adenocarcinoma, gliomas, hepatocellular carcinoma, and breast ductal carcinoma (Peretti et al., 2015
                     ). All the type of cancers mentioned above is of epithelial origin, carcinomas, while no sacromas (as mesothelioma is due to the mesodermal origin of the pleura) is mentioned to have increased CLIC1 expression. Thus CLIC1 overexpression in cancer could be cell-type specific and this could provide a potential explanation for the fact that in our study CLIC1 was not differentially overexpressed. The same could be the case with CLIC5 since it has been linked with rectal cancer (Supiot et al., 2013), hepatocellular carcinoma (Flores-Téllez et al., 2015), breast cancer (Yau et al., 2013). Regarding CLIC2 there is scarcity of information in the literature as per its role in cancer so no speculation can be made.

In this study we have identified the gene network of CLIC3 and CLIC4 and we report that this gene set consists of 12 more members out of which only two have been implicated to MPM pathophysiology (AQP1 and SMAD2) (Jagirdar et al., 2013; Vehviläinen et al., 2011). Since there was a strong association of the genes expressions of CLIC3 and CLIC4 and they shared a common member (DNM1) in their unique gene–gene networks we combined the two networks and analyzed them for functional enrichment analysis of GO as one.

This analysis revealed a significant role of this set of genes in the signaling of TGF beta, BMP and serine/threonine kinase that all have a role in the process of epithelial–to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) (Vehviläinen et al., 2011). This is of potential importance in MPM given that the most common histological subtypes are the epithelioid, the biphasic and the sarcomatoid (Carbone et al., 2012). Perhaps the CLIC3 and CLIC4 interactome may play a role in the transition from an epithelioid (more benign type) to a sarcomatoid (more aggressive) phenotype, however such a claim requires experimental validation since no data exist on CLICs and MPM. Nonetheless, there are immune-histochemical data that support the notion that detection of EMT markers such as high Snail and ZEB1 along with low E-Cadherin is associated with poor prognosis in MPM patients (Kobayashi et al., 2013). Additionally, a study that performed molecular classification of MPM patients concluded that patients with sarcomatoid tumors belong to an EMT realted subgroup with worse survival that is characterized by a mesenchymal phenotype (de Reyniès et al., 2015). Finally, there is one study that reports CLIC4 to be involved in EMT by regulating TGF-β-dependent myofibroblast differentiation to produce a cancer stroma. In this study experiments with conditioned media from CLIC4 overexpressing fibroblasts led to increased tumor cell migration and invasion in a TGF-β dependent manner and promoted EMT (Shukla et al., 2014).

One more interesting result that is derived by our study has to do with the second functional analysis performed that performs prediction based on orthologs of other organisms. In this case the GO terms that were most significantly enriched had to do with water transport. Water transport perturbations may play a significant role in MPM since the formation of pleural effusions in these patients is considered a potential route of tumor expansion in the pleural cavity (Jagirdar et al., 2013). This hypothesis is supported both by in vivo experimental studies (Stathopoulos et al., 2006) and from a clinical retrospective analysis of the characteristics of patients with MPM (Tanrikulu et al., 2010). In the first study it was shown in a mouse model of malignant pleural effusions that pleural fluid volume correlates significantly with increased number of tumor foci in the pleural cavity while on the latter it was shown that the existence of a pleural effusion in the context of the diagnosis of MPM is a poor prognostic factor with respect to survival.

CLIC 3, a protein that is localized predominantly in the nuclear membrane but is also found in the cytosol in a soluble form, has not been studied extensively but still it has been implicated in metastatic processes by regulating tumor invasiveness in ovarian and pancreatic cancer (Macpherson et al., 2014). Prior to that it was reported that CLIC3 along with Rab25 act synergistically in the endocytic trafficking of active b1 integrin from the late endosome/lysosome to the plasma membrane and this process promoted cell motility (Dozynkiewicz et al., 2012). In the same study in patients with pancreatic cancer with high CLIC3 and Rab25 expression the survival was reduced therefore CLIC3 was linked to poor outcome.

CLIC4 on the other hand, a protein that is localized in the cytosol in a soluble form but also detected in the plasma membrane and in many subcellular organelle membranes (nucleus, mitochondrion, cytoskeleton), is much more studied with respect to cancer and it known that it induces apoptosis evasion, increases cell proliferation thereby promoting tumor growth (Peretti et al., 2015). CLIC4 can translocate either to the nucleus or to the plasma membrane with different stimuli like cellular stress (nuclear translocation) or stimulation of RhoA activating receptors (plasma membrane translocation) therefore vesicular trafficking machinery is necessary (Suh et al., 2004; Ponsioen et al., 2009). Furthermore, it has been described that a reactive oxygen species (ROS)-CLIC4 pathway is required for the trans-differentiation of fibroblasts to myofibroblasts (Yao et al., 2009). This finding is very relevant to our study since the FAEGO analysis revealed pathways that mediate EMT processes.

As mentioned above, both CLIC3 and CLIC4 are involved in vesicular trafficking processes. Pertinent to this is the fact that in both CLIC3 and CLIC4 interactomes dynamin-1 (DNM1) was the only common member. DNM1 is a critical protein for seminal vesicular trafficking cellular processes like clathrin-coated vesicle formation in endocytosis, transport from the trans Golgi network, and for ligand uptake through caveolae (Macia et al., 2006). Another two proteins that are involved in vesicular trafficking and participate in the interactome of CLIC4 are ezrin (EZR) and beta actin (ACTB). These interactome elements highlight the translocative nature of CLIC3 and CLIC4 and also provide evidence for a protein complex that is relevant to MPM. This is because DNM1 role has been studied in normal human mesothelial cells (MeT-5A) and it was shown that its inhibition leads to induction of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) that has a key role in regulating the physiological thrombotic/fibrinogenic balance (Chung et al., 2009). Potentially this role holds valid in MPM cells as well. EZR, the plasma membrane-cytoskeleton linker protein, has been found in high proportions in exosomes secreted by MPM cells suggesting a pluripotent role in MPM biology and also it has recently being found to have a role in cell proliferation and migration of MPM cells (Hegmans et al., 2004; Pignochino et al., 2015). In our FAEGO analysis where the interactomes were analyzed together the enriched GOs verified a role for vesicular transport since significantly enriched GOs were the “regulation of intracellular transport” in the orthogonal FAEGO (Fig. 2B), while “actin filament organization”, “actin filament bundle”, “actin filament bundle organization” and “protein complex scaffold” in the predicted FAEGO (Fig. 2C).

In conclusion, we have identified CLIC3 and CLIC4 as two members of the CLIC family of chloride channels to be up-regulated in MPM and this novel finding seems to implicate a pathway that may be associated with the phenotype of the disease and potentially its severity. These data provide the basis for evidence based hypothesis regarding the role of CLICs in MPM and therefore functional experimental validation of our data is needed to further explain our finings.

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENT@&#


                  The Department of Respiratory Medicine in the Faculty of Medicine of the University of Thessaly funded this study.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

