@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Model-guided metabolic gene knockout of gnd for enhanced succinate production in Escherichia coli from glucose and glycerol substrates

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Model-guided gnd gene knockout strategy was applied for the first time in Escherichia coli for increased succinate production.


                        
                        
                           
                           The model prediction of increased succinate production after gnd gene knockout was consistent with experimental data.


                        
                        
                           
                           Glucose and glycerol substrates were used for the prediction and the experimental validations.


                        
                        
                           
                           This strategy produced 1.4gl−1 and 0.35gl−1 of succinate from glycerol and glucose substrates respectively.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#




                     E. coli




                  

Metabolic gene knockout

6-Phosphogluconate dehydrogenase (gnd)

Pentose phosphate pathway

Glycerol

Glucose

OptFlux software

Succinate

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The metabolic role of 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase (gnd) under anaerobic conditions with respect to succinate production in Escherichia coli remained largely unspecified. Herein we report what are to our knowledge the first metabolic gene knockout of gnd to have increased succinic acid production using both glucose and glycerol substrates in E. coli. Guided by a genome scale metabolic model, we engineered the E. coli host metabolism to enhance anaerobic production of succinic acid by deleting the gnd gene, considering its location in the boundary of oxidative and non-oxidative pentose phosphate pathway. This strategy induced either the activation of malic enzyme, causing up-regulation of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (ppc) and down regulation of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (ppck) and/or prevents the decarboxylation of 6 phosphogluconate to increase the pool of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate (GAP) that is required for the formation of phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP). This approach produced a mutant strain BMS2 with succinic acid production titers of 0.35gl−1 and 1.40gl−1 from glucose and glycerol substrates respectively. This work further clearly elucidates and informs other studies that the gnd gene, is a novel deletion target for increasing succinate production in E. coli under anaerobic condition using glucose and glycerol carbon sources. The knowledge gained in this study would help in E. coli and other microbial strains development for increasing succinate production and/or other industrial chemicals.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Succinic acid is a platform chemical and four (4) carbon carboxylic acid that can be produced by microbial fermentation. Microbial succinic production is a CO2 fixing fermentation, as such, it is considered as a green technology (Zeikus et al., 1999). It was classified among the 12 top bio-based chemicals by DOE in 2004 and 2010 reports (Choi et al., 2015). It is considered as a platform and/or specialty or commodity chemical with applications in agriculture, food and pharmaceutical industries (Zhang et al., 2009b). It can also be chemically converted into a variety of products, including green solvents, monomers for bio-based polymer syntheses and pharmaceutical products (Choi et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2009b).


                     Escherichia coli is the most known and highly characterized microorganism used for the production of industrial chemicals. These chemicals include succinic acid. With the development in systems metabolic engineering and synthetic biology, the specific genes involved in central metabolic pathways (CMP) and/or other alternative pathways can be deleted and/or manipulated using different strategies intentionally, so that the metabolic network can channel more carbon fluxes towards the production of desired chemicals (Lee et al., 2011, 2012, 2005a,b; Song & Lee, 2006; Yim et al., 2011). A study of metabolic gene knockout strategies for increasing productions of the targeted compound in E. coli using glucose and other cheap alternative carbon source, such as glycerol is necessary. This is because investigation of this sort can predict the changes in metabolism and evaluate the rationality of the specific gene alteration. Several authors have focused on metabolic gene knockouts in relation to glycolytic pathways, cell growth rate and cellular changes in metabolism (Zhao et al., 2004). Global metabolic responses of E. coli to glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PDH) and 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase (6PDGH) by metabolic gene knockouts of zwf and gnd genes were evaluated (Zhao et al., 2004). This was conducted primarily to understand the condition-dependent utilization of the CMP for growth and metabolism of the mutant constructed in their study (Zhao et al., 2004). In this study, we employed for the first time, a model-guided and/or systems based metabolic gene knockout of gnd for increasing succinate production in E. coli from both glucose and glycerol substrates.

Metabolically engineered E. coli strains for increasing succinate production were previously constructed using different strategies, ranging from metabolic evolution of energy conserving pathways with glucose as carbon source (Zhang et al., 2009a) to conventional experimental trial and error approach, involving the addition of foreign genes (Sanchez et al., 2005; Gokarn et al., 2001; Vemuri et al., 2002; Wang et al., 2006b). In a separate study, Jantama et al. (2008), constructed E. coli strains with deleted competing pathway genes involved in succinate production without the addition of foreign genes. An E. coli strain designated as KJ060, was evolved by combining competing pathway deletion strategies with metabolic evolution, which ultimately increases succinate production from glucose in the strain (Jantama et al., 2008). In addition, systems metabolic engineering for overproduction of succinic acid was applied by combining in silico modelling with MetaFluxNet and comparative genomics of E. coli and Mannheimia succiniciproducens (Lee et al., 2005a). This approach lead to the identification of pyruvate forming enzymes (ptsG, PykF and PykA) as good knockout candidates for enhancing succinate production in E. coli (Lee et al., 2005a). None of these metabolic engineering interventions identified a novel gene deletion target for increasing succinate production at the boundary between the oxidative and non-oxidative pentose phosphate pathway (PPP).

In a wild-type E. coli, besides glycolysis, PPP has been considered to be the major routes for intermediary sugar metabolism. Its role in various aspects of cellular metabolism is evident by breaking down carbon sources, the generation of a number of reducing power, such as NADPH and NADH and the syntheses of essential metabolites for cellular functions (Zhao et al., 2004, 2003). The metabolic changes in relation to glycolytic pathways were extensively studied (Zhao et al., 2004, 2003), but little is known about how the substrates (such as glucose and glycerol) are metabolized in the CMP if one of the PPP genes, such as gnd is intentionally deleted. In addition, the contribution of such deletion in increasing succinate production in E. coli still remained not yet fully specified. In a similar study reported by Zhao et al. (2004), their findings revealed that some genes involved in the oxidative PPP such as zwf and gnd are not essential under certain culture conditions, but they could not be able to explicitly indicate how the cell undergoes metabolic shifts to regulate the entire metabolic network to cope with these genes knockout (Zhao et al., 2004). Although, they emphasized on the significance and the central role of the PPP in E. coli metabolism, suggesting that any blockage of the PPP may cause a flux rerouting and activate a compensatory mechanism (Zhao et al., 2004, 2003), from which a beneficial metabolic response following a designated gene knockout can be established. Although Zhao et al. (2003) studied the physiological and metabolic responses to gnd knockout in E. coli K12, where they established that there was local flux rerouting via the Entner–Doudoroff pathway and additional direction reversing via the non-oxidative PPP metabolism in their E. coli mutant strain compared to the wild-type counterpart (Zhao et al., 2003). To the best of our knowledge, a single gnd gene knockout in relation to succinic acid production in E. coli has not yet been elucidated. We used the knowledge created in the aforementioned studies (knowledge-based) to predict metabolic gene knockout of gnd in relation to succinate production in E. coli using both glucose and glycerol substrates. In addition, we confirmed our prediction results by experimental production of succinic acid in mutant BMS2 strain

In this communication, we report the use of a comprehensive E. coli genome-scale metabolic model (Orth et al., 2011) and the Minimization of Metabolic Adjustment (MOMA) (Segre et al., 2002) within the OptFlux software interface (Rocha et al., 2010) to predict and/or guide metabolic gene knockout of gnd in relation to succinic acid production in E. coli. Translating our computational prediction results in the laboratory, we introduced, the actual gnd gene knockout in the E. coli strain designated as BMS2 and evaluated its succinate production potentials. Glucose and glycerol were used as the substrates. The former was used because it is easily metabolized by E. coli, while the latter was selected because it is recently being considered as a low cost alternative carbon source, as it is being generated as byproducts of biodiesel industry (Clomburg and Gonzalez, 2013; Dharmadi et al., 2006; Mattam et al., 2013). The rationale behind the deletion of the gnd gene is knowledge-based, primarily for blocking the efficient functioning of the gene and/or some reactions that connects the oxidative and non-oxidative PPP. We reason that the deletion of the gnd gene could prevent the decarboxylation of 6-phosphogluconate, which its accumulation could increase the formation of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate (GAP) and pyruvate (Fig. 1
                     ). GAP is a precursor for the formation of phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) (Fig. 1), which is needed for succinate production via phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (ppc) and/or ATP generation for cell maintenance and growth. Our approach in this study produced a mutant strain BMS2, with succinic acid production titer of 0.35gl−1 and 1.4gl−1 from glucose and glycerol substrates respectively. This work further elucidates that a model-guided and/or system based metabolic engineering approach could identify novel gene knockout target (gnd) in the PPP for increasing succinate production in E. coli under anaerobic growth culture conditions from glucose and glycerol carbon sources. The knowledge gained in this study would help in E. coli and other microbial strains development for increasing succinate production and/or other industrial chemicals


                        E. coli genome scale stoichiometric model iJO1366 (Orth et al., 2011) was employed for the in silico evaluation of gene deletion by using the Minimization of Metabolic Adjustment (MOMA) algorithm (Segre et al., 2002) with OptFlux software platform (http://www.optflux.org) (Rocha et al., 2010). The E. coli iJO1366 model has been tested and proven to be capable of computational predicting growth rates and metabolite excretion rates from a range of substrates and genetic conditions (Feist et al., 2010; McCloskey et al., 2013; Orth et al., 2011). MOMA was described as a flux based analysis technique that employs quadratic programming to search for the nearest point in the feasible solution space of the mutant model in relations to its wild-type optimal point feasible solution space (Segre et al., 2002). Alternative to MOMA is a bi-level optimization algorithm called OptKnock (Burgard et al., 2003). OptKnock was established to be not suitable for an expert knowledge-based gene deletion strategy due to its limitation of deleting sets of reactions instead of the real gene deletion in a genome-scale model (GEM) (Vilaca et al., 2011). The OptFlux software platform is an in silico metabolic engineering (ME) platform that was implemented using the Java programming, which contained MOMA as a simulation algorithm. Flux balance analysis (FBA) was used for all phenotype simulations. All the simulation of the mutant and the wild-type models were performed using the OptFlux software version 3.07

Glucose and glycerol were chosen as solitary carbon sources under anaerobic conditions. The substrate uptake rates were constrained to a maximum of 18.5mmolgDW −1
                        h −1 whereas their corresponding oxygen uptake rate was set to zero, as the environmental condition is anaerobic. These values were selected based on closely established experimental observations on aerobic and anaerobic growth in E. coli (Amit Varma and Palsson, 1993; Varma and Palsson, 1994).


                        E. coli JM109 (F¢ (traD36, proAB+ lacIq, D (lacZ) M15) endA1 recA1 hsdR17 (rk
                        −, mk 
                        +) mcrA supE44 l- gyrA96 relA1 D (lacproAB) thi-1) was used for maintenance of the pKD4 and pKD46 plasmids. The plasmids were used strictly following the method descried previously (Datsenko and Wanner, 2000). The plasmid pKD4 was extracted from E. coli JM109 using the QIAprep Miniprep kit (QIAGEN) according to the manufacturer’s specifications.


                        E. coli cells used in this study were grown in LB medium containing 0.5% yeast extract (Difco), 0.5% NaCl and 1% Bacto tryptone (Difco) with or without antibiotics at the concentrations of 100μg/ml ampicillin and 30μg/ml of Kanamycin. l-Arabinose, glycerol and glucose were from Sigma–Aldrich. KAPA HiFi Hotstart ReadyMix (2×) was from KAPA BIOSYSTEMS. Agarose was purchased from Sigma–Aldrich.

The E. coli gnd gene sequence was used to design forward and reverse primers with pKD4 template plasmid sequence. The primers had 36-nt 5′ extension including the gene initiation codon (H1) and 20-nt sequence (p1) as described previously (Baba et al., 2006; Datsenko and Wanner, 2000). See Table 1
                         for details of the primers used in this study.

PCR reactions were carried out in an eppendorf thermo cycler using 25μl reactions containing 12.5μl of KAPA HiFi Hotstart ReadyMix (2×), 1μl of pkD4 template DNA, 1.0μl of each primer. Reactions were performed for 30 cycles: 95°C for 3min, 98°C for 20s, 55°C for 15s, 72°C for 1:30s, 72°C for 60s and cooling at 4°C. PCR products were purified using SV gel and PCR clean up system (Promega, USA), according to the manufacturer’s protocol. PCR products were analyzed by 1% agarose gel-electrophoresis using 1× Tris–acetate buffer.


                        E. coli JM109 harboring the λ-Red helper plasmid pKD46 was grown in 100ml of LB medium with ampicillin and 1mM l-Arabinose at 30°C until an optical density at 600 reached 0.3. Competent cells for electroporation were prepared as described previously (Sharan et al., 2009). A measure of 1μl (400ng) of the PCR fragment was mixed with 50μl of Competent cell in an ice-cold Eppendorf electroporation cuvettes (0.2cm). Electroporation was performed at 2.5kV with 2mF and 600Ω, followed by immediate addition of 1ml of SOC medium which contained (0.5% yeast extract (Difco), 2% Bacto tryptone (Difco), 2.5mM KCl, 10mM NaCl, 10mM MgCl2, 10mM MgSO4, 20mM glucose) with 1mM l-Arabinose. The SOC medium mixed with the electroporated cells were incubated for 2h at 37°C. Selection of kanR transformant was followed immediately by spreading one-tenth portion onto kanamycin agar plate as described by Baba et al. (2006). Correct chromosomal structure was tested, by conducting 20μl PCR verification with kanamycin specific primers K1 and K2 as described previously (Datsenko and Wanner, 2000).

Bacterial cells starter culture was made by growing the cells in 10ml LB medium with shaking at 200rpm at a temperature of 37°C. One milliliter of seed culture was used to inoculate a 125ml butyl rubber stoppered serum vial, which contained 100ml of fermentation media as described by Lee et al. (2005a) with slight modification, replacing glucose with glycerol (10gl−1). The fermentation media used contained the following ingredients (per liter): yeast extract=5g; glucose=9g (50mM); NaHCO3
                        =10g; NaH2PO4·H2O=8.5g; K2HPO4
                        =15.5g (pH 7.0). Anaerobic condition was established by filling the headspace with N2 and addition of Na2S·9H20 (final 1mM). Cells were cultivated under anaerobic conditions at 37°C with shaking at 200rpm for 1–3days unless otherwise stated.

The concentrations of glucose and/or glycerol, ethanol and organic acids (lactate, formate, and succinate) were quantified by high performance liquid chromatography, Agilent 1260 Infinity (Agilent Technologies, USA). The HPLC Agilent, equipped with an RI detector and a 300×7.88mm Aminex HPX-87H ion-exchange column (Bio-Rad laboratories, USA), was used for these purposes. The culture supernatant was passed through a syringe filter (pore size of 0.2μm) after centrifugation at 10,000×
                        g for 10min and stored at −20°C for analyses. For operating condition to optimize peak separation, the column was eluted isocratically at 42°C with a flow rate of 0.6mlmin−1 using 30mM H2SO4 as the mobile phase, following the description in their original documentations for glycerol substrate (Dharmadi and Gonzalez, 2005; Dharmadi et al., 2006). While the operating conditions for d-glucose substrate, followed strictly the method described by Lee et al. (2005a), where the column was eluted isocratically at 47°C with a flow rate of 0.6mlmin−1 using 0.01N H2SO4 as the mobile phase. The optical density of the cell cultures was measured at 600nm to quantify cell growth, using a GENESYS 105 VIS spectrophotometer (Thermo scientific, USA).

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS@&#

Systems metabolic engineering applications employing the genome scale metabolic model is of utmost importance in guiding future metabolic engineering interventions and/or understanding the underlying metabolic functions of some certain metabolic pathway gene(s) in E. coli central metabolic pathways (CMP). Model-driven biological discovery could unfold knowledge gaps that can be pursued experimentally (Feist et al., 2010; Guzman et al., 2015) to address bio-based industrial chemical production. In the present study, we used model-guided metabolic gene knockout prediction strategy by targeting 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase (gnd), as it plays a significant role in the PPP because of its location at the interface between the oxidative and non-oxidative PPP, besides its additional role in NADPH and CO2 generation (Fig. 1). This disruption has been previously reported to cause rerouting carbon fluxes towards activation of certain compensatory mechanism in regulating the activities of the PPP (Zhao et al., 2004, 2003). In addition to this, gnd gene knockout in E. coli was established to activate the anaplerotic pathway catalyzed by malic enzyme, which ultimately caused an up-regulation of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (ppc) and down-regulation of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (ppck) (Zhao et al., 2003).

We predicted that the deletion of gnd gene in E. coli genome scale model under anaerobic conditions using glucose as substrate increased succinate flux that is 30% higher than its wild-type control model (Table 2
                     ). While on the other hand, the prediction of the same gene knockout using glycerol as a carbon source showed no increase in succinate flux (Table 2). The experimental results using glucose are in conformity with the succinate prediction results, indicating a true positive simulation outcome. While the model failed to accurately predict the gnd gene knockout (false-negative predictions) using glycerol substrate, because the experimental results showed increased succinate production from glycerol. In addition, ethanol formation in the model was not detected on glycerol carbon source, but the experimental measurement shows otherwise on the same substrate. These inconsistencies indicates that scope gaps and/or true biological gaps (missing regulatory processes) exist in the model used for the prediction (Monk and Palsson, 2014) and hence could drive future biological discovery on the glycerol substrate. In addition, these discrepancies, might be attributed to missed predictions, which often represent cases that are currently difficult for functional genomicist to understand (Monk and Palsson, 2014). These findings suggest that the mechanism that the E. coli cell used in increasing succinate production following the deletion of the gnd gene in BMS2 strain from glycerol substrate is intriguing.

The increase in succinate production in mutant strains (BMS2) reported in this study were found to be 0.28gl−1 (4.38 fold in 1day) and 0.35gl−1 (3.70 in 3 days) of fermentation time on glucose substrates respectively (Table 3
                     ). While their corresponding wild-type counterparts produced only 0.06gl−1 (1 day) and 0.09gl−1 (3 days) of fermentation time respectively (Table 3). The increased succinate productions in the mutant strain are attributed to the deletion of the gnd gene, and the experimental results are in conformity with the predicted results by E. coli genome scale model from glucose substrate (Table 2). While on the other hand, the same mutant strain demonstrated increased succinate production that is nearly 1.4gl−1 after the 4th day of fermentation time, 12.9 fold at 6th day and a nearly 13.9 fold after the 7th day of fermentation period using glycerol as substrate (Table 4
                     ). Glycerol fermentation in E. coli has been demonstrated previously (Clomburg and Gonzalez, 2013; Dharmadi et al., 2006; Shams Yazdani and Gonzalez, 2008; Yazdani and Gonzalez, 2007) and known to be slow, because the metabolic route for glycerol dissimilation in E. coli is different from that of glucose (Fig. 1). E. coli metabolizes glucose faster than glycerol, so when glucose is used as substrate less fermentation time (Zhang et al., 2009b) is enough to achieve improved succinate production compared to its glycerol counterpart (Tables 3 and 4). The slow metabolism of glycerol by E. coli and impaired growth rate have been reported to be attributable to a redox imbalance resulting from the use of intermediates for biosynthesis (Gonzalez et al., 2008) and/or limited availability of energy for cell envelop biosynthesis (gluconeogenesis) (Zhang et al., 2010). The problem of impaired growth of E. coli on glycerol has been recently addressed by Cheng et al. (2014), where they identified that mutation at rpoC and glpK genes in E. coli derived from adaptation in glycerol made the E. coli strain to gain fast growth advantage on glycerol substrate (Cheng et al., 2014). Therefore, the strain obtained in this study (BMS2) was tested on glycerol substrate because it is considered, the cheap, abundant carbon source that is being generated as a byproduct of the biodiesel industry. Its conversion into value added succinate by metabolically engineered E. coli could be considered as a green technology. It could serve dual purposes: waste conversion and CO2 consumption (succinate production being a CO2 fixing fermentation). In addition, glycerol has a peculiar advantage, such as greater degree of reduction over glucose and xylose sugars, giving it an opportunity to be used as a solitary carbon source for the microbial production of reduced chemicals such succinate, xylitol and even ethanol at a higher yield than those obtained using sugars (Dharmadi et al., 2006).

In the wild-type E. coli, two phases of PPP exist: (1) oxidative and (2) non-oxidative PPP. The mutant created (BMS2) in this study lacks the gnd gene that connects the oxidative and the non-oxidative PPP (Fig. 1). The deletion of gnd therefore has consequence on the direction of the fluxes involved in the non-oxidative pathway. This effect could increase the pool of 6-phosphogluconate, which can be directed towards the increased formation of GAP and pyruvate (Fig. 1). GAP is a precursor for PEP, as such an increase in GAP formation could potentially increase PEP pool and subsequently succinic acid via the CO2 fixation using ppc through oxaloacetate (OAA) routes (Fig. 1). We hypothesized that the accumulation of 6-phosgluconate can be achieved under anaerobic conditions, because the oxidative phase of PPP is inactivated and hence reduced the functioning of the ED pathway. The existence of ED pathway was previously reported to have the effect of reduced accumulation of 6-phosphogluconate (Zhao et al., 2003). In this study, the accumulation of 6-phosphogluconate is beneficial to increasing GAP and pyruvate, which could be responsible for increased succinate production in our mutant strain BSM2 when glucose was used as a carbon source (Fig. 1). The increase generation of pyruvate on the other hand, might have favored the formation of lactate and ethanol from glucose in the BMS2 mutant strain compared to its corresponding wild-type strain. Normal cells of E. coli uses mainly oxidative PPP to produce ribose, while gnd mutant was established to utilized intermediates of Embden–Meyerhof–Parnas (EMP) pathway to synthesize ribose and Erythrose-4-hosphate (E4P) (Zhao et al., 2003). This pattern of ribose formation occur biochemically, when most of the glucose-6-phosphate is converted to fructose-6-phosphate and GAP (Zhao et al., 2003).

Taken together, the deletion of gnd gene in mutant BMS2 causes flux rerouting and direction reversing in the PPP as previously reported (Zhao et al., 2003). This is a compensatory mechanism that was induced with respect to anaplerotic metabolism following the gnd gene knockout. In addition, decrease in flux through glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase and NADPH reactions could be expected following the deletion of the gnd gene (Fig. 1). Other compensatory NADPH-producing reactions may have been activated to compliment the reducing power used for the cell growth as previously established (Zhao et al., 2003). This form of compensatory mechanism could generate additional NADH in the cell in an effort to balance the overall redox poise of the cell. Correspondingly, increase in lactate and ethanol productions were observed in the mutant strain BMS2 compared to the wild-type (Table 3), suggesting that additional NADH could have been generated in the mutant cell. This is because it was previously established that increase in lactate and ethanol productions in E. coli anaerobic metabolism are NADH linked processes (Cheng et al., 2013). In addition, the other NADH consuming pathway genes (adhE and ldhA) were not deleted in strain BMS2 in order to clearly show that the increase in succinate production in this study is solely due to gnd gene knockout. This is the first study showing clearly that the deletion of the gnd gene increases succinate production in E. coli under anaerobic conditions.

In-depth discussion with respect to the increased in succinate production in mutant BMS2 strain was attributed to an alternative compensatory activation of malic enzyme, by which NADPH is produced using malate, an intermediate of TCA cycle. The consequence of induced malic enzyme activity can lead to drain of carbon skeletons from TCA cycle, which was already established to have minimal effect under anaerobic conditions in E. coli metabolism (Thakker et al., 2012). These changes will apparently enable the cell to respond to TCA carbon depletion by regulating the carbon flux through ppc and phosphoenolcarboxykinase (ppckA) (Zhao et al., 2003) under anaerobic conditions (Fig. 1). This form of compensatory regulation was meant to respond to the depletion of OAA in the TCA cycle following the increase of carbon flux by way of malic enzyme (Zhao et al., 2003). The mutant strain BMS2 must have increased the overall synthesis of OAA from PEP, by up-regulating the ppc and down-regulating the ppckA (Zhao et al., 2003).

Taken together, the plausible explanation for the mechanism involved in increasing succinate production in our mutant strain BMS2, could be activation of malic enzyme, up-regulation of ppc and down-regulation of ppckA, following the deletion of gnd gene. Although this mechanism could be only applicable to glucose substrate, but the exact metabolic route for increased succinate production from glycerol in strain BMS2 is intriguing.

It is worth mentioning that the succinate yield and productivity on both substrates reported in this study (Tables 3 and 4) are relatively low compared to those reported in other studies (Jantama et al., 2008; Lee et al., 2005a; Wang et al., 2015, 2006a; Zhang et al., 2009a), but this is an initial strategy for strain development and it is focused on identifying novel gene deletion target that has not been previously reported using expert knowledge-based and constraint-based modelling strategies. Other considerations of systems strategies for microbial strain design will be taken into account in the future work, which could involve iterative design and construction of strains, that entails the entire upstream process (strain development), mid-stream process (fermentation) and downstream process (separation and purification) as described recently by Lee and Kim (2015).

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

The work outlined here described how expert knowledge-based strategy combined with model-guided metabolic gnd gene knockout for the first time, to have shown increase in succinate production in E. coli that is 0.3gl−1 and 1.4gl−1 from glucose and glycerol substrates respectively. We hypothesized that the deletion of the gnd gene in E. coli could lead to the accumulation of 6-phosgluconate under anaerobic conditions, because the oxidative phase of PPP is inactivated and hence reduced the functioning of the ED pathway. This effect was also hypothesized to increase the formation of GAP, pyruvate, PEP, which ultimately increased succinate production in E. coli from both glucose and glycerol substrates used in this study. The knowledge gained in this study highlights the power of genome-scale metabolic model (GEM) in driving basic novel biological discovery and also clearly pinpoints its potentials in identification and guiding novel metabolic gene deletion target for increasing succinate production in E. coli.

No conflict of interest.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENT@&#

This work was supported in part by the Universiti Teknologi Malaysia Tier 1 Grant (No: Q.J130000.2513.04H25).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

