@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Evaluation of the effect of the chiral centers of Taxol on binding to β-tubulin: A docking and molecular dynamics simulation study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Binding properties of Taxol derivatives with β-tubulin have been investigated.


                        
                        
                           
                           Docking and MD simulation studies have been done.


                        
                        
                           
                           MM-GBSA calculations have been carried out.


                        
                        
                           
                           Two of the structures have better affinity toward the β-tubulin.


                        
                        
                           
                           Three of the structures have affinity similar to that of the Taxol.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Taxol

Paclitaxel

β-tubulin

Chiral centers

Molecular docking

Molecular dynamics (MD) simulation

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Taxol is one of the most important anti-cancer drugs. The interaction between different variants of Taxol, by altering one of its chiral centers at a time, with β-tubulin protein has been investigated. To achieve such goal, docking and molecular dynamics (MD) simulation studies have been performed. In docking studies, the preferred conformers have been selected to further study by MD method based on the binding energies reported by the AutoDock program. The best result of docking study which shows the highest affinity between ligand and protein has been used as the starting point of the MD simulations. All of the complexes have shown acceptable stability during the simulation process, based on the RMSDs of the backbone of the protein structure. Finally, MM-GBSA calculations have been carried out to select the best ligand, considering the binding energy criteria. The results predict that two of the structures have better affinity toward the mentioned protein, in comparison with Taxol. Three of the structures have affinity similar to that of the Taxol toward the β-tubulin.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Paclitaxel (trade name Taxol®) is playing a great role in cancer chemotherapy (Martello et al., 2001). It was found that the Taxol acting via binding to the β-tubulin (Stiles and Nelson, 2005; Yang et al., 2009). The binding conformation of Taxol in β-tubulin has been investigated by different groups. As an example, Snyder et al. used electron crystallographic density method; they found that the T-shaped Taxol or butterfly structure is optimized within the β-tubulin site (Snyder et al., 2001). Tubulin-bound paclitaxel conformation was used extensively as a model to inspect new drugs for cancer treatment. Geney et al. utilized such a method and their designed and synthesized compounds showed activities similar to Taxol (Geney et al., 2005). Serum proteins are important in effectiveness of drugs because binding of drugs to these proteins affect their activity as well as their disposition. It has been known that the albumin and globulin of the serum accumulate in tumor tissues because of enhanced tumor vascular permeability. Trynda-Lemiesz has investigated the binding of paclitaxel to the human serum albumin (HSA). The result showed that the paclitaxel–HSA interaction results in the helical stability of HSA via changing the conformation of the protein (Trynda-Lemiesz, 2004). Nowadays docking studies are playing a great role to investigate the interaction between ligands and proteins and these methods are extensively in use (da Cunha et al., 2010; Hanessian et al., 2001; Josa et al., 2008; Ligabue-Braun et al., 2012; Seeliger and de Groot, 2010; Taylor et al., 2002). As an example, Paal et al. used docking method to analyze the interaction of the Taxol with HSA. The results showed that the baccatin core of the Taxol and the C13 side chain were playing uniformly to the binding energy (Paal et al., 2007). In another work, the same research group investigated binding of the Taxol to the HSA in the presence of long-chain fatty acid. They reported that the effect of the baccatin core is more than the C13 side chain on the binding energy (Paul and Shkarupin, 2007). Rao et al. employed the photoaffinity labeling method to explore the binding of the Taxol to the β-tubulin. Their results were in good agreement with electron crystallography data (Rao et al., 1999). Xu et al. have performed molecular dynamic (MD) simulation and density functional studies to inspect interaction between the active pocket of the β-tubulin and the Taxol. Their results are indicative of the fact that ten amino acids of the protein play role in the interaction with the Taxol (Xu et al., 2012). Xiao et al. have investigated the mechanism of the microtubule stabilization by the Taxol. Their data suggest that the microtubule depolymerization is inhibited by the Taxol-induced changes in the tubulin conformation (Xiao et al., 2006).

Paclitaxel is naturally extracted from the bark of yew trees (Taxus brevifolia) which grows very slowly. Therefore, obtaining paclitaxel from the natural sources is not sufficient; (Fu et al., 2009) consequently different methods for attaining this valuable species have been developed. As an example, isolation of the Taxol from Pestalotiopsis breviseta has been reported by Kathiravan et al. (2012).

The total synthesis of Taxol has attracted the attention of different research groups. As an example, Kusama et al. reported the multi-step procedure starting coupling reaction of optically pure A-ring hydroxyl aldehyde with C-ring (Kusama et al., 2000). Danishefsky et al. reported another multi-step approach using Heck reaction as one of the key steps (Danishefsky et al., 1996). To date, different methods have been reported as well (Alcaraz et al., 1995; Borman, 1994a,b; Holton et al., 1994a,b; Nicolaou et al., 1995a,b,c,d,e,e; Rubenstein and Williams, 1995; Zurer and Baum, 1988). Taxol contains 11 chiral centers and four rings which make it a promising target for the total synthesis. Because of the difficulty of total synthesis, semi-synthetic procedure has been developed too (Fu et al., 2009).

Different efforts have been applied to examine the effect of side-chains on the anti-cancer properties of paclitaxel. One of the successful studies led to the Taxotere® which is more potent than paclitaxel itself (Bissery, 1991). The other important advantage of this compound is its higher solubility in water which makes it easier to be used as a drug.

As mentioned above, the 11 chiral centers of Taxol makes it a very difficult target for the total synthesis. The difficulty of introducing exact chiral centers in appropriate positions leads to loss of total yield of the final product. Our literature survey shows that to date, no study has been attributed to the effect of each of chiral centers of the Taxol on binding to the β-tubulin. Indicating the effect of each chiral center on the binding to the β-tubulin can be used as a guideline to omit some chiral centers from the synthesis procedure and thereby to reduce the complexity and number of steps. This approach can increase the total yield of product in considerable amount. In the present study, the Taxol and related compounds, which have been obtained by changing one of the chiral centers to the opposite one at a time, are studied. The numbering system assigned for various species throughout is based on the numbers used for the chiral centers of Fig. 1
                      while structure 12 is the original Taxol molecule intact. It worth to mention that this is a virtual experiment and these compounds are not synthesized.

The β-tubulin has been utilized as a target and initially, docking study has been performed to obtain the appropriate complex between the hypothetic ligand and protein. Subsequently, MD simulation studies, which is one of the best method to study ligand–protein behavior in the presence of solvent, (Bharatham et al., 2008; Costantino et al., 2002; Stiles and Nelson, 2005) have been carried out to achieve the stable conditions. Finally, binding free energies of ligand–protein complexes are obtained via MM-GBSA methods, to evaluate the complexes.

The conformational analysis on all of the ligands was performed using Avogadro (1.1.0) (Hanwell et al., 2012) suit of program. Molecular mechanics by Open Babel’s force fields (OBForceFieldMMFF94) used for conformational searches. Random rotor search algorithm, implemented in the program was used for conformational analysis. All of the single bonds were considered free to rotate. Only the branches and not the rings were considered in the conformational analysis. 400 Conformations were obtained. The structure which has been introduced as the most stable one by the program, based on the energy (structure with lowest energy) was selected for future analysis. The most stable conformations were optimized utilizing GAMESS (Schmidt et al., 1993) package in the gas phase at the B3LYP/6-31G(d,p) level of theory. The minimum natures of optimized structures were established by absence of imaginary frequency.

Docking of ligands to the protein structure was performed with the AutoDock 4.2 program using the Lamarckian genetic algorithm. Lamarckian Genetic Algorithm (LGA), with a maximum of 2,500,000 energy evaluations has been used in the docking study. Maximum number of generations has been regarded as 27,000; 0.02 has been selected for the rate of gene mutation with the rate of cross over equal to 0.8. The highest amount for the population generation was 2,325,1800. Seventeen active torsions of the Taxol and all of the derivatives have been let to rotate freely. 200 runs have been done for each ligand. The crystal structure of the β-tubulin from the protein with the pdb ID=1TUB after removing the ligands was used as the starting model for investigation. Tubulin heterodimer consists of two subunits, namely Alpha and Beta, with the latter subunit only having interaction with Taxol, therefore only this subunit was used in the study. The position of the Taxol in the crystal structure was used as a guideline to define grid box needed for the docking studies. To reach that goal, the grid box with 60, 60, and 60 points were used for docking in the x, y, and z directions, respectively. The default grid spacing of 0.375Å was applied, as well. The structure of the protein was regarded as rigid and all rotatable bonds of ligands were left relaxed to rotate. All of the hydrogens were added to the protein structure and Gasteiger charges were assigned. Lamarckian Genetic Algorithms was considered for docking. 200 Docking runs were carried out (Schmidt et al., 1993). MD simulations were performed using Gromacs (4.5.5) (Berendsen et al., 1995) program. Amber force field (amber99SB) was utilized for the simulation process (Hornak et al., 2006). General Amber force field (GAFF) (Wang et al., 2004) parameters were applied to the ligands using Antechamber (Wang et al., 2006) set in the AmberTools 12 package (Case et al., 2012). Acpype (da Silva et al., 2012) script was used as interface to apply GAFF parameters to the ligands. VMD (Humphrey et al., 1996) (1.9.1), Chimera (Pettersen et al., 2004) (1.6.1), and LigPlot+ (Laskowski and Swindells, 2011) programs were used as graphical interface to analyze the simulation results. The chimera program was used to apply the partial charges to the ligands, as well. Dodecahedron box of solvent using TIP3P model of water was used to solvate the protein-ligand complex. Sodium cations were added to the system to neutralize it. The complex was kept away from the walls of the box no less than 10Å. Particle Mesh Ewald (PME) method was used to calculate electrostatic interactions. Steepest descent minimization method with maximum 50,000 steps and the maximum force threshold <10.0kJmol−1 criteria were used to remove short contacts. Subsequently, the position restrained simulation while restraining the position of heavy atoms of the system by 1000kJmol−1
                     Å−2 criteria at 300K has been performed for 100ps (NVT condition). Further, another 100ps simulation has been applied to equilibrate the system at 1.0bar pressure with keeping the temperature of the system constant at 300K (NPT conditions). Finally, a 10ns simulation has been done for all of the complexes. MM-GBSA calculations were performed using the AmberTools 12 and Amber 12. Molecular Mechanics/Generalized Born Surface Area (MM/GBSA) method has been introduced to obtain the free energies which are a computationally efficient procedure. Therefore it has been accepted as a versatile procedure to compute free energies. This method uses additive approximation in which the net free energy change has been treated as a sum of a wide-ranging set of individual energy component.

In the MM/GBSA method the free energy could be obtained from the following equations:
                        
                           ΔG
                              bind
                              =
                              G
                              com
                              −(G
                              rec
                              +
                              G
                              lig) (1)
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           ΔG
                              bind
                              =ΔH−TΔS
                              ≈ΔE
                              MM
                              +ΔG
                              sol
                               ̶ 
                              TΔS (2)
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           ΔE
                              MM
                              =ΔE
                              internal
                              +ΔE
                              electrostatic
                              +ΔE
                              vdw (3)
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           ΔG
                              sol
                              =ΔG
                              PB/GB
                              +ΔG
                              SA (4)
                        
                     In this method separated trajectories have been regarded for the ligand, receptor, and complex which causes to the more accurate results. In this procedure the conformational changes related to the binding of the free ligand to the unbounded receptor will be considered, which causes to the mentioned higher accuracy (Hou et al., 2011).

We have used MM/PBSA.py provided by AmberTools program to obtain MM/GBSA data. MMPBSA.py is a program in Python language which can use both Poisson–Boltzmann and Generalized Born salvation models. Although the mentioned program is able to consider the normal mode or quasi-harmonic analysis, but we have not use this capability in our calculations to reduce the computation time. Five separated 1ns runs have been done (totally 5ns). 2,500,000 snapshots have been used. The final structure of the Gromacs simulation have been used to start the MMGBSA calculation, therefore all of the frames (starting from frame 1, with the interval of 2) have been used in the calculation. Salt concentration equals to the 0.1 was used.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS@&#

To evaluate the docking results, clustering based on root mean square deviation (RMSD) with 2.0Å tolerances was used. To select the best ligand, binding energies reported by AutoDock program were used. The binding energies related to the investigated structures, reported by AutoDock program are presented in Table 1
                        . The results show that the structures 2, 5, and 7 have the most similar binding energy to the Taxol, 12. Changing the chirality in the position 6 (structure 6) has the most sever effect on the binding of the ligand to the protein. In this case, the binding energy has been reduced to −8.07kcalmol−1. The results show that, changing the chirality in the center 10 has lesser effect on the binding energy in comparison with all the remaining moieties.

The structures with more favorable binding energy and considering the essential interactions between the ligand and the protein were selected for further analysis. The structures of the selected complexes and the interactions have been presented in Fig. 2
                        ; other structures are available as Supporting information.

A brief survey of the illustrated 2D presentations of the docking results show that in most cases, different inter-molecular interactions including hydrogen bonding, cation–π, and π–π ones contribute to the stabilization of the ligand–protein complex.

To further analyze the structures, molecular dynamic (MD) simulation (10ns) has been carried out on structures which were obtained from docking studies.

To analyze the stability of the complexes, the root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) of selected protein’s backbone structure (structures 1, 3, 5, 8, 9, and 12) was investigated (Fig. 3
                        ). The backbone of protein was used to evaluate the RMSD. It is evident from Fig. 3 that, in all of the cases, the structure of the proteins has very high stability during simulation period. The RMSD for other structures are available as Supporting information.

The representative structures related to the selected steps of MD simulation (0, 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10ns) are presented in Table 1. It is clear that solvent molecules show contribution to the ligand–protein–solvent interactions. Distance lesser than 3.5Å for the acceptor–donor distance and cutoff angle for hydrogen-donor-acceptor equal to 30 degree were used (Gromacs’s default) to evaluate the hydrogen bonding. It worth mentioning that, these are only sample representations and because of the dynamic nature of the species, especially the solvent molecules, speaking exact identity of solvent is not possible.

As it was expected, because of dynamic nature of the simulation, the interactions were changed in each represented snapshot. As a brief example, in the structure 1, at the beginning of the simulation only water molecules are observable in the environment of ligand. This behavior continues until 6th ns. In this period of time, His229 and Lys218 have contributed in the interaction with ligand. In the 8th ns, Lys218, His229, and Thr276 have hydrogen bonding with ligand. At the final snapshot, His229 and Leu275 are observable.

Such a manner could be observed for other ligands as well. As another example, to be explained here, structure 8 is selected. From Table 2
                         it is observable that, in almost all of the presented snapshots (except 2th ns) ligand has contributed in hydrogen bonding at least with one amino acid of protein.

In the structure 12 in 0ns, an interaction between the ligand and His229, Arg278, and Arg369 is observable. The interaction with His229 is the most stable one and is observable in other analysed snapshots, as well.

As mentioned before, the complexes have a high stability in the simulation process. To further analyze the results, the MM-GBSA calculations have been done on the structures to investigate the ligand–protein affinities. The results of these calculations are presented in Table 3
                        . The previously reported experimental binding energy for the Taxol is −10.0kcalmol−1 (Matesanz et al., 2008). As the data of aforementioned table indicate, structures 5 and 8 have better affinity toward the protein in comparison with Taxol. Species 1, 3, and 9 have affinities very close to that of the Taxol. Structure 2 is not showing a good affinity toward the protein. Other structures are showing relatively lesser attraction toward the protein.

The hydrogen bonding between the selected ligand–protein structures as a function of simulation time has been presented in Fig. 4
                        . In the structure 5 the average hydrogen bonding remains about one during the simulation process. The structure 1 showed a very similar property; also it showed a decrease of number of hydrogen bonding at the 7 and 9ns. In the structure 8, a relatively stable interaction is observable during the simulation. In the structure 1, 3, and 9, an increase of interactions between ligand and protein is observable, from the middle to the end of simulation.

The hydrogen bondings between the ligand and water molecules (as a solvent) during the simulation process have been shown in Fig. 5
                        . It is evident from Fig. 5 that the contribution of the solvent in hydrogen bonding with ligand is relatively constant. In the structure 1 and 9 at first step of the simulations, five hydrogen bondings between ligand and protein could be observed. After 4 and 6ns respectively, the number of hydrogen bonding reduced to four and remained constant until the end of process. Structure 3 and 5 showed very similar behavior. From the beginning until 5ns, the average number of the hydrogen bonding is four; after this period of time the average number reduced to 3, until the end of simulation. Structure 8 showed a stability of the number of hydrogen bondings during the simulation.

The distance between the center of mass of ligand and protein, during the MD trajectories is presented in Fig. 6
                        . In the structure 3 and 9 the distance between ligand and protein is relatively constants at 2.1 and 2.15Å, respectively. In the structure 1, a decrease is observable during simulation but it remains relatively constant after 6ns until the end of simulation. In the structure 5 and 8, a stability of distance is observed at the beginning of the simulation until 7 and 9ns, respectively; after that the distance decreases in a considerable amount.

In the Structure 12, two distinct regions are observable. From zero until 4ns, the distance between ligand and protein is 2.2Å, after that, the distance reduced to the 2.1 and remained stable until the end of simulation.

To investigate the stability of the structure of the ligand during the MD process, the RMSD values of the ligand are presented in Fig. 7
                        .

Structure 3 showed a high stability for the simulation period. Other structures showed changes in the RMSD during the simulation process which indicates a change in the structure of the ligand to adapt itself with the variation of the environment. In the structure 1 three distinct regions are observable. After 5ns, the structure of ligand remained stable until the end of simulation. In the structure 5, after 4ns (except an exception at the 6th ns) the structure of the ligand remained stable. Structure 8 shows four regions. Structure 9 shows a low stability of the structure of the ligand; but the RMSD value is about 0.10–0.15 after 5ns which is an acceptable amount. Structure 12 shows two distinct regions. During first 4ns, an increase/decrease in the distance is observable. After that an equilibrated distance is noticable.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

In conclusion, the effect of the changing chiral centers of Taxol on the binding to the β-tubulin has been studied. At first, docking analysis has been done. The structures with better binding free energy toward the protein have been selected for further investigation with MD simulation method. MD simulation has been done for each ligand–protein complex. The RMSD values for the simulation period showed that the complexes are stable. Finally, MM-GBSA calculations have been carried out to evaluate the affinity of the ligands toward the protein. The results show that the structures 5 and 8 have better affinity toward the β-tubulin in comparison with Taxol itself. Species 1, 3, and 9 have close affinity relative to the Taxol. The moieties 5 and 8 are very good candidate to be synthesized and analyzed by experimental methods. We hope this work opens up a door for synthetic chemists to simplify the very complicated process of the Taxol synthesis, by omitting the above mentioned chiral center from synthesis plan and thereby reducing the synthesis steps.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

We gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the research council of Shahid Beheshti University. Also the technical support of the chemistry computational center at Shahid Beheshti University is gratefully acknowledged.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2015.02.018.

The following are Supplementary data to this article:
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

