@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Distribution of putative xenogeneic silencers in prokaryote genomes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Xenogeneic silencer-like regulators were searched in fully sequenced prokaryote genomes.


                        
                        
                           
                           Putative xenogeneic silencer regulators are limited to some bacteria and are specific for each division.


                        
                        
                           
                           Xenogeneic silencer regulators from the H-NS family are the most diversified.


                        
                        
                           
                           Other nucleoid-associated proteins were also searched and their distribution was also assessed.


                        
                        
                           
                           Our search updates and extends xenogeneic silencer regulators database.


                        
                        
                           
                           Results showed that xenogeneic silencer-like regulators are specific for the bacteria they are found in and exclusive, as members of the other families are excluded.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Foreign DNA

Comparative genomics

Bacterial transcriptional regulators

Archaea and Bacteria

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Gene silencing is an important function as it keeps newly acquired foreign DNA repressed, thereby avoiding possible deleterious effects in the host organism. Known transcriptional regulators associated with this process are called xenogeneic silencers (XS) and belong to either the H-NS, Lsr2, MvaT or Rok families. In the work described here we looked for XS-like regulators and their distribution in prokaryotic organisms was evaluated. Our analysis showed that putative XS regulators similar to H-NS, Lsr2, MvaT or Rok are present only in bacteria (31.7%). This does not exclude the existence of alternative XS in the rest of the organisms analyzed. Additionally, of the four XS groups evaluated in this work, those from the H-NS family have diversified more than the other groups. In order to compare the distribution of these putative XS regulators we also searched for other nucleoid-associated proteins (NAPs) not included in this group such as Fis, EbfC/YbaB, HU/IHF and Alba. Results showed that NAPs from the Fis, EbfC/YbaB, HU/IHF and Alba families are widely (94%) distributed among prokaryotes. These NAPs were found in multiple combinations with or without XS-like proteins. In regard with XS regulators, results showed that only XS proteins from one family were found in those organisms containing them. This suggests specificity for this type of regulators and their corresponding genomes.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

It is generally accepted that the fastest source of acquisition of new genetic material in a cell is by horizontal gene transfer (HGT), an extensive and common occurrence in nature (Syvanen, 2012). These events provide evolutionary and functional advantages to the receptor cell, including antibiotic and heavy metal resistance, new metabolic elements or pathways, and virulence factors, among others. However, genetic material acquired through HGT could also imply a risk for cell homeostasis if, for example, restriction enzymes, cell toxins or DNA-binding transcription factors (TFs), that might disrupt established regulatory networks in the host cell, are obtained. In this regard, one possible fate for foreign (or xenogeneic) DNA is to be degraded by restriction enzymes, or by the CRISPR/Cas system or by the Rec system and then to have its components recycled. Alternatively, xenogeneic DNA can potentially be adapted by the internal regulatory network and then expressed in order to assist the host cell in multiple metabolic processes, environment adaptation, pathogenesis and symbiosis. Thus, material obtained through HGT represents a functional and potential evolutionary advantage for the receptor cell making its retention worthwhile. Proteins in charge of regulating the expression of xenogeneic DNA in bacteria are called xenogeneic silencers (XS) (Ali et al., 2013). XS regulators belong to the group of proteins with the ability to associate to DNA also called nucleoid-associated proteins (NAPs). NAPs are small and basic proteins with roles such as DNA compaction and gene regulation (Dillon and Dorman, 2010). The paradigm of XS regulators is H-NS in the Gram-negative bacterium Salmonella (Oshima et al., 2006; Lucchini et al., 2006; Navarre et al., 2006). Proteins with a similar role as XS regulators but little or no sequence similarity to H-NS have been described in other bacteria, such as MvaT in Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Tendeng et al., 2003; Li et al., 2009), Lsr2 in Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Gordon et al., 2008), and Rok in Bacillus subtilis (Smits and Grossman, 2010). Given that the HGT processes take place among all prokaryotes, it is possible that XS regulators are widely distributed. In this work, in order to determine how extensive the presence of XS regulators is, we surveyed the presence of H-NS-like proteins (HLPs), MvaT-like, Lsr2-like and Rok-like proteins in prokaryotic genomes and evaluated its significance in abundance and functional terms. Results showed that these proteins are limited and specialized in certain prokaryote groups. Given the exclusiveness of XS regulators we also aimed to define how other NAPs (Fis, EbfC/YbaB, HU/IHF and Alba), not known to function as XS proteins, are distributed. Except for Alba and in contrast to XS regulators, most of the times these proteins were found in combination with other NAPs and in very few occasions by themselves.

The complete genomes of 2413 prokaryotic organisms were obtained from ftp://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov section genomes. 148 of these were archaea and 2265 bacteria. For our purposes, annotated genes were defined as those genes with ORFs that might be encoding predicted protein sequences (the proteome) in all organisms.

In order to exclude the overrepresentation of bacterial and archaeal genomes associated with particular bacteria and archaea divisions representative bacterial and archaeal species were selected. Selection was made through the concatenation of 21 conserved proteins across diverse sequenced genomes and a single data set for phylogenetic analysis was constructed (Brown et al., 2001). The phylogenetic tree reconstruction was based on a maximum likelihood method as it was reported previously (Brown et al., 2001). Thus, genomes located more closely together on a phylogenetic tree were excluded leaving a set of 790 genomes phylogenetically distant from each other, including 704 classified as bacteria and 86 as archaea.

In order to identify the repertoire of family-specific xenogeneic silencers (XS) the hidden Markov models (HMM) of PF00816 (H-NS), and PF11774 (Lsr2) were retrieved from the PFAM database (Finn et al., 2008) and used to scan the predicted proteome sequences from all organisms (E-value threshold of 10−3 and a Z-value of 23193494), with the “hmmsearch” module from the HMMer suite of programs (http://HMMER.wustl.edu). Given that for MvaT and Rok there are no HMM models deposited in PFAM, both MvaT (PA4315) from P. aeruginosa (strain PAO1) and Rok (BSU14240) from B. subtilis strain 168 were used as seeds to compare them against the non-redundant database (NCBI) by using the Blastp program (E-value threshold of 10−6 and a ≥60% of coverage). Then the sequences retrieved from each search were filtered at 100% of identity to exclude a bias and posteriorly were aligned with the Muscle program (default parameters) (Edgar, 2004). After this, the alignments were used to construct the HMMs and scan the predicted proteome sequences from all the organisms with the same parameters as previously described.

In order to predict putative new XS regulators two approaches were performed: In the first one, an HMM was constructed using the structural alignment described by Gordon et al. (2011) an E-value threshold of ≤10−3 was used to scan all the bacterial and archaeal genomes in the complete data set. As a second alternative, we constructed a regular expression pattern for the following consensus ({[TS]-X-[QR]-G-R-X-P-A}), considering the already mentioned structural alignment (Gordon et al., 2011) and this was used to scan all the genomes.

A similar procedure as the one described for detecting XS-like regulators was done for identifying some NAP-like proteins. Briefly, the HMMs of PF02954 (Fis), PF02575 (EbfC/YbaB), PF00216 (IHF) and PF01918 (Alba) were retrieved from PFAM (Finn et al., 2008) and used to scan the predicted proteome sequences from the complete and the non-redundant bacterial and archaeal genomes using the parameters described above. Because proteins from the Fis group belong to the bacterial enhancer binding proteins family with different regulatory mechanisms (Morett and Bork, 1998), we considered only proteins that exclusively exhibited the Fis domain, i.e. monodomain proteins (DNA-binding domains).

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

In this study we evaluated the diversity of xenogeneic silencers (XS) with similarity to H-NS, MvaT, Lsr2 and Rok in bacteria and archaea genomes. Although Will and colleagues (2015) only consider H-NS, MvaT and Lsr2 as members of the family of XS regulators, here B. subtilis Rok was also included, as it has been shown to have a similar role as the others (Smits and Grossman, 2010).

Results showed that 31.7% of all the genomes analyzed contained at least one protein with identity to the aforementioned proteins (Fig. 1
                        A and Supplementary Table S1); however these XS-related proteins were found exclusively in bacteria. Given that XS regulators used for the search are from bacterial origin this is not unexpected and it does not exclude the possibility that xenogeneic silencing occurs in archaea. If xenogeneic silencing happens in archaea and other bacterial groups this might be conducted by either: (1) a new type of yet-to-be-uncovered XS regulator, or (2) by some of the specific NAPs already described for this cellular domain (Dillon and Dorman, 2010). In order to assess the former we made two attempts using either the structure or the sequence proposed by Gordon et al. (2011) to find putative new XS regulators. Using an HMM 1271 proteins were identified, from which 1046 (82%) corresponded to proteins similar to H-NS, whereas 191 (15%) corresponded to Lsr2-like proteins, all of them already identified in our searches (Supplementary Table 1). Finally, 34 proteins were identified as new potential XS regulators (Supplementary Table S2). From these proteins no clear DNA-binding functions or motif was identified and most of them are annotated as hypothetical proteins with no clear structural domains identified with PFAM and Superfamily. This was not surprising as it seems that this kind of regulators have non-classical DNA or RNA binding motifs.

In the second approach, by using a regular expression pattern for the consensus sequence ({[TS]-X-[QR]-G-R-X-P-A}), 938 proteins were identified; 375 corresponded to H-NS-like proteins and 77 to Lsr2-like proteins, however the other proteins (486) are associated to diverse functions different from DNA-binding (deduced from annotations and PFAM and Superfamily assignments) (Supplementary Table S3). In this regard, to evaluate the statistical significance of this search, we scanned a random database (generated randomly using the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database), identifying 47 hits, whereas 58 hits were identified in the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot real database. This latter result shows that a large number of false positives were identified. In summary, this search lacks of statistical significance and cannot be considered for predicting XS regulators. Taken together, these results show some potential new XS regulators but these should be tested experimentally.

In the following sections, we continue describing potential XS regulators from the H-NS, Lsr2, MvaT and Rok families.

Once putative XS regulators from the HLP, MvaT, Lsr2 and Rok groups were identified, we aimed to evaluate their distribution in all the bacterial divisions. Putative XS regulators were grouped depending on their identity with H-NS, MvaT, Lsr2 or Rok.

Our results showed that HLP are the most abundant XS regulators (19.9% of the genomes, 478/2403) (Fig. 1B). Given that multiple Proteobacteria strains from the same species have been sequenced and are included in the dataset it is possible that the amount of detected HLPs and other XS regulators is overrepresented. To exclude a possible bias associated with overrepresentation, a non-redundant genomes dataset was constructed and analyzed. Results showed a similar tendency as that observed using the original data set (i.e., 17% of the genomes, 134/790) (Fig. 1C) and therefore we continued working only with the non-redundant data set. We then observed how HLPs are distributed. As seen in Fig. 2
                           A, HLPs were found in the Alpha, Beta and Gamma Proteobacteria divisions. A few exceptions were found in the Chlorobi (Chlorobium limicola and Pelodictyon phaeoclathratiforme) and Delta/Epsilon (Desulfotalea psychrophila) subdivisions.

The fact that in some of the genomes there is only one HLP strongly suggests that these proteins are the bone fide XS regulators in these organisms. Of course further experimental evidence is necessary to prove this hypothesis. In contrast, many organisms contain several HLPs, suggesting that these proteins have diversified more extensively than any other XS regulators (Supplementary Tables S1 and S4). In fact, in organisms having more than one HLP there is evidence that these proteins have multiple roles, even that of counteracting the repressive role of H-NS (reviewed in Will et al., 2015). For instance, Ler, a transcriptional regulator of enteropathogenic and enterohemorrhagic E. coli pathovars virulence genes, belongs to the HLP family and has been shown to overcome H-NS repression in optimal inducing conditions by competing for binding sites in the promoter regions (Winardhi et al., 2014). Moreover, some HLPs, such as StpA, and Hfp in E. coli (Lucchini et al., 2009; Muller et al., 2010) coordinate with H-NS to regulate the expression of multiple regulons throughout the cell cycle. Hence, this adds some complexity for discovering silencers in those organisms with a high amount of HLPs. Therefore it is tempting to propose that in those organisms with multiple HLPs, or some other XS-like regulator, some might have the role of XS regulators, some might have the role of complementing the main XSs and the others might have the role of counteracting the repression exerted by the main XS regulator.

Despite MvaT low sequence identity with H-NS, experimental results have shown it belongs to the HLP group (Tendeng et al., 2003; Li et al., 2009). MvaT has been shown to be involved in gene silencing by forming oligomeric rigid filaments with the DNA it interacts with (Winardhi et al., 2012). Moreover, a P. aeruginosa strain lacking MvaT and its homolog MvaU is not viable, because it has an increased expression of prophage Pf4, which eventually lyses this bacterium (Castang and Dove, 2012). MvaT-like proteins were identified only in Gamma

Proteobacteria, mostly in Pseudomonas and Marinobacter species, Azotobacter vinelandii, Chromohalobacter salexigens and Hahella chejuensis (Fig. 2B and Supplementary Tables S1 and S4). This finding supports the idea that MvaT-like proteins have specialized in these bacteria and very likely have a role as an XS in those organisms similar to that seen in P. aeruginosa.

The prototype Lsr2 protein is a basic, small protein conserved mainly in Actinobacteria (Gordon et al., 2008). This protein has important roles in genome compacting and gene regulation. Lsr2 also binds preferentially to AT-rich regions; especially those that were likely acquired through HGT (Gordon et al., 2010), and have a similar protein domain organization to that observed in H-NS but no sequence similarity. Despite this latter, and as mentioned above, recently this same research group reported that H-NS and Lsr2 share a common structure related with DNA binding and called it the “Q/RGR“ motif (Gordon et al., 2011). Here we found that Lsr2-like proteins are present in 8.9% (70/790) of the analyzed organisms (Fig. 1C and Supplementary Table S4). These proteins were present in 70 of the 90 (77.8%) non-redundant Actinobacteria genomes analyzed. Our results corroborated that Lsr2 are constrained to Actinobacteria (Fig. 2C). The majority of Actinobacteria have only one Lsr2-like protein but in some cases this number was higher, such as in Rhodococcus jostii RHA1 and Amycolatopsis mediterranei S699, which have 9 and 7 Lsr2-like proteins, respectively. This raises the possibility of a counteracting repression or complementing roles as mentioned above for other XS regulators.


                           B. subtilis Rok regulator has a xenogeneic silencer and AT-rich binding protein functions similar to those observed in H-NS and Lsr2 (Smits and Grossman, 2010). Only 5 organisms (0.63%) have Rok-like proteins encoded and all of them belong to the Bacillus genus (Figs. Fig. 11C and Fig. 22D). Rok-like proteins were found only in the B. subtilis, B. amyloliquefaciens, B. coagulans, B. licheniformis, B. atrophaeus and B. pumilus species (Supplementary Table S4). This finding shows that Rok are not widespread in this phylum and suggests a specialization only in the Bacillus genus.

It has been suggested that xenogeneic sequences acquired via HGT contain a different AT content, usually higher than the resident genome, even in cases in which the host genome is itself AT-rich (Daubin et al., 2003). In order to define how XS regulators are distributed depending on GC content, HLPs were used as a model. Organisms were grouped according to Hu and colleagues classification (Hu et al., 2007). In this regard, 52% of HLPs were found in organisms with intermediate-GC (38–55%) content; 35% in high-GC content genomes (>55% GC), and 11% in low-GC genomes (<38% GC) (Fig. 3
                        ). This shows that HLPs are not restricted to organisms with intermediate-GC content, though the most of them are found in those organisms. In addition, results showed that the number of HLPs increments in correlation with the genome size. Although the amount of proteins in the other XS groups is not enough to perform a similar analysis we propose that XS regulators are not limited to organisms with medium to high GC content. Those organisms with a low-GC content may have XS proteins with a different affinity in order to avoid silencing important genome regions.

As mentioned before, some XS regulators not only have this role but also have a role in compacting DNA, and therefore are grouped as NAPs. In addition to this, in some cases they also act as global regulators. After we determined the number and distribution of putative XS regulators of the H-NS, Lsr2, MvaT and Rok families, we wondered how they relate to each other and to other NAPs. NAPs that either have regulatory functions or that interact in a similar fashion as H-NS with DNA, such as HU/IHF, EbfC, Fis and Alba, were searched in the genomes dataset. Results are illustrated in Fig. 4
                         and show that 94% of all organisms have at least one of these NAPs. NAPs from these families are found in multiple combinations both with putative XS regulators and other NAPs (Fig. 4B). Results also showed that HU/IHF and EbfC are the most widely distributed NAPs in prokaryotes, Fis is found only in bacteria, and Alba is found mainly in archaea with a few exceptions in bacteria (Fig. 4 and Supplementary Table S4). Alba was selected in this study because similar to H-NS it is able to bridge DNA and binds in a cooperative fashion, although a role as global regulator has yet not been shown (Laurens et al., 2012; Črnigoj et al., 2013). Given that so far no role as XS regulators has been shown for any member of the HU/IHF, EbfC, Alba and Fis families it is hard to predict whether they have this role and therefore we cannot assume that members of these NAPs families are XS. For instance, xenogeneic silencing in Firmicutes has been described only for B. subtilis and a detailed analysis of our results showed that 79 % of these organisms have HU/IHF and EbfC. As already mentioned, it is not possible to speculate at this point that either of these proteins have an XS role and it is very likely that other XS regulators different from those already described will be described.

In regard to the putative XS regulators, interestingly no XS-like proteins were found in any combination with other XS-like protein from one of the other three families (Figs. Fig. 2 and Fig. 44B, Supplementary Tables S1 and S4). This contrast with what we observed for all the other NAPs analyzed. This finding shows that bacterial organisms containing putative XS regulators from either of the H-NS, MvaT, Lsr2 or Rok groups have one or many members of the same family but not from another family. To our understanding this observation has not been done before on this type of regulators. This finding suggests that once a defined NAP from certain family gets the role as XS regulator the others seem to be excluded. How this happens is matter of a different study.

Taken together, these results suggest that XS regulators from the families analyzed in this work are specific for a bacterial group and therefore could be exclusive. This characteristic, together with the fact that XS related proteins are found in any given organism with other NAPs but not with another XS regulator, and their biochemical properties (such as molecular size and isoelectric points) could be used to predict new XS regulators. Taking this in consideration we returned to search the data in Table S2 (Supplementary Table S2) to determine the presence or not of XS regulators of any of the already mentioned families. In half of the cases there are putative XS regulators from either the Lsr2 or H-NS families, so this would suggest that the predicted proteins are not XS regulators. In contrast, for the rest of the organisms no XS-like regulators from the H-NS, Lsr2, MvaT or Rok are present. In these particular cases it would be worthy to define the role of these proteins as XS regulators. In the same sense, Alba was not found with any other XS regulator but other NAPs were present which suggest a possible role as XS regulator. Of course this needs to be taken carefully as the XS families are derived from bacteria.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

Acquisition of foreign DNA is thought to be of key relevance for evolution. Despite this a genetic control of such material is critical for the possible harm it can cause in the recipient cell. In this work, we found that XS regulators are present only in some phyla in the bacteria domain or in specific bacterial divisions. This does not mean that xenogeneic silencing occurs only in a few bacteria, as this very likely happens also in archaea and the rest of bacteria. This role might be accomplished by new types of XS regulators or by already known NAPs. It is interesting to note that structural data associated with these DNA-binding proteins suggest different evolutionary origins, because almost all proteins have different structural arrangements (folds), and as a consequence of events of convergence. What seems to be obvious from our analysis is that once an XS regulator evolves from a specific family, only members of this family will prevail. Therefore, for those organisms containing XS homologs extensive experimental work needs to be done in order to define a silencing role, but we consider that our study establishes the necessary groundwork for these future experiments.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

Authors would like to thank Dr. Charles Dorman for his comments on an early version of this manuscript. Martha Thayer is very much appreciated for proofreading this manuscript. Authors would like to thank to the anonymous reviewers for they helpful insights to improve this work. JAI was supported by grants from COFAA-IPN, EDI-IPN and SIP-IPN (20140845 and 20150612); EP-R was supported by a grant (IN-204714) from DGAPA, UNAM, and CONACYT (155116). JAI was hired through the “Programa Institucional de Contratación de Personal Académico de Excelencia IPN”.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2015.06.007.

The following are Supplementary data to this article:
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

