@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Genome-wide identification and predictive modeling of lincRNAs polyadenylation in cancer genome

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Investigate the distribution of PASs respect to the lincRNA.


                        
                        
                           
                           Acquire the distribution of lincRNA PAS in normal and cancer tissues.


                        
                        
                           
                           Get the motifs surrounding lincRNA of normal and cancer tissues.


                        
                        
                           
                           Propose a SVM-based lincRNA PASs identification method.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Long intervening noncoding RNA

Polyadenylation sites

Support vector machine

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) play essential regulatory roles in the human cancer genome. Many identified lncRNAs are transcribed by RNA polymerase II in which they are polyadenylated, whereby the long intervening noncoding RNAs (lincRNAs) have been widely used for the researches of lncRNAs. To date, the mechanism of lincRNAs polyadenylation related to cancer is rarely fully understood yet. In this paper, first we reported a comprehensive map of global lincRNAs polyadenylation sites (PASs) in five human cancer genomes; second we proposed a grouping method based on the pattern of genes expression and the manner of alternative polyadenylation (APA); third we investigated the distribution of motifs surrounding PASs. Our analysis reveals that about 70% of PASs are located in the sense strand of lincRNAs. Also more than 90% PASs in the antisense strand of lincRNAs are located in the intron regions. In addition, around 40% of lincRNA genes with PASs has APA sites. Four obvious motifs i.e., AATAAA, TTTTTTTT, CCAGSCTGG, and RGYRYRGTGG were detected in the sequences surrounding PASs in the normal and cancer tissues. Furthermore, a novel algorithm was proposed to recognize the lincRNAs PASs of tumor tissues based on support vector machine (SVM). The algorithm can achieve the accuracies up to 96.55% and 89.48% for identification the tumor lincRNAs PASs from the non-polyadenylation sites and the non-lincRNA PASs, respectively.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The abnormal regulation of genes expression plays a significant role in triggering cancer (Hanahan and Weinberg, 2011). Recent efforts have uncovered a vast number of novel non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs), which generate transcripts but do not code the functional proteins (Wang and Chang, 2011). However, they impact multiple major biological processes including development, differentiation, and metabolism (Flintoft, 2013). Plenty of attentions has been drawn to the ncRNAs in cancer genome research (Cao et al., 2013; Gibb et al., 2011; Qi and Du, 2012). In contrast to the highly conserved small ncRNAs, long ncRNAs (lncRNAs), a new kind of ncRNAs with molecules greater than 200nt in length is poorly conserved and their expression mechanisms are not fully understood so far (Batista and Chang, 2013; Wang and Chang, 2011). Furthermore, many lncRNAs are specifically associated with certain cancer, such as MALAT1, HOTAIR, and HULC genes (Batista and Chang, 2013; Gibb et al., 2011; Prensner and Chinnaiyan, 2011).

The majority of lncRNAs is transcribed by RNA polymerase II, which means that most lncRNAs are always polyadenylated, as almost all mRNAs do (Millevoi and Vagner, 2010; Ulitsky and Bartel, 2013; Zhao et al., 1999). Polyadenylation is an essential step in the RNAs maturation process (Andreassi and Riccio, 2009; Tian and Graber, 2012). Recent efforts have uncovered that alternative polyadenylation (APA), which can generate many different transcripts for a given gene, is prominent in human genome (Di Giammartino et al., 2011; Lutz and Moreira, 2011; Ulitsky and Bartel, 2013). The APA can produce truncated RNA outcome, influence transcript stability, alter translation efficiency and affect transcript export (Ozsolak et al., 2010; Shi, 2012; Tian and Manley, 2013). Many important oncogenes such as p53 and CCND1 are known to have different polyadenylation sites (PASs) in normal and cancer tissues (Lin et al., 2012). A related emerging explanation in cancer biology is that the shorter isoforms have higher translational efficiency than the long ones (Lutz and Moreira, 2011). Comparison studies of the expression level of polyadenylated and non-polyadenylated mRNAs in human normal and cancer tissue have demonstrated that polyadenylation transcripts are associated with the cancer development (Zhao et al., 2013).

The long intervening noncoding RNAs (lincRNAs), which lie between two genes, have been widely used for researches on lncRNAs (Ulitsky and Bartel, 2013). Thereby, it is clear that the analyses of lincRNAs could eliminate the influence caused by the overlap with other type of genes. To date, however, the roles and mechanisms of lincRNAs polyadenylation in tumors are rarely fully understood yet.

In this study, we reported on the genome-wide identification of lincRNAs PASs in five normal and tumor tissues. At first, we mapped the lincRNAs PASs to the human genome and annotated them based on their location with respect to the lincRNA genes. Then, we performed a de novo search for motifs near lincRNAs PASs. More important, to identify tumor specific PASs, we proposed a novel support vector machine based method with weighted degree string kernel.

The annotated lincRNAs data were downloaded from the UCSC genome browser tables (Meyer et al., 2013). We totally got 11,904 transcripts grouped into 7114 gene loci. The original direct RNA sequence (DRS) reads containing PASs results were downloaded from the xPAD database (Lin et al., 2012), a public resource containing PASs of five normal tissues, i.e. breast, colon, kidney, liver, and lung, as well as their corresponding tumor ones.

Because PASs vary by a few nucleotides in a given isoform (at most 24bp), we used the snow-ball method to define PASs (Hoque et al., 2013). We first aggregated the reads whose distances to the neighbors are less than 24bp into one cluster. In order to determine the locations of PASs, more attention should be paid on the clusters whose length is more than 24bp, and we needed to re-cluster them and take the 3′-most location as PASs. After that, these clusters were mapped to the human genome. Then, the clusters were checked to find and eliminate those overlapped with other kinds of genes annotation. We counted the length of each cluster, and got the length distribution. In order to investigate PASs distribution of each tissue, a figure drawn by circos (Krzywinski et al., 2009) was depicted in Fig. 1
                         to illustrate the distributions of lincRNAs PASs and lincRNA genes in cancer genome.

The relative location of PASs with respect to lincRNAs was annotated using the home-made scripts. When a locus could be attributed to multiple possible annotations, the locus was assigned with a single annotation in the following priority order: 3′-exons (sense), internal-exons (sense), 5′-exons (sense), intron (sense), 5′-exons antisense, internal-exons antisense, 3′-exon antisense, and intron antisense.

According to the pattern of genes expression and the manner of APA, we divided the mapped PASs into five categories: constitutive (occur in both normal and tumor tissues), normal APA (alternative only in normal), tumor APA (alternative only in tumor), normal gene specific (gene expression specific only in normal), and tumor gene specific (gene expression specific in tumor).

Motifs of the PASs from all these five categories were analyzed using the following method. Motifs in regions flanking (±300nt) PASs of the lincRNAs were detected based on the DREME motif discovery algorithm (Bailey, 2011), followed by a stringent statistical assessment (E-value<1e–10) of the positional preference of the motifs, using CentriMo (Bailey and Machanick, 2012). The motifs corresponding to less than 5% of the sequences were eliminated because they occurred in a limited number of sequences. The detected motifs were assembled into larger motifs. We then scanned all the sequences with these larger motifs to acquire their distribution. For the normal and tumor tissues, we only considered the PASs that specifically occur in the corresponding tissue and those occur in both tissues were eliminated.

To recognize the specifically polyadenylated lincRNA genes, we considered the lincRNA genes specifically expressed only in normal or cancer genome. Then, we reported the distribution of these specifically polyadenylated genes in the tumor and healthy tissues using Venn diagram.

To recognize the tumor-specific lincRNA PASs from other sequences, we first constructed the model of the whole tumor-specific PASs (including tumor APA and tumor gene specific PAS). Given the fact that the mainly elements are located in the (−100, 100)nt region around polyA sites, we only considered sequences in this region. As a result, our dataset is a set of sequences with 201nt in length like the sequences used in (Hafez et al., 2013). For the positive training data, the elements at position 101 represents the PASs. We chose a flanking region of 100nt upstream and downstream of the mode of the PAS cluster due to previous studies that the main features are located in this region. After that, we eliminated sequences with ambiguous characters to construct the positive dataset. Finally, we got 3371 sequences in the dataset (tumor specific).

The negative datasets composed of four parts: (1) a dataset with 21,710 sequences which do not contain PASs (non-PAS); (2) a dataset with 2171 PASs belonging to the protein-coding genes (non-lincRNA PAS); (3) a dataset with 4241 sequences that with lincRNA PASs occur at both normal and tumor tissues (constitutive); (4) a dataset with 2894 sequences surrounding the specifically expressed lincRNA PASs in normal tissues (normal specific). The first two datasets are available in previous reference (Hafez et al., 2013).

Here, we built an SVM, using all of the information available in the sequences flanking PASs, by applying the weighted degree kernel with shifts (WD) (shogun toolbox; version 2.0.0) (Sonnenburg et al., 2010). At the beginning, we used the negative data which did not contain PASs to get the optimized parameters. The four parameters to be optimized are the misclassification penalty (C), the length of the substrings compared (order), the positional shifts around polyadenylation site for WD kernel (shift), and the length of flanking region around PAS. We tried different values for each of these parameters, while fixing the rest. To avoid over-fitting, at first, we randomly split our dataset into two: 20% used for model selection and the rest used for training and testing. These two sets were kept independent of each other. In the model selection phase, we applied the 2-fold cross validation, and selected parameters that achieved the highest area under ROC (C
                        =1.5, order=9, shift=16). We then used the selected parameters in the training and testing phase by the 10-fold cross validation. After that, we used the selected parameters to the rest two negative datasets by the 10-fold cross validation.

Furthermore, we performed the following classification using the same method, which includes separating the alternative PASs from normal tissue ones, separating the alternative PASs from the constructively ones, separating PASs of tumor specific expression genes from the normal specific ones, separating PASs of tumor specific expression genes from the constructively ones. At last, we performed the prediction on each organ using the above method on their datasets.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The reads of five matched pairs (10 samples) of tumor and normal tissues from human breast, colon, kidney, liver, and lung were used to mapped to the lincRNA genes. The total numbers of genes that are polyadenylated in a given normal or cancer type are listed in Table 1
                        .

DRS can pinpoint where PASs located, at the same strand (sense strand) or at the complementary strand (antisense strand) of the genes. About 80% reads are mapped to the sense strands of lincRNA genes (Fig. S1 and Table S1). It can be observed that sense transcripts constitute the major fraction of polyadenylated sites (Fig. 2
                        (A)).

Wherein the 7114 annotated genes, about 1545 (21.7%) genes have antisense transcripts, and the number of genes with sense transcript is up to 3250 (45.7%). About 70% mapped PASs are located at the sense strand of lincRNA genes, and most of these sites (∼70%) are located at the 3′-exon and 3′-intron regions (Table S2). Compared with other lincRNA functional regions, more than 90% of these PASs that are mapped to antisense strand appear in intron regions across all 10 types of tissue (Fig. 2(A) and Table S2). To investigate whether the lengths of exons and introns could influence the result, we calculated the length distribution of exons and introns of lincRNA genes. As shown in Fig. S2, about 90% of the exons is less than 1000nt, which is much shorter than introns of the corresponding genes (p
                        =∼0).

Like the protein-coding genes, APA is prevalent among lincRNA genes, wherein about 40% of the mapped lincRNA genes contain alternative PASs (Fig. 1(B) and Table S3). It suggests that APAs are likely to play a remarkable role in the functional regulation of lincRNAs.

For all the samples, the length of most PAS clusters is less than 40nt (Fig. S3). As shown in Fig. 1, the distribution of PASs is analogous to the lincRNA distribution in the genome. It is consistent with the fact that most of the lincRNA genes are polyadenylated. However, when considering the tendency distribution on the details, it varies significantly in normal and tumor tissues for different organs.

We first acquired the amount of the lincRNA genes that are with PASs for each organ, listed in Table 2
                        .

We discovered 488 genes that only express in normal tissues particularly, while 515 genes only express in cancer (Fig. 3
                         and Table 2). The amount of lincRNAs that are with PASs in each tissue is listed in Table 3
                        . As shown in Fig. 3 and Table 3, for breast, colon, kidney, liver, and lung normal tissue, the amounts of genes are 158, 143, 172, 28, and 104, respectively, and the amounts of PASs are 196, 157, 209, 33, and 114, respectively. For the tumor tissues, the amounts of genes are 122, 153, 172, 65, and 156, respectively, and the amounts of their corresponding PASs are 144, 172, 223, 96, and 193, respectively.

All of the discovered lincRNAs are listed in the Supplementary file 2. According to further detections of these special genes in each tissue, it can be found that most of these genes expresses in a tissue-specific way. The amounts of lincRNA genes with PASs that only occur in breast, colon, kidney, liver, and lung normal tissue are 101, 90, 113, 15, and 73, respectively. The amounts of lincRNA genes with PASs only occur in corresponding tumor tissues are 69, 92, 111, 27, and 95 (Fig. 3 and Table 3).

The amounts of PASs for the five defined groups, i.e. constitutive, normal APA, tumor APA, normal gene specific, tumor gene specific are shown in Table S4 and Fig. S4. Obviously, among these five groups, the constitutive group contains the largest fraction of PASs (∼40%), and the normal APA group and tumor APA group contain nearly the same PASs, but the fraction is less than constitutive group, while the rest two groups contain the least sites. The fractions of PASs from normal and tumor tissues are nearly equal, which is about 30% of the whole sites mapped to each organ. Alternatively, taken all the five organs as an entirety, the amount for the constitutive, normal APA, tumor APA, normal gene specific, tumor gene specific is 4242, 2329, 2738, 567, and 633, respectively.

We examined the distribution of different motifs surrounding PASs. The motifs detected from all the organs are shown in Fig. S5. There are two predominant motifs i.e., the TTTTTTTT, AATAAA, and their variants, occurred ∼21nt upstream PASs in a highly position-specific manner. In addition, we also detected a strong position-specific pattern, the palindromic sequence CCAGSCTGG, downstream PASs. We also observed motif RGYRYRGTGG in all the tissues. The probability distributions of motifs surrounding the sites of all five different categories are shown in Fig. S6. The probability distributions of motifs surrounding the sites of all 10 samples are shown in Fig. S7.

To directly compare the distribution of four motifs, we examined the fraction of sequences that contain the motifs at each position. In Fig. 4
                        , we compared the distribution of PASs of 10 different samples. For TTTTTTTT motif, it occurs in a highly position-specific way between 45 and 0nt upstream PASs. The AATAAA motif localizes ∼21nt upstream from the polyadenylation location. The CCAGSCTGG manifests a position-specific manner ∼21nt and ∼190nt downstream the cleavage sites. While the RGYRYGTGG motif localizes ∼31nt downstream PASs. The fractions of the sequences in the peak region of the motifs for different tissues are shown in Table 4
                        . The fraction of TTTTTTTT motif in region (−45, 0)nt is range from ∼60% to ∼80%. The lung normal tissue is with the most amount (up to 80.1%), while the kidney tumor tissue is with the least (59.6%). On the contrary, the tissue with the most amount of AATAAA is kidney tumor (55.8%), while the least is the lung normal tissue (27.6%). The most fraction of CCAGSCTGG is up to 19.9% with lung normal, while the least is with kidney tumor (10.6%). For RGYRYGTGG motif, the tissue that contains the most motif in the peak region is lung normal (13.6%), while the least fraction is 6% with lung tumor. Compared with tumor tissues, the normal tissues are more likely to have TTTTTTTT, CCAGSCTGG, and RGYRYGTGG motifs except breast. Further hypothesis testing has identified that the RGYRYGTGG co-occurs with the CCAGSCTGG (p
                        =∼0). We also found that RGYRYGTGG and CCAGSCTGG co-occur with the TTTTTTTT motif, while negative correlated with AATAAA (p
                        =∼0).

The comparison of PASs located at sense and antisense strands of lincRNA genes in normal and tumor tissues for breast, colon, kidney, liver, and lung are shown in Figs. S8–S12, respectively. The distributions of these motifs that located in exon (sense), intron (sense), and antisense intron regions in the normal and tumor tissues for breast, colon, kidney, liver, and lung are shown in Figs. S13–S17, respectively. Among these three categories, the TTTTTTTT motif is more obvious for PASs located in the region (−50, 0)nt in intron than exon, while AATAAA is relative more in exon than intron in the corresponding region. The CCAGSCTGG and RGYRYGTGG are also more in intron than exon. The distributions of PASs respect to five categories (tumor APA, normal APA, tumor gene specific, normal gene specific and constitutive) are also performed, and their performances for breast, colon, kidney, liver, and lung are shown in Figs. S18–S22, respectively. The distributions of the entire normal and tumor tissues are also shown in Figs. S23 and S24. We detected several sub-peaks. For the sequences surrounding PASs that localize in the antisense strand of lincRNA genes, a sub-peak of CCAGSCTGG at the location ∼80nt upstream the polyadenylation location and a sub-peak of RGYRYGTGG at the location ∼180nt upstream PASs are detected. The two new sub-peaks are not obvious for sequences that localize in the sense strand of lincRNA genes. The sequences in the sense strand more likely to be with AATAAA motif, while the fraction of TTTTTTTT, CCAGSCTGG, and RGYRYGTGG is larger. The fraction of TTTTTTTT in normal tissue is larger than the one in the corresponding tumor one, while the fraction of AATAAA in normal tissue is less than in tumor one. The two new sub-peaks are also more likely to appear in normal tissues, while the constitutive parts of PASs are not obvious with these two sub-peaks. We also found that the constitutive sites are more likely to be with TTTTTTTT, CCAGSCTGG, as well as RGYRYGTGG at the major peak of them.

Because the complexes responsible for synthesizing the polyadenylated tail lack substrate specificity, it necessitates the presence of specific signals that govern lincRNA polyadenylation. To date, modeling lincRNA PASs has rarely been investigated so far.

Although we have found that the distribution of motifs have several differences, however, the fraction of genes with these differences is subtle, and it is not enough to separate these PASs only using these motifs. The nucleotide compositions surrounding PASs are shown in Figs. S25 and S26. The most frequent nucleotide at each position surrounding PASs is the thymus. We then employed the sum of deviation squares (SDS) of each nucleotide to show the composition difference (Fig. S27). We found that the obvious differences between the constitutive and tumor or normal tissues mainly located 100nt upstream and downstream PASs. However, the difference between normal and tumor tissues is subtle (SDS<5e–3). The differences between normal and tumor APA, normal and tumor gene specific PASs are located mainly within (−200, 200)nt. However, the SDS values are very subtle. Thus, further research is needed to achieve the purpose to separate the different PASs.

To investigate whether the local sequence features around PASs are sufficient to explain polyadenylation, we first examined whether PASs clusters for tumor-specific genes could be classified from non-PASs. We then distinguished the tumor-specific lincRNA PASs from the non-lincRNA PASs. Then, the model was used to classify the tumor-specific lincRNA PASs from the constitutive ones. Finally, we trained models to separate the tumor-specific PASs from the normal-specific PASs. The WD kernel is powerful enough to capture the phenomenon with nearly perfect accuracy to depict the sequences flanking PASs. The performance of classifier using the WD kernel is shown in Fig. 5
                        , Tables S5 and S6.

The classification accuracies for non-PASs, non-lincRNA PASs, constitutive and normal specific PASs are 96.55, 89.48, 59.54, and 51.57, and the corresponding area under ROC of each dataset is 0.9865, 0.9680, 0.6224, and 0.5051, respectively. The classification accuracies between tumor and normal APA data, between tumor and normal gene specific data, between tumor APA and constitutive PASs, and between tumor gene specific data are 51.70, 53.04, 61.81, and 87.01, and the corresponding area under ROC is 0.5145, 0.5377, 0.6267, and 0.6508, respectively.

The prediction results of each organ can be found in the supplementary Fig. S28, Tables S7 and S8.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The purpose of this study is to demonstrate the expression of polyadenylated lincRNA in cancer genome, and it reveals that polyadenylated lincRNA sequences could be considered as a new kind of biomarker for cancer diagnosis. The expression of polyadenylated lincRNA in tumor tissues is different from the normal tissues and some genes express in the tumor-specific manner.

Global mapping of lincRNA PASs reveals that their main distribution is almost the same, and it is consistent with the distribution of the lincRNA genes. However, for the lincRNA clusters in one specific region, the distribution varies greatly. Our results show that more than half of the lincRNA PASs are located in the sense strand of the lincRNA genes. PASs prefer to occur in the introns of the gene rather than the exons, contrasting with ones in mRNA genes. About 40% of the lincRNA genes possess at least two PASs, in other words, they have alternative PASs, which produce different lincRNA isoforms and impact the effect of gene process.

Our observation of polyadenylation patterns includes the prevalent TTTTTTTT, AATAAA motifs, the co-occurring motif CCAGSCTGG and RGYRYRGTGG, which have been observed in the mRNA genes (Ozsolak et al., 2010). The RGYRYRGTGG motif that is most likely the binding motif of CstF64 is observed in all tumor tissues (Martin et al., 2012). The TTTTTTTT, CCAGSCTGG, and RGYRYRGTGG are more likely to appear in tumor tissues, whereas the AATAAA are less in normal tissues. The negative correlation between TTTTTTTT and AATAAA may suggest that the TTTTTTTT, and its co-occurring motifs are associated with coordinating APA events. The phenomenon that TTTTTTTT motif is more prevalent in the intron region also indicates the relationship between the motif and APA. However, based on these observations, calculating position weighted matrix scores of these motifs as features for the classifier will not be sufficient to recognize the tumor-specific PASs.

We proposed a novel tumor-specific classifier based on the SVM algorithm with a string kernel. This method could separate the tumor-specific PASs from the non-polyadenylation sequences or non-lincRNA PASs sequences effectively. Although we could not separate the tumor-specific PASs from the normal specifically expressed ones effectively, it reveals that our proposed algorithm is promising to fulfill the tasks.

In conclusion, we reported the global distribution of the lincRNA PASs in normal and tumor tissues in human genome. At the same time, we detected the motifs used in lincRNA polyadenylation process. Meanwhile, we proposed an effective SVM-based method for recognition of tumor-specific lincRNA PASs.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This work is supported by grants from National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61105021), Ph.D. Program Foundation of the Ministry of Education of China (No. 20110201110010), China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (No. 2011M501442), Natural Science Foundation of Shannxi Province (No. 2012JQ8042) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2014.07.001.

The following are Supplementary data to this article:
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

