@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Identification of possible siRNA molecules for TDP43 mutants causing amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: In silico design and molecular dynamics study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Design of siRNAs for tdp43 mutants causing ALS disorder is proposed.


                        
                        
                           
                           Analysis initiated at the genetic level after identifying the respective codons for the mutants based on minimum free energy and probabilistic approach.


                        
                        
                           
                           Elucidation of target accessibility of the identified siRNA.


                        
                        
                           
                           Evaluation of the ability of siRNA to interact with target mRNA via molecular dynamics and thermo-physical analyses.


                        
                        
                           
                           To propose the best possible siRNA candidates for RNAi therapy.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#




                     tdp43




                  

siRNA

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis

RNAi

Molecular dynamics simulation

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The DNA binding protein, TDP43 is a major protein involved in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and other neurological disorders such as frontotemporal dementia, Alzheimer disease, etc. In the present study, we have designed possible siRNAs for the glycine rich region of tardbp mutants causing ALS disorder based on a systematic theoretical approach including (i) identification of respective codons for all mutants (reported at the protein level) based on both minimum free energy and probabilistic approaches, (ii) rational design of siRNA, (iii) secondary structure analysis for the target accessibility of siRNA, (iii) determination of the ability of siRNA to interact with mRNA and the formation/stability of duplex via molecular dynamics study for a period of 15ns and (iv) characterization of mRNA–siRNA duplex stability based on thermo-physical analysis. The stable GC-rich siRNA expressed strong binding affinity towards mRNA and forms stable duplex in A-form. The linear dependence between the thermo-physical parameters such as T
                     m, GC content and binding free energy revealed the ability of the identified siRNAs to interact with mRNA in comparable to that of the experimentally reported siRNAs. Hence, this present study proposes few siRNAs as the possible gene silencing agents in RNAi therapy based on the in silico approach.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a neurodegenerative disorder that causes damage to both upper and lower motor neurons. The main pathological feature of most neurological disorders including ALS is the aggregation of insoluble ubiquitinated proteins (Wu et al., 2013). Familial type of ALS is observed in 10–15% of patients and sporadic type is observed in 90% of patients (Tsai et al., 2011). Several point mutations in various proteins such as Superoxide dismutase 1 (Rosen et al., 1993), TAR DNA binding protein (Sreedharan et al., 2008), Fused in Sarcoma (Kwiatkowski et al., 2009), Profilin 1 (Wu et al., 2013), Ubiquilin 2 (Deng et al., 2011) and Valosin containing protein (Johnson et al., 2010) cause ALS disease. The pathogenesis mechanism of ALS still remains unclear and also demands effective treatment (Tsai et al., 2011). Riluzole is the only drug used to control the glutamate level in ALS patients (Miller et al., 2007) although its role in ALS and proper target is not fully explored (Cheah et al., 2010).

The TDP43 protein, which is encoded by tardbp gene, plays an important role in cellular processes such as transcription, splicing, stability regulation, etc. Mutations in TDP43 protein is reported to cause both familial as well as sporadic forms of ALS (Kabashi et al., 2008), specifically in ALS10 and also in several other neurological disorders like frontotemporal dementia, Alzheimer disease, etc. (Rutherford et al., 2008; van Eersel et al., 2011; Wilson et al., 2011). Hence, in the present study, tardbp gene is selected as the target for treating ALS by RNA interference (RNAi).

Several mutations in TDP43 protein has been reported till date (Supplementary Table 1) and most of them are observed at the glycine rich region (formed by the amino acids between 216 and 414) of C-terminal suggesting the involvement of C-terminal domain in TDP43 proteinopathy (Guo et al., 2011). Recently, Pinto and co-workers has reported the Promine database (Pinto et al., 2010) which lists the disease associated mutations in human neurodegenerative disorders like ALS, including TDP43. Since, all of these biologically important mutations are located at the C-terminal glycine rich region, the present study focuses on the designing of small interfering RNA (siRNA) for this C-terminal glycine rich region.

RNA interference is a gene knockdown process, in which small double stranded RNAs trigger the cleavage of its complementary mRNA via RNA Induced Silencing Complex (RISC) formation (Bernstein et al., 2001). RNAi is a natural phenomenon observed first in Caenorhabditis elegans, and involves in sequence specific gene silencing in eukaryotic cells. RNAi pathway includes the processing of double stranded RNA (dsRNA) substrate into small dsRNAs (micro RNAs or small interfering RNAs) by Dicer family proteins. With the target mRNA, micro RNA (miRNA) shows partial complementarity while small interfering RNA (siRNA) shows perfect complementarity. Such partial interaction of miRNA leads to translation inhibition while the perfect complementarity of siRNA leads to target cleavage (Hutvagner and Zamore, 2002).

SiRNA is a duplex RNA having nucleotides of 21–28 bases in length and is generated by the processing of the long double stranded RNA by dicer enzyme. Elbashir et al. (2001) have reported that nucleotides of 21–22 bases in length degrade mRNA effectively (Elbashir et al., 2001). The guide strand of siRNA recognizes its complementary target with the help of Argonaute (ago) protein which leads to the cleavage of target mRNA via the formation of RISC (Meister and Tuschl, 2004). Ago protein is the main functional unit of RISC, which shows significant structural similarities across various species. Ago protein has four structural domains such as N-terminal, PAZ, PIWI and MID domains connected by linkers (Schirle and MacRae, 2012). The PIWI domain plays a major role in RNA cleavage as it possesses slicer activity similar to RNase H (Wang et al., 2009). Rational design of siRNA is gaining importance in RNAi or gene therapy due to the dramatic increase in its success rate (Boese et al., 2004). Several online tools have been developed for the rational designing of siRNAs and are siMAX (Schramm and Ramey, 2005), siDirect (Naito et al., 2004), Sfold (Ding et al., 2004), RNAxs (Tafer et al., 2008), etc. The efficiency of siRNA depends on several factors including RNA conformation, target secondary structure, three dimensional conformation, GC content and stability of mRNA–siRNA duplex (Pei and Tuschl, 2006).

Recently, immunotherapy and gene therapy are being used to treat incurable diseases like plant viruses, hepatitis C virus, HIV, various types of cancers, Neurological disorders, etc. (Mahmood et al., 2008). The role of RNAi in understanding various immune cell modulations is also reported by Mao et al. (2007). RNAi therapy using siRNA is successfully applied to silence several genes involving in cancer (Gartel and Kandel, 2006) and is being clinically tested with no toxic effects (Petrocca and Lieberman, 2010). RNAi therapy for the treatment of ALS caused by SOD1 mutations has been developed by Xia et al. (2005) and studies by Ralph et al. have been successful in delaying the symptoms of ALS by 100% and extends the life by 80% (Ralph et al., 2005). SiRNAs have been successfully designed and tested against E2 and ns1 genes in Chikungunya virus and are found to be very efficient in inhibiting viral replication (Parashar et al., 2013). The rorc2 gene involved in autoimmune diseases has been suppressed using rationally designed siRNAs with 91.1% of silencing efficiency (Ganjalikhani Hakemi et al., 2013).

Several siRNAs, successfully designed by Boudreau et al. (2011) have been proven to be effective in the treatment of Huntington’s disease (Boudreau et al., 2011). SiRNAs designed using Sfold showed significant RNAi activity and are successfully targeted for Hepatitis B (McCaffrey, 2009). Naito et al. have rationally designed and validated antiviral siRNA which showed efficient inhibition of HIV-1 (Naito et al., 2007). Herpes simplex virus (HSV), which infects higher mammals does not have an effective treatment yet. Nur et al. (2013) have designed potent siRNAs using multiple tools like siDirect, Dharmacon design centre genscript, etc. to successfully target this HSV (Nur et al., 2013). The three different siRNAs targeting at position 273, 772, 1237 designed using Sfold showed success in silencing the mice inhibin gene (Han et al., 2013). Helicoverpa armigera is an insect pest which negatively affects the gross yield in various crops like tomato, legumes and cotton, etc. Choudhary and Sahi (2011) have reported siRNAs designed using in silico siRNA designing tools to increase the resistance in plant against this insect pest (Choudhary and Sahi, 2011). The same plant pest has also been controlled by silencing hahr3 gene using siRNAs designed from Sfold (Xiong et al., 2013). The main causative agent of cervical cancer is human papillomaviruses (HPV) and more than 50% of cases show HPV16 variant. The expression of E6 and E7 oncoproteins in HPV16 causes malignancy. Three siRNAs designed using siDirect software have proven their potency in targeting E6 and E7 oncoproteins (Yamato et al., 2008). The disc1 gene disruption causes several major mental disorders like Schizophrenia, bipolar affective disorder and recurrent major depression. The successful knockdown of the disc1 gene using siRNA designed by siDirect tool is reported by Hattori et al. (2014).

Molecular dynamics simulation finds application in understanding the nature of biomolecular system from the structure level to the functional level by exploring the time dependent conformational changes (Kalyaanamoorthy and Chen, 2013). The stability of mRNA–siRNA duplex is important for the target cleavage by siRNA and hence performing molecular dynamics simulations on these RNA duplexes would provide a clear insight on the stability and dynamics of mRNA–siRNA duplex at the atomic level (McDowell et al., 2007).

Lack of information on ALS mechanism and therapeutic measures demands the need for exploring novel treatment methods like RNAi via siRNA. Thus, the present study proposes the design and identification of novel siRNA candidates for the silencing of TDP43 mutants using theoretical approaches including rational designing of siRNA and molecular dynamics simulation studies.

@&#METHODOLOGY@&#

The mutations in TDP-43 protein associated with ALS disorder have been listed in Promine database (Pinto et al., 2010). As this present investigation focuses on designing new siRNA for ALS disorder, it is necessary to consider the C-terminal mutations in TDP-43 protein at the genetic level. In order to identify the respective codons for the mutated amino acids, all possible codons have been generated and used for further analyses. It is experimentally reported that the best possible codon for a particular mutation could also be achieved based on approaches like minimum free energy, probabilistic approaches, etc. (Du et al., 2014; Katz and Burge, 2003). In this analysis, the best codon is identified based on the minimum free energy obtained from RNAfold (Hofacker, 2003). The identified codon has been further validated using the probabilistic approach by performing multiple sequence alignment with related species using ClustalW. Supplementary Table 2 lists the experimentally reported mutations at the glycine rich region of TDP43 gene (gene id: EF434181.1.), the selected codon of these mutations along with the free energy (kcal/mol) calculated using RNAfold.

For the derived 40 mutants of tdp43 gene, all possible siRNAs were designed using Sfold (Ding et al., 2004), siDirect (Naito et al., 2004) and siMAX (Schramm and Ramey, 2005) tools. The most important properties for an effective siRNA includes, (i) GC content within the range of 30–52% (ii) absence of internal repeats (Reynolds et al., 2004) and (iii) target position should be 100bp downstream from the start codon (Pei and Tuschl, 2006). The tools used for this study implement specific protocol along with the above mentioned basic rules for the identification of siRNA. The tool Sfold considers the target site accessibility (Ding et al., 2004) whereas siMAX uses local free energy and secondary structure of target mRNA (Schramm and Ramey, 2005). SiDirect prevents off targets and potential cross hybridization candidates to design siRNA (Naito et al., 2004). Hence the use of all these three tools ensures the identification of all possible siRNAs for these mutants.

The total 40 mutations are considered from the Glycine rich ‘C-terminal’ domain of tdp43 that causes ALS disease. For each mutant, siRNAs were designed using three different tools that resulted in more than 2000 siRNAs. A single copy of siRNA was retained, if it is identified for more than one mutations. Further, the siRNAs were screened based on a common conserved pattern identified by multiple sequence alignment using ClustalW (Larkin et al., 2007). This screening was performed to avoid off targets and to select siRNAs which are not mutation specific and which do not possess overlapping target positions. The secondary structures of these 27 siRNAs were identified using CLCRNA workbench trial version and the target mRNA secondary structures were generated using sRNA module of Sfold.

The three dimensional structure of mRNA–siRNA duplexes in A-conformation were generated using Discovery Studio 3.1. The MD simulations of mRNA–siRNA duplexes were performed using GROMACS-4.5.5 (Van Der Spoel et al., 2005) package with AMBER-99SB-ILDN force field. The mRNA–siRNA duplexes were solvated in a triclinic box of dimensions 11Å×11Å×25Å using TIP3P water molecules and were neutralized using Na+ counter ions. The entire system was simulated at periodic boundary conditions and was minimized using steepest descent followed by conjugate gradient algorithms for 50,000 cycles in each steps. A cut off of 1.0nm was used to treat the long range interactions. The electrostatic interactions were treated using Particle-Mesh Ewald method. All bonds were constrained using LINCS algorithm (Hess et al., 1997). The entire system was equilibrated for a time period of 100ps at 300K using Berendsen thermostat (Berendsen et al., 1995) and 1bar pressure conditions using a time step of 2fs. The production MD run was recorded at every 2ps over the simulated period of 15ns. The mRNA–siRNA duplex conformation was analyzed for all the simulated duplexes using X3DNA (Zheng et al., 2009) and pseudo torsion angles for all the duplexes were analyzed using DSSR software (Lu and Olson, 2003).

The physical and thermodynamic properties of all the duplexes such as T
                        m (melting temperature), ΔG (Intermolecular interaction energy) and GC content were calculated using Oligocalc tool (Kibbe, 2007). Similar calculation has been performed for the siRNAs having high AT content as well as experimentally proven siRNAs to validate the identified siRNAs (Kretschmer-Kazemi Far and Sczakiel, 2003; Ui-Tei et al., 2008). For T
                        m calculation, the nearest neighbor method was used as it predicts accurately and widely accepted too. RNAcofold module of Vienna RNA websuite (Bernhart et al., 2006; Gruber et al., 2008) was used for calculating hybridization energy and minimum free energy (MFE). These parameters were used in describing the potency of siRNA in regard to RNAi.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

The experimentally reported mutations at protein level have been selected for the present study. TDP43 has an N-terminal domain followed by RNA recognition motifs (RRM I and II) and a glycine rich C-terminal domain. The present analysis accounts the 40 mutations observed at glycine rich region of TDP43. Supplementary Table 2 clearly depicts the position of amino acids, the identified gene codons and the respective mutations at the glycine rich region of tardbp gene. Each mutation in TDP43 Mutant is generated using all possible codons. First, the secondary structures of all generated mRNAs have been evaluated for their target accessibility. After ensuring the target accessibility, the suitable codon was selected based on minimum free energy identified using RNAfold (Supplementary Table 2). These identified codons have also been further validated using probabilistic approach in order to void of the bias in codon selection irrespective of the adopted methods. For this analysis, a set of highly conserved sequences (having 90% similarity) from higher eukaryotes are retrieved from the NCBI database using blast. From the resulted hits, a set of mRNAs from higher eukaryotes such as Pongo abelli, Sus scrofa, Bos taurus, Mus musculus, Macaca fasicularis, Rattus norvegicus & Gallus gallus, expressing higher similarity with TDP43 (above 90%), have been selected and are subjected for multiple sequence alignment using ClustalW (Supplementary Fig. 1). It is interesting to note that all the codons of TDP43 mutants identified using minimum free energy analysis share more than 95% similarity with the naturally adopted codon in the higher eukaryotic mRNAs and are highlighted in yellow. This observation from both analyses (probabilistic as well as minimum free energy approaches) ensures the unbiased selection of codon as well as the reliability of the selected codons for TDP43 mutants.

All possible siRNAs for these 40 mutants were generated using Sfold, siDirect and siMAX and were screened using multiple sequence alignment to identify siRNA candidates for further study. Secondary structure plays an important role for the complexation of siRNA with mRNA (Patzel et al., 2005). Hence the secondary structure of siRNA and the target mRNA was examined to understand the target accessibility using (i) CLCRNA workbench trial version and (ii) the sRNA module of Sfold (data not shown), respectively. Based on the sequence alignment using ClustalW, about 27 siRNAs were extracted for further analysis and are listed in Table 1
                        . Each siRNA has been named by its starting position at the gene and this numbering is maintained throughout the text.

Several duplexes of mRNA–siRNA have been generated by placing the siRNA at various sites of mRNA oligonucleotide to have Watson–Crick base pairing (refer Table 1). All the duplexes were subjected for all atom simulation to understand the stability of duplexation and are studied over a period of 15ns. Fig. 1
                         depicts the conformation of mRNA–siRNA383 duplex extracted at 15ns and the conformations of all the studied duplexes are shown in Supplementary Fig. 2. The duplex mRNA–siRNA shows stable dynamics throughout the simulation period with an RMSD value of 3.5±0.75Å.

Structures from every 500ps have been analyzed to understand the interaction between mRNA and siRNA using Visual Molecular Dynamics (Humphrey et al., 1996). Among the simulated duplexes, the siRNA that pairs at 211, 251, 403, 466, 522, 758, 795, 796, 810, 897, 899, 1108, 1109 and 1112 positions of mRNA express most stable interaction. These duplexes express more than 40 H-bonding interactions during the period of simulation and reveal the existence of stable Watson crick base paring between the newly designed mRNA–siRNA duplex. Supplementary Table 3 lists the RMSD and H-bonds observed for the entire set of 27 mRNA–siRNA duplexes during simulation.

During simulation, the mRNA–siRNA duplex adopts right handed A-form. All the duplexes express stable H-bonding interaction with the complementary base pair and the average H-bonding distance calculated between the paired bases was found in the range of 2.6–3.4Å. The unpaired overhanging nucleotides of mRNA express higher fluctuation due to the unpaired free state and the paired end nucleotides of mRNA–siRNA duplex also express higher fluctuation due to end effects. Hence, the RMSF of the paired nucleotides by excluding these regions have been calculated by considering the purine/pyrimidine base N-atom connected to the C1′-atom of furanose sugar moiety. The average value of RMSF calculated only for the paired region in mRNA–siRNA duplex is observed in the range of 1.57–1.93Å and this stable fluctuation mediated by H-bonding interactions reveals the strong paring between mRNA and siRNA during the entire period of simulation.

The parameters describing the helical regularity (displacements in X- and Y-direction and inclination), stacking geometry (shift, slide, rise, tilt, roll and twist) and complementary base pairing (H-bonding and stacking) in the mRNA–siRNA duplexes were analyzed using the program X3DNA (Zheng et al., 2009) and are listed in Supplementary Table 4. All these conformational parameters agree well with the experimentally reported values for RNA duplex in A-form (Lu and Olson, 2003; Ouyang et al., 2009). The parameters such as shift, slide and rise, those defining the stacking geometry of the paired bases in mRNA–siRNA duplex with respect to the X-, Y- and Z-axis (as adopted in the X3DNA program) are observed as −0.025, −1.67 and 3.30Å, and are in good agreement with the reported values, −0.08, −1.48 and 3.30Å, respectively (Ouyang et al., 2009). The parameters tilt, roll and twist, representing the angular orientation between the stacked base pairs (−0.22, 8.63 and 29.53°) are also in good agreement with the reported values −0.4, 8.6 and 31.6°, respectively (Lu and Olson, 2003).

The planarity of paired bases described by shear, stretch, stagger, opening, buckle and propeller (−0.031Å, −0.004Å, −0.12Å, 0.93°, 1.826° and −13.68° respectively) are comparable with the reported values (Ouyang et al., 2009) and ensures the stability of the duplex via H-bonding as well as stacking interactions. The chi (χ) angle that presents the appropriate orientation of base pairs to form effective base pairing and stacking interactions in all duplexes ranges between −142.58 to −159.76°. The backbone torsion angles such as α, β, γ, δ, ε and ζ analyzed using X3DNA are tabulated in Supplementary Table 5. The calculated average value of backbone angles α, β, γ, δ, ε and ζ (310.67, 176.20, 61.71, 80.29, 211.18 and 291.86°, respectively) confirm the formation of mRNA–siRNA duplex in A-form (Duarte and Pyle, 1998).

In addition to these structure analyses, the H-bonding and base stacking interactions those stabilizing the mRNA–siRNA duplex have been validated using DSSR software (Lu and Olson, 2003). The schematic representation of the base paring of mRNA–siRNA duplex (shown in Table 1) depicts the perfect base-base interactions.

The pseudo torsion angle that explains one-to-one variation between η (the dihedral angle defined by C4′
                           i−1-P
                           i
                        -C4′
                           i
                        -P
                           i+1) and θ (the dihedral angle defined by P
                           i
                        -C4′
                           i
                        -P
                           i+1-C4′
                           i+1) has been calculated using the average values of η and θ angles for all the mRNA–siRNA duplexes (Supplementary Table 6) and is depicted as ‘θη- plot’ (Fig. 2
                        ). The θ is derived as a combination of δ, ε and ζ angles while η comprises α, β and γ (Richardson et al., 2008) and falls in the range of 171–229° and 149–185°, respectively. These values explain the formation of stable helical duplex in A-form between the interacting mRNA and siRNA as reported by Keating et al. (2011). All these above observations evidence the stability of the designed siRNA and its efficiency in identifying the target region in mRNA via effective base pairing as well as stacking interactions to form stable mRNA–siRNA duplexes.

The stability of mRNA–siRNA duplexes have also been studied using the thermo-physical properties such as T
                        m and GC content (Table 2
                        ) using Oligocalc software (Kibbe, 2007). It is interesting that most of the reported functional siRNAs express about 30–52% GC content (Reynolds et al., 2004). The duplexes with low GC content might induce duplex destabilization while duplexes with high GC content interfere with RISC accessibility and hence siRNAs require moderate GC content as reported (Chan et al., 2009). The selected duplexes possess about 32–53% GC content and demonstrate their ability for stable interaction with mRNA. The melting temperature (T
                        m) calculated for the duplexes ranges between 52.19 and 62.91° and signifies the conformational stability even at higher temperature. The observed higher T
                        m reveals stronger interaction exerted by the GC pairs between mRNA and siRNA. The binding free energy that indicates the binding affinity of siRNA towards mRNA, communicated via intermolecular interactions, has been calculated using RNAcofold by employing the basic thermodynamic equation,
                           
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       G
                                       binding
                                    
                                    =
                                    Δ
                                    
                                       G
                                       
                                          A
                                          B
                                       
                                    
                                    −
                                    Δ
                                    
                                       G
                                       A
                                    
                                    −
                                    Δ
                                    
                                       G
                                       B
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     

The calculated binding free energy for all duplexes (ranging between −24 and −34kcal/mol) expresses linear dependence with both T
                        m (Fig. 3
                        ) and GC content (inset of Fig. 3) values. SiRNAs with less GC content have also been analyzed and they fall quite apart as outliers from experimental values (Fig. 3). These siRNAs are comparatively poor mRNA binders as they share a very less binding free energy values around ∼−20.3kcal/mol.

Thermo-physical parameters (GC content, T
                        m and ΔG) for few more experimentally reported siRNAs (listed in Supplementary Table 7) have been calculated and are compared with the identified siRNAs. Fig. 3 shows the relationship between the calculated thermo-physical parameters. The experimentally reported siRNAs have the GC content in the range of 38–57% and their binding free energy falls in between −25 and −35kcal/mol. Hence, it is clearly observed that the presently identified siRNA sequences (data shown in filled circle) agree well with the values of experimentally reported siRNAs (data shown in triangle) and are encircled with red lines. Hence, the predicted siRNAs that fall in the range of experimentally reported thermo-physical values are presumed to establish both strong interaction and higher activity with mRNA similar to that of experimental siRNAs.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

Designing siRNA plays an important role in treating various disorders at genetic level and is being effectively used in RNAi. The RNAi therapy has been successfully used in treating various types of cancer diseases, HIV, immuno disorders and neurological disorders such as Alzheimer’s disease, Huntington’s disease, ALS and Parkinson disease, etc.

In the present study, we have focused on designing siRNA against mutant tardbp causing ALS disease as it is instrumental in understanding various neurological disorders. Mutations in this protein have been found in both sporadic and familial ALS disease. Thus, a systematic theoretical analysis has been performed on the tardbp mutants at the genetic level and the possible novel siRNAs have been designed against these mutants. The siRNA candidates have been identified using computational tools such as siDirect, siMAX and Sfold in order to cover all possible siRNA candidates. This set of siRNAs was screened further based on maximum populated conserved pattern using multiple sequence alignment. The secondary structure of siRNA plays a key role in target accessibility, that determines its ability to interact with the target and all of these shortlisted siRNAs are found to be easily accessible to their targets. Duplexes are formed between the selected siRNA candidates and target mRNA. The conformational stability of siRNA-mRNA duplex analyzed using molecular dynamics simulation revealed stable dynamics of the duplex in A-form (i.e., the characteristic functional form of RNA duplex) during the simulation for a period of 15ns. The stability of these modeled duplexes has been examined further using structural and thermo-physical parameters such as T
                     m, GC content and binding free energy values and the linear dependence between them proclaim the stability as well as the native conformation of siRNA, required to establish stronger interactions with mRNA. These theoretically identified novel siRNAs, which possess the physico-chemical properties in the range of experimentally reported potent siRNAs, are suggested as the possible siRNA candidates in silencing the interested gene and demands further experimental testing and validation to explore their efficiency. Hence, these computationally predicted siRNAs could be proposed to play an instrumental role in down regulating the mutant tardbp expression and further in the prevention of ubiquitinated protein aggregation in the cytoplasm.

The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

One of the authors Vishwambhar Vishnu Bhandare would like to thank University Grants Commission, New Delhi, India for providing financial assistance under Rajiv Gandhi National fellowship (No. F.14-2(SC)/2010 (SA-III)). One of the Authors, Amutha Ramaswamy acknowledges the Science and Engineering Research Board, India for the financial support in the form of Fast Track scheme for Young Scientists.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2016.01.001.

Supplementary Tables 1 and 2 highlights C-terminal mutations at gene and protein level, and free energy calculation to select possible codon for each mutations. Supplementary Table 3 shows the molecular dynamic simulation analysis such as rmsd and H-bonds. Supplementary Tables 4–6 represent the conformational parameters of RNA duplex such as, helical parameter, backbone angles and pseudo torsion angles of the backbone. Supplementary Table 7 represents the experimentally proven siRNAs. Supplementary Fig. 1 represents the probabilistic approach for codon selection using multiple sequence alignment, Supplementary Fig. 2 shows the three dimensional conformation of all the studied mRNA–siRNAs duplexes at 15ns.

The following are Supplementary data to this article:
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

