@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Expression patterns of photoperiod and temperature regulated heading date genes in Oryza sativa
            

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Expression profiles of flowering genes were compared using a co-expression network approach.


                        
                        
                           
                           17 and 3 co-expressed photoperiod and temperature regulated flowering genes were detected.


                        
                        
                           
                           Strong evidence that temperature affects flowering time independently of photoperiod.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#




                     Arabidopsis thaliana




                  

Expression profiling

Heading date




                     Oryza sativa




                  

Photoperiod

Temperature

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  In plants, flowering is a major biological phenomenon, which is regulated by an array of interactions occurring between biotic and abiotic factors. In our study, we have compared the expression profiles of flowering genes involved in the flowering pathway, which are influenced by conditions like photoperiod and temperature from seedling to heading developmental stages in two Oryza sativa indica varieties, viz., Zhenshan 97 and Minghui 63 using a expression network approach. Using the network expression approach, we found 17 co-expressed genes having the same expression profile pattern as three key photoperiod flowering genes Hd1, Ehd1 and Hd3a. We also demonstrated that these three co-expressed genes have a similar simulation pattern as temperature flowering genes. Based on our observations, we hypothesize that photoperiod and temperature regulate flowering pathways independently. The present study provides a basis for understanding the network of co-expressed genes involved in flowering pathway and presents a way to demonstrate the behavior of specific gene sets in specific cultivars.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


                     Oryza sativa is classified as a short-day plant, which accelerates its heading date (HD), under short-day (SD) conditions and delays under long-day (LD) conditions (Garner and Allard, 1920). HD, which represents the heading or flowering time is controlled by heading date 1 (Hd1), an ortholog of CONSTANS (CO) family in Arabidopsis thaliana, which acts as a key switch molecule in controlling O. sativa heading. It controls the heading date by acting as a promoter under short-day (SD) conditions and as a repressor under long-day (LD) conditions and is controlled exogenously by the environment, or endogenously, by signaling molecules (Barth et al., 2006). Several comparative studies have shown the crucial role of Hd1 in promoting flowering under SD conditions (Yano et al., 2000; Kojima et al., 2002; Luan et al., 2009). Earlier, Luan et al. (2009) reported a slightly higher expression level of Hd1 under long day and under low temperature conditions. Recently it has been indicated that the Ehd1–Hd3a/RFT1 complex is conserved in both the photoperiodic and temperature flowering regulatory pathways based on the reduced expression of Ehd1, Hd3a and RFT1 at low temperature (23°C) (Song et al., 2012). A recent critical insight was demonstrated using wild and mutant varieties under different photoperiod and temperature treatments, which revealed two base pair insertions (129bp and 150bp in lf1132) and several single-base substitutions (in total 6 substitutions), which are mainly responsible for the reduction of the mRNA levels in mutant phenotype (Luan et al., 2009). It has also been demonstrated that up regulation of Ghd7 might be a crucial cause of delayed flowering under low temperature condition under LD conditions based on Ghd7 mRNA levels, which were promoted at low temperature (23°C) (Song et al., 2012).

Another identified QTL for flowering, early-heading date 1 (Ehd1), which encodes a B-type response regulator (Doi et al., 2004), promotes flowering under both SD and LD conditions but it has been shown to be more active under SD conditions. It has been demonstrated that under SD conditions, Ehd1 promotes expression of heading date 3a (Hd3a) and a related FT-like gene; O. sativa FT1 (Doi et al., 2004). Temperature is an important environmental factor, which plays a significant role in the selective expression of the genes involved in flowering pathway. In A. thaliana variation at FLOWERING LOCUS C (FLC) or FRI or a combinatorial variation involving both these genes, accounts for the major portion of the winter annual habit (Lee et al., 1993). However, very little is known about the role of the temperature-regulated genes in O. sativa flowering pathway. The most probable reason might be the absence of vernalization in this species. It has been observed in field and laboratory experimental conditions that temperature acts as an important factor, which influences the heading date of O. sativa var. indica rice varieties, viz., Zhenshan 97 (ZS97) and Minghui 63 (MH63). These species in particular displays a contrasting pattern of flowering time in accordance with the variation in temperature. However, the underlying molecular mechanism has not been yet identified (Luan et al., 2009; Kovi et al., 2011).

This motivated us to undertake the presented research to understand and elucidate the underpinning complex interactions regulating the photoperiod. Gene expression network has played a important role in the elucidation of the protein–protein interactions, metabolite profiles and earlier predicted conserved gene interactions using a large-scale gene expression analysis or analyzing gene transcript levels (Lee et al., 2009; Childs et al., 2011; Hamada et al., 2011). Several highly correlated genes have been identified using large-scale co-expression in A. thaliana and O. sativa (Ficklin et al., 2010; Mutwil et al., 2010). In our study, we analyzed the gene expression patterns to identify the relative expression patterns of the O. sativa photoperiodic and temperature influenced flowering genes at different stages of development, in order to detect the commonly expressed genes (CEGs) for crucial photoperiod flowering genes Ehd1, Hd1 and Hd3a, as well as for ambient temperature dependent genes. Our analysis indicates that temperature flowering genes have relatively higher expression pattern as observed in the transition phase and photoperiod and temperature can independently regulate the flowering pathways. In addition, we demonstrate 17 photoperiodic and 3 temperature flowering candidate genes, which might play an important role in understanding the molecular mechanisms of the photoperiodic pathway and the ambient temperature pathway in O. sativa.

For the identification of putative orthologs of photoperiod and temperature regulated genes, we first performed a systematic search of the A. thaliana flowering-time (photoperiod and temperature regulated) genes using the annotation and the previously described literature. On the basis of the obtained information, all the relevant genes were retrieved from TAIR database version 9 (http://www.arabidopsis.org/index.jsp) and subsequently used as query to find the putative orthologs in the O. sativa protein sequences downloaded from Rice Annotation Database version 6.1 (http://www.rice.plantbiology.msu.edu/) using reciprocal bi-directional best blast hit (RBH) approach encompassing BLASTX (Altschul et al., 1997) with a E-value threshold of 1e−20 and an alignment length >80 amino acids. Recently, A. thaliana has been used as a gold standard on the basis of the available well-annotated genome co-ordinates for identifying the orthologous probe sets for Affymetrix microarray datasets (Ouyang et al., 2012).

We further performed a pattern search against the CREP (Collections of Rice Expression Profiling Database, http://www.crep.ncpgr.cn), which contains the systematic hybridization patterns of RNA samples pooled from 39 tissues of two main rice varieties ZS97 and MH63 containing 190 Affymetrix microarrays to quantify the variations in the in the expression patterns of the co-expressed genes in O. sativa photoperiod and temperature orthologs (Wang et al., 2010a). We restricted our expression search pattern to the developmental stages from vegetative to the reproductive phase. In total, we analyzed the hybridization data for 23 tissues from sowing to heading stages and are displayed in Table 1
                        . Probe sets in the range of 100% identity compared to the corresponding genes were considered to be significant. In case of more than one probe set, data for only one probe for each gene was used for expression analysis. As previously described, in case of genes having the multiple probe hits, probes were selected on the basis of the higher signal value for further downstream analysis (Ouyang et al., 2012). Recently, this similar approach of probe selection on the basis of the higher signal intensity value has been used, validated and confirmed (Ouyang et al., 2012).

Normalization of the cel files of microarray experiments was performed using the quantile normalization and summarization method using the robust multi-array average method in Bioconductor Affy package based on the customized chip description library (Collections of Rice Expression Profiling Database, http://www.crep.ncpgr.cn; Wang et al., 2010b). The expression values were log-transformed, and cluster analysis was performed using a software cluster with Euclidean distances and the hierarchical cluster method of complete linkage clustering. This method has been earlier described in Wang et al. (2010a). Multi-genes chronology (MGC) information was retrieved and expression values were log-transformed, and cluster analysis was performed with Euclidean distances and the hierarchical cluster method of complete linkage clustering. We further calculated Z-scores to validate the observed expression values. Heat maps were drawn using the calculated Z-scores and the color in the heat map corresponds to the intensity of the expression. All analysis was performed using R version 2.9.0 (http://www.r-project.org/).

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

A framework of molecular interactions occurring between the O. sativa flowering genes has been shown in Fig. 1
                        . Recently the molecular regulatory network of flowering influenced by photoperiod and temperature has been reviewed (Song and Luan, 2012). In our study, we used A. thaliana photoperiodic regulated flowering genes for searching putative orthologs in O. sativa. In addition, we also used O. sativa known functional photoperiod genes (Hd3a, Ghd7 and RID1) for the putative mining of the orthologs. In total, 27 genes were included for further analysis. The entire gene loci IDs of the selected genes were searched in O. sativa multi-platform microarray query database of CREP (http://crep.ncpgr.cn/crep-cgi/query_by_tree.cgi) (Table 2
                        ). We identified a corresponding dataset of 190 Affymetrix O. sativa microarray probes (Wang et al., 2010b). We observed that the expression levels of photoperiodic regulated flowering genes showed noticeable differences at various developmental stages in both ZS97 and MH63 (Table 2; Supplementary Fig. 1). We further speculate that the important circadian clock genes OsTOC1, OsZTLa, OsFKF1, and Hd1, OsPHYB, OsPHYC, Hd3a, OsGI, OsMADS56, OsCRY1a and Ehd1, which are involved in light signaling were found to be highly expressed in flag leaf stage and at 4–5cm young panicle stage whereas OsLFY, OsMADS20, OsMADS14 and OsMADS15, which are potentially involved in flowering initiation or transition from the vegetative to the reproductive stage showed higher expression levels at young panicle 3rd, 4th, and 5th (T12, T13 and T14) stages (Kim et al., 2007). These results are in complete agreement with the argument about the earlier demonstrated molecular interactions among the photoperiod flowering genes (Tsuji et al., 2011) and clearly demonstrates that flag leaf stage (before heading, T18) and 4–5cm young panicle stage (T17) are important developmental stages. It further demonstrates that stages T12, T13 and T14 are very important in transition from vegetative to reproductive phase.

We observed that the expression of Ghd7 is completely absent in ZS97, although the expression pattern was observed in MH63 (Supplementary Fig. 1A). These results are in perfect agreement with the earlier experimentally characterized genes (Xue et al., 2008), which demonstrate the validity of the proposed network approach. Recent reports on the Hd1 regulatory relationships in the photoperiodic flowering pathway speculates that Hd1 positively regulates Ghd7 transcription under LD conditions establishing the basis of the regulation of the Hd1–Ghd7–Ehd1–RFT1 pathway (Song et al., 2012), which is inline with our observed findings in the conducted research.

Understanding the temperature regulated flowering in O. sativa has been the focus of many studies over several decades. Despite the observed efforts, no flowering gene has been reported yet in O. sativa, whose regulation is initiated or controlled by temperature. To elucidate the identification of the temperature regulated flowering genes, we used 16 temperature regulated flowering time genes from A. thaliana to find the corresponding orthologous genes in O. sativa using the criteria for orthologous search as previously described in material and methods section. We found 16 putative orthologous candidate genes, which can be potential putative genes for temperature regulated flowering time in O. sativa. We further searched the entire gene locus IDs of the 16 candidate genes (Table 3
                        ) in O. sativa multi-platform microarray query database of CREP (http://www.crep.ncpgr.cn/crep-cgi/query_by_tree.cgi). In contrast to photoperiod regulated genes, we observed that majority of the temperature responsive genes (Table 3) were found to be highly expressed at young panicle 3rd, 4th and 5th stages (T12, T13 and T14) and also in 4–5cm young panicle stage (T17) in ZS97 and MH63 (Supplementary Fig. 2). It has been previously shown that the phase transition of the O. sativa shoot, from the vegetative to the reproductive stage, is morphologically observed by the development of the first bract primordium on the shoot apical meristem (SAM) 5 days before the young panicle 3 stage (Kaneko et al., 2004). Recently, it has been shown that the expression of the Ehd1, Hd3a and RFT1 gets dramatically reduced in low temperature conditions (23°C) (Song et al., 2012), which is perfect agreement with our present finding, which hypothesize that temperature plays a major role in the transition from the vegetative to the reproductive stage in rice.

To identify the co-expressed genes with the key photoperiod flowering genes, we selected Hd1 and Ehd1, which play a major role as key regulators to elucidate the phenomenon of LD and SD flowering pathways along with Hd3a as a query against the CREP database to find co-expressed genes. We identified a cluster of 89, 44 and 78 co-expressed genes (CEG) with Hd1, Ehd1 and Hd3a in ZS 97, as shown in Venn diagram (Fig. 2
                        ). We subsequently discovered that 36 genes share homology and are co-expressed with Ehd1 and Hd1 co-expressed genes (CEG), whereas 70 genes share co-expression patterns with Ehd1 and Hd3a CEGs. In addition, a set of 25 genes was found at the juncture of co-expression with Hd1 and Hd3a CEGs (Fig. 2A). Finally, we identified 17 CEGs, whose expression pattern was common among these three photoperiod genes (Table 4
                        ). The selected genes and their Pearson correlation coefficient (r) are displayed in Table 4. Recently two studies focused on the network analysis using the rice Affymetrix data selected the genes on the basis of the Pearson correlations, which supports over demonstrated approach (Ouyang et al., 2012; Xie et al., 2013).

In order to demonstrate the significant expression patterns of these 17 genes in accordance with the three key flowering genes, expression profiles were systematically analyzed. Interestingly, we observed that among these 17 genes, the expression pattern of four genes LOC_Os01g71720, LOC_Os08g32930, LOC_Os05g34470 and LOC_Os10g28600 was positively correlated to Hd1, Ehd1 and Hd3a (Fig. 3
                        ) in both ZS97 and MH63. In particular, we observed that the uniform and highly expressed gene in the flag leaf stage before heading (T15 and T18), which indicates their potential roles in the regulation of flowering. In contrast, the expression pattern of 13 genes was negatively correlated with Hd1, Ehd1 and Hd3a. They have low expression pattern in the flag leaf stage before heading (T15 and T18), which is completely contrary to that of Hd1, Ehd1 and Hd3a, but are highly expressed at young panicle stages (T12, T13 and T14) (Fig. 3 and Table 4). In our studies, although the expression profiles have been elucidated for the potential 17 genes still the function of these genes remains unclear. Further experimental work is required to validate the function and the differences in the expression profiles of the identified genes and to exemplify what roles these genes play in the molecular signaling of the photoperiod mediated flowering pathways.

In order to demonstrate the possible role and the differences in the temperature dependent expression profiles, three important temperature genes; OsFCA, OsFRI and OsMADS31 were selected and scanned against CREP to find the co-expressed genes. Our analysis predicted a total of 33, 10 and 32 genes, which were found to be co-expressed with OsFCA, OsFRI and OsMADS31, respectively. In total, we found that six genes were having the common expression profiles with CEGs of OsMADS31 and of OsFRI, 29 genes and were found to share expression pattern with CEGs of OsMADS31 and of OsFCA. We also observed 7 genes, which were found to be co-expressed with CEGs of OsFRI and of OsFCA. Finally, three genes were commonly detected as co-expressed genes with all the three ambient temperature flowering genes (Fig. 4
                         and Table 5
                        ) in both ZS97 and MH63. We observed that the expression profiles of these three CEGs were negatively correlated with OsMADS31, OsFCA and OsFRI (Table 5). It was further observed that these three temperature related genes were highly expressed at young panicle 3, 4 and 5 stages (T12, T13 and T14), while the three CEGs were expressed at sheath of young panicle stage (T11) (Fig. 4). These results clearly support our findings that temperature plays a detrimental role at young panicle stage (T11–T14) (see Section 3.2). In our analysis, we found no common CEGs overlapping with the two groups, which is a strong support to the proposed hypothesis, that photoperiod and temperature regulate flowering pathways independently.

Among the identified probable 17 candidate genes of photoperiodic flowering, three genes LOC_Os01g47080, LOC_Os06g09630 and LOC_Os09g36860 were functionally annotated as chloroplast precursor putatively expressed genes on the basis of the homology with the previous annotated genes. Chloroplasts have been observed to be involved in light perception and interact with photoperiodic development acting as major light harvesting organs (Lepistö et al., 2009). Thus we postulate that the three genes may play a crucial role in photoperiodic control of flowering. To conclude, we identified a potential set of genes, which have a strong effect on flowering time under photoperiodic and temperature regulation of flowering in O. sativa. We also provide strong evidence that temperature affects flowering time independently irrespective of photoperiod. In our studies, we have detected three candidate genes for ambient temperature flowering genes, OsMADS31, OsFCA and OsFRI. Our studies provide a platform, which can be exploited for the experimental verification of the detected candidate genes and their role in up regulating Ehd1 pathway and can provide a better understating of the trade-off of these genes in temperature flowering pathway.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This work was supported by the National Nature Science Foundation of China (30971749 and 30830064) and National Key Program on the Development of Basic Research (2010CB125901), and Special Program on Plant Transgenic Breeding (2011ZX08009-001).

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2013.03.004.

The following is the supplementary data to this article:
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

