@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Molecular design and structural optimization of potent peptide hydroxamate inhibitors to selectively target human ADAM metallopeptidase domain 17

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           A structure-based strategy is described to discover ADAM17-selective inhibitors.


                        
                        
                           
                           The strategy combines computational modeling and experimental analysis.


                        
                        
                           
                           Two peptide hydroxamates are successfully designed to have potent activity and high selectivity.


                        
                        
                           
                           Hydrogen bond network at enzyme–inhibitor interface is responsible for inhibitor selectivity.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

ADAM17

ADAM10

Peptide hydroxamate

Selective inhibitor

Inflammatory bowel disease

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Human ADAMs (a disintegrin and metalloproteinases) have been established as an attractive therapeutic target of inflammatory disorders such as inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). The ADAM metallopeptidase domain 17 (ADAM17 or TACE) and its close relative ADAM10 are two of the most important ADAM members that share high conservation in sequence, structure and function, but exhibit subtle difference in regulation of downstream cell signaling events. Here, we described a systematic protocol that combined computational modeling and experimental assay to discover novel peptide hydroxamate derivatives as potent and selective inhibitors for ADAM17 over ADAM10. In the procedure, a virtual combinatorial library of peptide hydroxamate compounds was generated by exploiting intermolecular interactions involved in crystal and modeled structures. The library was examined in detail to identify few promising candidates with both high affinity to ADAM17 and low affinity to ADAM10, which were then tested in vitro with enzyme inhibition assay. Consequently, two peptide hydroxamates Hxm-Phe-Ser-Asn and Hxm-Phe-Arg-Gln were found to exhibit potent inhibition against ADAM17 (K
                     i
                     =92 and 47nM, respectively) and strong selectivity for ADAM17 over ADAM10 (∼7-fold and ∼5-fold, S
                     =0.86 and 0.71, respectively). The structural basis and energetic property of ADAM17 and ADAM10 interactions with the designed inhibitors were also investigated systematically. It is found that the exquisite network of nonbonded interactions involving the side chains of peptide hydroxamates is primarily responsible for inhibitor selectivity, while the coordination interactions and hydrogen bonds formed by the hydroxamate moiety and backbone of peptide hydroxamates confer high affinity to inhibitor binding.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a group of inflammatory conditions of the colon and small intestine that affects millions of people worldwide, and its peak onset is in persons 15–30 years of age (Loftus and Sandborn, 2002). The IBD comprises primarily two disorders: ulcerative colitis (UC) and Crohn’s disease (CD). CD generally involves the ileum and colon, but it can affect any region of the intestine, often discontinuously; UC involves the rectum and may affect part of the colon or the entire colon in an uninterrupted pattern (Abraham and Cho, 2009). The hallmark of IBD is chronic, uncontrolled inflammation of the intestinal mucosa, which can affect any part of the gastrointestinal tract (Hanauer, 2006). Accumulating evidences suggest that the IBD results from an inappropriate inflammatory response to intestinal microbes in a genetically susceptible host and a large number of cellular factors are involved in the pathological process, in which the tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFα) is one of the most crucial mediators of this abnormal immune response (Magro and Portela, 2010), which has now become a well established target for IBD therapy (Ardizzone and Porro, 2005). The engineered monoclonal antibody Infliximab has largely revolutionized treatment of IBD and represents the first effective biologic therapy by targeting TNFα (Travassos and Cheifetz, 2005). Although the era of TNFα antibody therapy was a remarkable progress in combating IBD, many patients do not respond to the anti-TNFα treatment (Neurath, 2014). The effect of Infliximab is of limited duration, with the response lasting 2–3 months in most patients (Su et al., 2001). In addition, direct inhibition of TNFα may cause a variety of unexpected adverse effects such as morphea (Stewart et al., 2013) and central nervous system toxicity (Sand and Thomsen, 2013).

Several new therapeutic targets for IBD have been discovered over the past decade, including PPARγ (Dubuquoy et al., 2006), Jak/Stat (Coskun et al., 2013) and metalloproteinases (Naito and Yoshikawa, 2005). The TNFα-converting enzyme, also known as ADAM (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase) metallopeptidase domain 17 (ADAM17), releases transmembrane TNFα from cell surfaces of immune system to yield the soluble form of TNFα that acts as a compartmentalized or circulating cytokine to regulate complicated immune responses by providing direct signals required for full activation of effectors and regulatory T cells (Ślebioda and Kmieć, 2014). Although a number of proteases have been shown to process proTNFα, none do so with the efficiency of ADAM17. The ADAM17 is a membrane-bound enzyme that cleaves a large number of cell surface proteins including the proTNFα (Scheller et al., 2011). A series of orally bioavailable, selective and potent ADAM17 inhibitors are currently in clinical development, although none of them has been successfully applied into patients to date (Saftig and Reiss, 2011). These inhibitors effectively block ADAM17 mediated processing of proTNFα and can reduce soluble TNFα production by lipopolysaccharide stimulated whole blood by >95% (Newton et al., 2001). Thus, selective inhibition of ADAM17 has been raised as a promising therapeutics for IBD and other inflammatory diseases (Brynskov et al., 2002; Kirkegaard et al., 2004; Moss et al., 2008).

The ADAM10 is a close relative of ADAM17; both of them share high conservation in sequence, structure and function, but exhibit subtle difference in regulation of downstream cell signaling events (Duffy et al., 2011). Here, we performed rational design and structural optimization of peptide hydroxamate inhibitors with high potency against ADAM17 and strong selectivity for ADAM17 over ADAM10. Hydroxamate derivatives have been widely used as the metal coordination-based inhibitors of Zn2+-containing metallopeptidases (Jani et al., 2005). In the procedure, the intermolecular interactions of ADAM17 and ADAM10 with peptide hydroxamate ligands were examined systematically based on crystal and modeled complex structures. The harvested knowledge were then used to derive a virtual combinatorial library of peptide hydroxamate compounds by optimizing molecular structures in order to achieve high affinity for ADAM17 and low affinity for ADAM10 simultaneously, from which few promising candidates were selected and tested in vitro with enzyme inhibition assay to substantiate the computational findings. The molecular mechanism of inhibitor selectivity between ADAM17 and ADAM10 was also investigated in detail by dissecting the structure basis and noncovalent property of inhibitor recognition by the two enzymes.

The crystal structure of ADAM17 catalytic domain complexed with its cognate inhibitor TAPI2 (
                           
                        ) has been solved at a high resolution of 1.9Å via X-ray crystallography (Fig. 1
                        A) (Mazzola et al., 2008), which was retrieved from the PDB database (PDB: 3EDZ) (Berman et al., 2000) and used as structure template to computationally construct the theoretical structure of ADAM10 catalytic domain. The primary sequences of ADAM17 (residues 223–470) and ADAM10 (residues 207–453) catalytic domains were curated from the UniProt database (Uniprot, 2010) under accession numbers P78536 and O14672 respectively, and then sequence alignment between them was carried out using ClustalW program (Thompson et al., 1994), resulting in a high conservation of the two proteins (identity=40.1%) (Fig. 1C). Based on the crystal template structure of ADAM17 as well as the sequence alignment between ADAM17 and ADAM10, homologous modeling was conducted to model the spatial structure of ADAM10 catalytic domain by using MODELLER program (Fiser and Sali, 2003). The method grafted identical regions from template to the target structure and then employed loop optimization algorithm to implement ab initio prediction of loop regions of the target. In the procedure the Zn2+ ion in ADAM17 active site was also automatically grafted to corresponding site in ADAM10. The modeled structure of ADAM10 catalytic domain was further equilibrated by molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to eliminate bad atomic overlapping and collisions involved in the artificial structure (Fig. 1B).

The complex structure of ADAM10 with TAPI2 was computationally constructed from ADAM17–TAPI2 complex crystal template using a strategy described previously (Cui et al., 2015): first, the modeled ADAM10 structure was superposed onto the crystal ADAM17–TAPI2 complex to obtain a ADAM17/TAPI2/ADAM10 system; second, the ADAM17 protein was removed manually from the system, resulting in an artificial ADAM10–TAPI2 complex; third, the artificial complex structure was minimized and equilibrated with MD simulations to eliminate bad atomic collisions.

The binding affinity of peptide hydroxamate inhibitors to ADAM10 and ADAM17 was separately evaluated at low and high levels. The low-level method is a knowledge-based statistical potential DFIRE derived from various protein–ligand complex crystal structures in the framework of classical potential of mean force (PMF) theory, which describes interaction preference for 19×19 types of atomic contacts at protein–ligand interface (Zhang et al., 2005). This method can be used to perform high-throughput affinity scoring of various ADAM10/ADAM17-inhibitor interactions based on their modeled complex structures.

The high-level method is a post molecular mechanics/generalized Born surface area (MM/GBSA) analysis (Genheden and Ryde, 2015) of enzyme–inhibitor binding free energy over hundreds of dynamic snapshots extracted from 10-ns MD simulations (Lindahl, 2015). The simulations were performed at 300K in an implicit generalized Born water environment (Tsui and Case, 2001) neutralized by counter ions of Na+ with amber ff11 force field (Duan et al., 2003), during which restricted electrostatic-potential (RESP) fitting (Cornell et al., 1993) was employed to derive partial charges for inhibitor atoms, and generalized amber force field (GAFF) (Wang et al., 2004a) and zinc amber force field (ZAFF) (Peters et al., 2010) were used to parameterize inhibitor ligand and Zn2+ ion, respectively.

The inhibitory activity of peptide hydroxamate inhibitors against ADAM enzymes was determined as described previously (Xue et al., 2001; Wang et al., 2004b). The synthetic fluorogenic peptide Mca-PLAQAV-Dpa-RSSSR-NH2 was used as a general substrate of ADAM enzymes, which was diluted to a final concentration of 10μM in an assay buffer containing 50mM Tricine, pH 7.5, 100mM NaCl, 1mM ZnCl2 and 10mM CaCl2. The enzyme reaction was performed with 2nM ADAM17 or 100nM ADAM10 plus the diluted peptide substrate in presence or absence of inhibitors. Reaction mixtures were incubated at room temperature. Fluorescence measurements were conducted to monitor the increase in fluorescence emission intensity upon substrate cleavage. The rate of emission increase is proportional to enzyme activity. Initial velocities, in the presence or absence of inhibitors, were measured as slopes of the linear portion of the product progress curves. Inhibition constants K
                        i were determined by plotting the inhibitor concentration dependence of the fractional velocity for each enzyme. The inhibitor selectivity S for ADAM17 over ADAM10 can be quantified as:
                           
                              (1)
                              
                                 
                                    S
                                    =
                                    −
                                    log
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             K
                                             i
                                          
                                          (
                                          ADAM17
                                          )
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             K
                                             i
                                          
                                          (
                                          ADAM10
                                          )
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        where S
                        >0 and S
                        <0 represent ADAM17- and ADAM10-selective inhibitors, respectively.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

The TAPI2 is a peptide hydroxamate inhibitor of metalloproteinases (ADAMs, ACE secretase and other MMPs), which can potently suppress ADAM17 enzyme activity at nanomolar level (IC50
                        =43±4nM) (Ingram et al., 2006). The high-resolution complex crystal structure (see Fig. 1A) of ADAM17 catalytic domain with TAPI2 has been solved by Mazzola et al. (2008) (PDB: 3EDZ), from which the noncovalent interactions at the complex interface can be detected using LigPlot program (Wallace et al., 1995) and visualized in Fig. 2
                        . As can be seen, the TAPI2 molecule binds at a narrow cleft on ADAM17 surface and establishes two coordination interactions between its hydroxamate moiety and the Zn2+ ion in enzyme active site. In addition, five hydrogen bonds form along TAPI2 backbone with ADAM17 residues Gly346, Leu348, Hlu406, Pro437 and Ala439, and the side chains of TAPI2 constitute a number of hydrophobic contacts and van der Waals packing against the nonpolar residues Val402, Ile438 and Ala439 of ADAM17. The C-terminus of TAPI2 consists of an amide group and an ammonium salt, which is out of enzyme active cleft and does not participate in effective nonbonded interactions with the enzyme.

The structural visualization and noncovalent analysis of ADAM17–TAPI2 complex suggest that the TAPI2 molecule can be divided into three substructures (Fig. 3
                        A): Substructure 1 is the hydroxamate moiety which can establish strong coordination interactions with ADAM17. Substructure 2 contains three amino acid residues that correspond separately to the S1′–S3′ pockets of enzyme active site; the peptide-like backbone of substructure 2 can be tightly bound in the site through five well-defined hydrogen bonds. Substructure 3 is at the C-terminus of TAPI2 and contributes modestly to inhibitor binding. In this respect, the hydroxamate moiety of substructure 1 and the peptide-like backbone of substructure 2 play a critical role in the tight binding of inhibitor ligand to ADAM17 receptor, whereas the amide group and ammonium salt of substructure 3 are not essential for the binding. In addition, the three side chains in substructure 2 can only form weak, nonspecific interactions such as hydrophobic contacts and van der Waals forces with their surrounding residues in the active-site S1′–S3′ pockets, and they may be replaced by other amino acid types to improve inhibitor affinity and selectivity. Based on above discussions, a structure sketch of peptide hydroxamate inhibitor is simplified from the TAPI2 molecule (Fig. 3B), where the substructure 1 is not changed and keeps as the hydroxamate moiety, substructure 2 is replaced by three variable residues R1–R3, and substructure 3 is substituted by a carboxyl group to make the inhibitor with a natural peptide C-terminus.

In order to determine favorable and unfavorable amino acids at the three variable residues (R1–R3) of simplified structure sketch of peptide hydroxamate inhibitor, a systematic mutation affinity profile for TAPI2 binding to ADAM17 and ADAM10 was derived. According to a previously described strategy (Cui et al., 2015), each TAPI2 residue was separately mutated to 20 types of amino acids using the SIDEpro server (Nagata et al., 2012) followed by a force field minimization to relax the mutated system. Consequently, we obtained 3×20=60 mutants, based on which the mutation affinity map of ADAM17–TAPI2 and ADAM10–TAPI2 interactions at the three mutated residues is depicted in Fig. 4
                        A, in which the affinity change is colored for systematic single-point mutation on each residue. The affinity change in a specific residue upon a given mutation was defined as the difference between the DFIRE scores (ΔDFIRE) (Zhang et al., 2005) of TAPI2 and mutant. As can be seen in Fig. 4A, most mutations appear to reduce ADAM17/ADAM10–TAPI2 affinity (ΔDFIRE >0), although this is not very significant for most cases. This is anticipated since the TAPI2 is a potent inhibitor of ADAM enzymes, which has been structurally optimized to well match the enzyme active site and thus most mutations are likely to undermine the cognate interaction between ADAM and TAPI2.

Here, considering that we attempted to design peptide hydroxamate inhibitors that can selectively target ADAM17 over ADAM10, the ADAM17-favorable and ADAM10-unfavorable amino acids at residues R–R3 were determined in terms of the systematic mutation affinity profile and listed in Fig. 4B, and their intersection (⋂) is shown in Fig. 4C. The intersection represents the amino acid types at different residues that can simultaneously promote inhibitor binding to ADAM17 and unbinding to ADAM10, thus conferring strong ADAM17-over-ADAM10 selectivity for inhibitor ligands. Consequently, 3, 4 and 7 amino acids were chosen for, respectively, R1–R3 as the building blocks to generate a virtual combinatorial library of peptide hydroxamates, which contains totally 3×4×7=84 possible candidates possessing the simplified structure sketch depicted in Fig. 3B.

The complex structures of ADAM10 and ADAM17 catalytic domains with the 84 peptide hydroxamate candidates in virtual combinatorial library were computationally modeled from the corresponding enzyme–TAPI2 complex templates using a following protocol: First, the C-terminal amide group and ammonium salt of TAPI2 in the templates were truncated and the C-terminus was then capped by a carboxyl group. Second, the side chains of three variable residues were removed manually, which can be virtually mutated to target amino acids by using SIDEpro method (Nagata et al., 2012).

Based on modeled complex structures the binding affinities of the 84 peptide hydroxamate candidates to ADAM10 and ADAM17 can be fast evaluated by using DFIRE scoring function (Zhang et al., 2005). The DFIRE method only considers organic atom types so that it cannot be used for Zn2+ ion directly. However, considering that we herein only concerned the relative binding strength of the candidates to ADAM10 and ADAM17, the contribution of Zn2+ coordination can be assumed as a constant over these candidates. Thus, the DFIRE was only applied for evaluating the nonbonded interactions such as hydrogen bonds, electrostatic forces and hydrophobic contacts between enzyme and inhibitor. In this way, relative binding strengths of the 84 candidates to ADAM10 and ADAM17 can be readily ranked using the DFIRE method based on their complex structures, and selectivity distribution of these candidates is plotted in Fig. 5
                        A in terms of the difference between the DFIRE-predicted binding affinities of peptide hydroxamates to ADAM10 and ADAM17, where the difference [DFIRE(ADAM10)–DFIRE(ADAM17)] >0 and <0 represent ADAM17- and ADAM10-selective inhibitors, respectively. It is seen that the selectivity distribution ranges from –4 to 4, but most candidates locate in the region >0, suggesting that the built virtual combinatorial library is expected to have high potential for the putative selectivity. Here, 27 peptide hydroxamate compounds with selectivity scores>2 were selected and their binding affinities towards both ADAM10 and ADAM17 were recalculated rigorously via MM/GBSA approach. The MM/GBSA-based selectivity distribution of the 27 samples is replotted in Fig. 5B, in which seven peptide hydroxamates with selectivity scores >3 were suggested as highly promising candidates for the selective inhibition of ADAM17 over ADAM10. We synthesized the seven peptide hydroxamate compounds and tested their inhibitory activities against the recombinant proteins of human ADAM10 and ADAM17 catalytic domains using enzyme inhibition assay, and the resulting inhibition constants K
                        i and selectivity S are tabulated in Table 1
                        . As expected, most peptide hydroxamates possess high or moderate inhibitory potency against ADAM17 with K
                        i ranging between 47 and 725nM, while they can only moderately or modestly inhibit ADAM10 with K
                        i
                        >200nM. Six out of the seven tested compounds can selectively inhibit ADAM17 (S
                        >0), although the selectively seems not very significant for some of them. In particular, the designed peptide hydroxamates Hxm-Phe-Ser-Asn and Hxm-Phe-Arg-Gln exhibited>5-fold higher inhibitory potency against ADAM17 than ADAM10 (S
                        =0.86 and 0.71, respectively); these two compounds could be used as lead entities to develop potent, selective ADAM17 inhibitors.

The complex structures of ADAM17 and ADAM10 catalytic domains with the selective peptide hydroxamate inhibitor Hxm-Phe-Ser-Asn designed in this study was modeled, based on which the noncovalent interactions at the two complex interfaces were identified using LigPlot program (Wallace et al., 1995) and shown in Fig. 6
                        . As seen, the binding modes of the inhibitor to ADAM17 and ADAM10 are very similar; both locate at the S1′–S3′ pockets of enzyme active site and establish two coordination interactions with the electrophilic Zn2+ ion. In addition, the inhibitor backbone can form five hydrogen bonds with enzyme residues in both the two systems; the five hydrogen bonds can also be found in the complex systems of ADAM17 and ADAM10 with their cognate inhibitor TAPI2. Thus, the two coordination interactions and five hydrogen bonds are considered as the basic nonbonded elements to stabilize ADAM–inhibitor architecture, but may not provide specific differentiation between the two ADAM proteins; the selective inhibition of ADAM17 over ADAM10 by Hxm-Phe-Ser-Asn should be determined by the side chains of three residues R1–R3 of the inhibitor (Fig. 6):

The first residue is an aromatic, bulky phenylalanine (Phe), which occupies in a hydrophobic pocket defined by a number of nonpolar amino acids such as Leu348, Leu401, Val402, Ala439 and Val440 of ADAM17 and tightly packs against the enzyme S1′ pocket, forming intensive hydrophobic interactions and van der Waals contacts at the packing interface. In ADAM10 system, the hydrophobic pocket is much bigger and thus the residue packing is relatively loose; only few weak nonpolar forces are observed between the residue and Leu328, Ile379 and Ala421 of ADAM10.

The second residue serine (Ser) is a small, polar amino acid that cannot form effective interactions with ADAM17 and ADAM10. In fact, the side chain of this residue points out of enzyme active site and can only constitute modest chemical forces with both the two proteins. Therefore, this residue is thought not to confer selectivity to the inhibitor, and the amino acid Ser chosen for this residue could be attributed to a compromise between the high and low binding affinities of the inhibitor to ADAM17 and ADAM10, respectively.

The third residue of the inhibitor is an asparagine (Asn), which possesses a polar amide group in its side chain that is observed to form two strong hydrogen bonds with the Asn389 and Tyr390 of ADAM17. In contrast, the residue does not participate in specific interactions with ADAM10 (Zhou et al., 2012), which can only weakly contact with its context in enzyme active site. The significant difference in hydrogen-bonding capability at the third residue with ADAM17 and ADAM10 can well explain the high inhibitor selectivity between the two enzymes.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENT@&#

The authors thank Dr. Kuifeng Wang from Taizhou Hospital of Zhejiang Province for his kind help on compounds designing and computer modeling. This work was supported by the Foundation of Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

