@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Identification of potential drug targets by subtractive genome analysis of Bacillus anthracis A0248: An in silico approach

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We identified potential drug target for Bacillus anthracis A0248 strain.


                        
                        
                           
                           We selected non-human homolog essential proteins involved in metabolic pathways.


                        
                        
                           
                           PSORTb, ngLOC, and CELLO are used to predict membrane-bound proteins.


                        
                        
                           
                           17 proteins in unique pathways and 28 membrane-bound proteins are identified.


                        
                        
                           
                           These findings from this current study will pave the way for further extensive in wet lab experiments and in that way assisting to drug design against anthrax.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#




                     Bacillus anthracis




                  

Anthrax

Biological weapon

Computational approach

Therapeutic drug

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Background
                  
                     Bacillus anthracis is a gram positive, spore forming, rod shaped bacteria which is the etiologic agent of anthrax – cutaneous, pulmonary and gastrointestinal. A recent outbreak of anthrax in a tropical region uncovered natural and in vitro resistance against penicillin, ciprofloxacin, quinolone due to over exposure of the pathogen to these antibiotics. This fact combined with the ongoing threat of using B. anthracis as a biological weapon proves that the identification of new therapeutic targets is urgently needed.
               
               
                  Methods
                  In this computational approach various databases and online based servers were used to detect essential proteins of B. anthracis A0248. Protein sequences of B. anthracis A0248 strain were retrieved from the NCBI database which was then run in CD-hit suite for clustering. NCBI BlastP against the human proteome and similarity search against DEG were done to find out essential human non-homologous proteins. Proteins involved in unique pathways were analyzed using KEGG genome database and PSORTb, CELLO v.2.5, ngLOC – these three tools were used to deduce putative cell surface proteins.
               
               
                  Results
                  Successive analysis revealed 116 proteins to be essential human non-homologs among which 17 were involved in unique metabolic pathways and 28 were predicted as membrane associated proteins. Both types of proteins can be exploited as they are unlikely to have homologous counterparts in the human host.
               
               
                  Conclusion
                  Being human non-homologous, these proteins can be targeted for potential therapeutic drug development in future. Targets on unique metabolic and membrane-bound proteins can block cell wall synthesis, bacterial replication and signal transduction respectively.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


                     Bacillus anthracis, the causative agent of anthrax in both human and animal is a gram positive, spore forming, aerobic, non-motile bacterium. B. anthracis is the most renowned and obligate pathogen of the bacillus genus (Spencer, 2003). Unlike most other bacillus species, entry of B. anthracis spores into mammals through respiratory, gastrointestinal or cutaneous routes can result in systemic infection and lethal disease (Koehler, 2009). Systemic infection resulting from the inhalation of the organism has a mortality rate approaching 100 percent and death usually occurs within a few days after the onset of symptoms (Terry et al., 1999). Consumption of contaminated meat which is usually cooked insufficiently causes gastrointestinal anthrax. More than 95% of incidents are cutaneous anthrax that affects 20,000–100,000 human annually. Regular infection outbreaks on the wild animal caused by anthrax spores have been reported after decades of animal interment (Siddiqui et al., 2012; Chakraborty et al., 2012).

Recently an outbreak episode of anthrax created much havoc and dreadful clinical outcome from April to August, 2011 in Bangladesh. But this incident has its history back in 1980–1984 with a broader manifestation on human and cattle in 2009–2010. This outbreak hit 12 districts and affected 607 people which led Bangladesh government to declare a red alert (Siddiqui et al., 2012). Far from this tropical region, anthrax outbreak also occurred in the western territory. In Canada, anthrax outbreak had been occurred since 1962 in domestic cattle (Dragon et al., 1999). B. anthracis had also been weaponized in World War I and in World War II and threats are marked presently for possible use of B. anthracis in Bioterrorism. Anthrax mail attack in USA in 2001 is an alarming example of bioterrorism that disclosed the drastic utilization of the pathogen (Spencer, 2003; Ahn et al., 2014).

Presently advocated drugs for post-exposure of cutaneous and inhalation anthrax are ciprofloxacin, doxycycline, penicillin G and amoxicillin (Chen et al., 2004; Athamna et al., 2004). Ciprofloxacin carries out its function by inhibiting DNA replication enzymes, DNA gyrase and topoisomerase IV which induce negative supercoils to relieve the strain of positive supercoils and decatenation of DNA (Choe et al., 2000; Drlica et al., 1997). Doxycycline being in tetracycline antibiotic class is a broad-spectrum antibiotic that binds with 30s ribosomal subunit at A site in the translational complex and thus inhibits the binding of aminoacyl-tRNA at the A site. So protein synthesis is stopped due to the failure of incorporation of amino acids (Chopra et al., 2001). On the other hand penicillin binds to DD-transpeptidase enzyme (also called penicillin binding protein-PBP) through β-lactam ring that inhibits the cross-linking between bacterial peptidoglycan chain causing disruption of the cell wall and cell death (Georgopapadakou and Liu, 1980; Waxman, 1980; Tipper and Strominger, 1965). But extensive repeated exposure of bacteria to these drugs caused the evolution of resistant strains. Naturally B. anthracis exhibits resistance to penicillin. Moreover in vitro resistance to ciprofloxacin, doxycycline, quinolone, and fluoroquinolone and other β-lactam antibiotics has been reported (Chen et al., 2004; Athamna et al., 2004; Choe et al., 2000).

All these major incidences have provoked a necessity for developing potential drugs against this dreadful pathogen. Identification of novel therapeutic targets ultimately leads to novel drug designing. There are various strategies for potential drug designing, among them comparative genomic can be considered worthy as newer genes, genomes and protein databases are available online.

In this proposed work, subtractive genome analysis has been used where subtraction of similar gene set is done after comparing human and pathogen genome. With the help of entire genome of B. anthracis, a minimum set of genes required for the survival of the organism is identified as essential genes (Zhang and Lin, 2009). In the consecutive work computational approach through subtractive genomics using necessary databases has been adopted to find out unique proteins in the metabolic pathways and proteins associated with the membrane. Membrane bound proteins are selected because 60% of the therapeutic drugs are targeted to membrane proteins (Hossain et al., 2013; Arinaminpathy et al., 2009). This approach is successfully used in many other bacteria such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Sakharkar et al., 2004), Helicobacter pylori (Dutta et al., 2006), Burkholderia pseudomalleii (Chong et al., 2006) etc. Therefore in the current study, we have simultaneously approached a goal to identify the potential drug targets in two ways – screening through the essential non-human homolog proteins in unique pathways and proteins characterized as membrane-bound, which can be valid target for drug designing by further research.

@&#METHODOLOGY@&#

Selection and characterization of potential drug targets for B. anthracis A0248 were done by a certain stepwise manner which is summarized in Fig. 1
                      and sequentially mentioned below.

The complete protein sequences or proteome of B. anthracis strain A0248 were retrieved from the NCBI (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) protein database. NCBI provides databases of various formats with different perspectives. Among them FASTA format of the protein was chosen for subsequent analysis.

Proteins of B. anthracis retrieved from NCBI database were subjected to CD-hit suite using sequence identity cut off value at 60% (Huang et al., 2010). Proteins being more than 60% identical were considered to be duplicates or paralogs. The duplicates were excluded and from the remaining set of non-paralog proteins, those were selected for further screening having more than 100 amino acids. This was based on the assumption that proteins less than 100 amino acids in length were most unlikely to represent essential proteins (Kumar et al., 2010; Haag et al., 2012).

The non paralog proteins were then subjected to NCBI BlastP against Homo sapiens using threshold expectation value 10−4 to identify the human non-homologous proteins of B. anthracis (Hossain et al., 2013; Haag et al., 2012; Kerfeld and Scott, 2011). At first, the human homologs were excluded and then the rest of the non-homologs were unified.

The selected human non-homologous proteins were then subjected to similarity search against the Database of Essential Genes. A maximum threshold expectation value 10−100 and a minimum bit-score cut-off of 100 were used as parameters to analyze the proteins for identifying essential human non-homologs (Kumar et al., 2010; Luo et al., 2013; Punta et al., 2007).

The human non-homologous essential proteins of B. anthracis obtained through DEG were then subjected to metabolic pathway analysis that was done by KAAS server at KEGG for the identification of potential targets (Moriya et al., 2007). KAAS (KEGG Automatic Annotation Server) provides functional annotation of genes through BLAST comparisons against the manually curated KEGG GENES database. The result contains KO (KEGG Orthology) assignments that specify the metabolic proteins. It also automatically generates KEGG pathways which indicate those metabolic proteins.

The unique metabolic pathways of B. anthracis against Homo sapiens were identified using KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) Genome Database (Kanehisa et al., 2014; Kanehisa and Got, 2000). The three letter codes specific for each of the two organisms (host and pathogen) were placed in the Genome Comparison and Combination box for comparing the metabolic pathways. Ultimately the KEGG Genome generated pathway maps, among which the pathways involved only in B. anthracis, were identified as unique pathways. Previously selected human non-homologous metabolic proteins were screened to reveal their involvement in those unique pathways.

In addition to identification of proteins involved in unique pathways, we also detected putative membrane associated proteins. Proteins associated with the cytoplasmic membrane of the pathogen can be potential target for drugs. Sub-cellular localization of essential human non-homologous proteins was done by using PSORTb (Yu et al., 2010), CELLO v.2.5 (Yu et al., 2006) and ngLOC (King et al., 2012) simultaneously. These three tools were used with the perspective to maintain the better accuracy in the result. If any two of the three tools were unanimous to predict a specific protein as membrane-associated, then the prediction was adopted. But if the three tools disagreed with each other on a specific protein, then the protein was not considered to be membrane-associated.

Functional family prediction of one hypothetical protein previously identified as surface protein was done by Pfam server (Punta et al., 2012).

In this study we investigated the potential target for therapeutic drug through subtractive genome analysis. The basic of in-silico subtractive genome analysis is that the essential proteins of a pathogen should be sorted as unique which cannot be found in the host for precise drug usage. The essential genes are the minimum set of genes which are required for the survival of an organism under the reasonable condition (Zhang and Lin, 2009). The results of the successive analytical steps are presented in Table 1
                      and the procedure is summarized in Fig. 1.

In the current investigation a set of total 11,000 proteins was retrieved which were further analyzed through subtractive genome approach. Firstly, these proteins were run in CD-hit tool using 60% identity as threshold value which resulted in 5112 non-paralog proteins. Among these, 4225 proteins were sorted out having more than 100 amino acids in length. Because the probability of involvement of proteins having more than 100 amino acids in essential metabolic pathways is greater than the proteins containing less than 100 amino acids (Kumar et al., 2010).

Now human non-homologous proteins were identified by performing NCBI BlastP using 10−4 as threshold value. Screening through BlastP, we found considerable similarities (E-value less than 10−4) between pathogen (B. anthracis) and host (Human) proteins which were identified as homologous and then excluded. Hits having expectation value greater than 10−4 were selected to ensure the human non-homologous proteins. We found 3368 human non-homologous proteins (Hossain et al., 2013; Haag et al., 2012; Fariselli et al., 2007; Anishetty et al., 2005). Homologous proteins between bacteria and human emerged in course of evolution and they are involved in various common cellular systems between host and pathogen (Hediger et al., 1989; Swango et al., 2000; Chen et al., 1986; Johnson et al., 1989). Proteins without significant similarity with human were considered as human non-homologous (Hossain et al., 2013; Yadav et al., 2012).

Screening through DEG revealed 116 human non-homologous proteins as essential proteins. This strategy further utilized blast analysis against bacterial genome and excluded distant human homologs if any were present by chance (Fariselli et al., 2007; Anishetty et al., 2005). However, out of these 116 human non-homologous essential proteins, 108 were finalized through KAAS server at KEGG to be involved in metabolic pathways. KAAS uses Blast analysis on the prokaryotic proteome for the selection of metabolic proteins out of 116 human non-homologous essential query proteins (Hossain et al., 2013; Kumar et al., 2010; Rathi et al., 2009). Drug targeting on these essential proteins can block one or more of these metabolic pathways which can exert a vital effect on bacterial pathogenesis and its vulnerability.

17 unique metabolic pathways of B. anthracis were identified by comparing with H. sapiens through KEGG Genome (Table 2
                     ) and among those pathways 17 human non-homologous metabolic proteins were involved (Table 3
                     ).

The sub-cellular localization of human non-homologous essential proteins predicted 28 proteins as membrane associated. This prediction was done by PSORTb, CELLO v.2.5 and ngLOC concurrently with a view to comparing the results with better accuracy. The results differed from each other in a few cases. For example, four proteins were not predicted as membrane associated by CELLO but other two tools predicted them as membrane associated and another four proteins were not predicted as membrane associated by ngLOC but other two tools predicted them as membrane associated. These eight proteins were considered as membrane-associated as they were predicted by maximum two tools. This strategy remarkably increased the probability of a protein being membrane associated than using only one tool. The remaining 20 proteins were unanimously predicted as membrane-associated by the three tools. If all three predictors disagreed with each other on a specific query protein then this was not considered to be membrane-associated.

Out of these 28 membrane-bound proteins, only 1 protein was hypothetical which was characterized as short chain fatty acid transporter by using Pfam server (Table 4
                     ).

This appendage covers the interpretation of the proteins from the unique pathways for auspicious drug targets. We found eleven essential human non-homologous proteins involved in peptidoglycan biosynthesis, three in phosphotransferase system, two in oxidative phosphorylation and one in d-alanine metabolism.

Naturally occurring penicillin resistant B. anthracis strains have been reported having upto 16% resistance. In vitro resistance was also found to other beta-lactum antibiotics like cephalosporin and cefuroxime (Doganay and Aydin, 1991; Frean et al., 2003). This is due to the functional β-lactamases encoded by bla genes that hydrolyze carbon-nitrogen bonds in cyclic amides. Conventional targets on penicillin binding proteins (PBPs) to disrupt the peptidoglycan layer in the last step of peptidoglycan biosynthesis should be altered to alleviate the penicillin-resistance in B. anthracis (Hossain et al., 2013).

MurA catalyzing the formation of UDP-N-acetylglucosamineenolpyruvate at the first step of peptidoglycan biosynthesis is an effective target for fosfomycin. But one disadvantage of targeting murA is the presence of two different murA1 and murA2 genes having less than 60% similarity and encoding the enzymes with different active sites that can again substitute each other. So development of a potential drug against murA is not so convenient (Hossain et al., 2013; Kedar et al., 2008; Du et al., 2000). Similar is the scenario in case of murB catalyzing the synthesis of UDP-N-acetylmuramic acid. MurB has an alternate form murB2 that can foil drug action.

But murC and murD of mur ligase family catalyzing the formation of UDP-N-acetylmuramoyl-l-alanine (3rd step) and UDP-N-acetylmuramoyl-l-alanyl-d-glutamate (4th step) have single copy of each gene. UDP-MuNAc-l-Ala-d-Glu is an important precursor for peptidoglycan biosynthesis that can serve as a propitious target point (Kanehisa et al., 2014; Nathenson et al., 1964; Gordon et al., 2001).

Another suitable pathway is PEP: carbohydrate phosphotransferase system uniquely found in bacteria. Simultaneous transportation and phosphorylation of carbohydrates by phosphoryl group from PEP are catalyzed by two enzymes – enzyme I (phosphoenol pyruvate-protein phosphotransferase) and enzyme II (specific for different carbohydrates like fructose specific IIABC component and glucose specific IIABC component) (Deutscher et al., 2006). PEP phosphotransferase, glucose and fructose specific IIABC components can be blocked to inhibit phosphorylation cascade and AtxA transcription factor activation which is responsible for virulence in B. anthracis (Stülke, 2007; Deckers-Hebestreit and Altendorf, 1996).

In our study we found 28 membrane bound proteins that contribute in communication between the internal and external environment of bacterial cell. The membrane associated proteins interact with extracellular signaling molecule and thus play a major role in signal transduction. The advantage of targeting membrane proteins is that it is easier to study their function by computer based method than wet-lab process. They have generally a uniform structure and a tendency to form secondary structure which can also be predicted by computational method. For example ab initio modeling methods can be used even when there is no experimental information or high resolution 3D structure available (Punta et al., 2007 
                        Vaidehi et al., 2009). Moreover, combining experimental procedures with structural genomic studies, it has been possible to determine the crystal structures of more than 180 membrane proteins (Deutscher et al., 2006). As a result structure based drug design would be possible in future (Hossain et al., 2013; Sousa et al., 2006; Morya et al., 2010).

One major target can be glucose or fructose specific IIABC component of PTS system. Their hydrophilic A, B domains are exposed at outer membrane and hydrophobic C domain is integrated in plasma membrane which can be targeted to block uptake and phosphorylation of carbohydrates (Frean et al., 2003). Another potential target can be F0F1 ATP synthase subunit beta. ATP synthase produces ATP from ADP in the presence of a proton gradient across the membrane. The β regulatory subunit resides in peripheral F1 complex of ATP synthase. If beta subunit is made inactive then ATP synthesis and hydrolysis will be inhibited leading to bacterial instability (Deckers-Hebestreit and Altendorf, 1996).

This subtractive genome analysis method has been effectively applied in various organisms such as Mycoplasma pneumoniae M129 (Kumar et al., 2010), Staphylococcus aureus N315 (Hossain et al., 2013), Mycobacterium tuberculosis F11 (Hosen et al., 2014), Neisseria meningitides serogroup B for drug target identification (Narayan et al., 2009). The proteins identified in our work will equally lead to constructive approach for effective therapeutic drug designing for future researchers.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

In our whole study, we have investigated through two equidistant ways to identify potential targets for drugs. We have found 17 unique pathways and 17 proteins in unique pathways and 28 membrane-bound proteins. Unique pathways are ideal for drug targeting as they are not found in host (H. sapiens) and obtained through subtractive genome analysis. Membrane associated proteins can be targeted to oppose signal transduction. Structural modeling through virtual simulation can manifest the domains of membrane proteins whether it is extracellular, trans-membrane or intracellular for drug targeting. Being verified by laboratory experimental analysis, our identified human non-homologous unique metabolic proteins and membrane bound proteins would make it easier for future researchers to develop effective drug against anthrax. Hence these findings will be significantly helpful because there are reports on increasing threat of resistance of B. anthracis and its utilization as biological weapon now-a-days.

Author(s) discloses no potential conflict of interests.

There is no funding source.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

