@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#The functional landscape bound to the transcription factors of Escherichia coli K-12

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           DNA-binding transcription factors were searched in the complete genome of Escherichia coli K-12 by sequence comparisons.


                        
                        
                           
                           TFs deposited in RegulonDB were used as seeds to identify hypothetical TFs.


                        
                        
                           
                           Duplication events increase the size of the regulatory network in this bacterium.


                        
                        
                           
                           Potential target genes were predicted to uncharacterized TFs.


                        
                        
                           
                           Probable regulatory interactions were identified between well-known and uncharacterized TFs.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

K-12

Transcription factors

Bacteria

Evolution

Genomics

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Motivated by the experimental evidences accumulated in the last ten years and based on information deposited in RegulonDB, literature look up, and sequence analysis, we analyze the repertoire of 304 DNA-binding Transcription factors (TFs) in Escherichia coli K-12. These regulators were grouped in 78 evolutionary families and are regulating almost half of the total genes in this bacterium. In structural terms, 60% of TFs are composed by two-domains, 30% are monodomain, and 10% three- and four-structural domains. As previously noticed, the most abundant DNA-binding domain corresponds to the winged helix-turn-helix, with few alternative DNA-binding structures, resembling the hypothesis of successful protein structures with the emergence of new ones at low scales. In summary, we identified and described the characteristics associated to the DNA-binding TF in E. coli K-12. We also identified twelve functional modules based on a co-regulated gene matrix. Finally, diverse regulons were predicted based on direct associations between the TFs and potential regulated genes. This analysis should increase our knowledge about the gene regulation in the bacterium E. coli K-12, and provide more additional clues for comprehensive modelling of transcriptional regulatory networks in other bacteria.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


                     Escherichia coli K-12 substr. MG1655 represents one of the most important model organisms in biology. Its chromosome is composed of a 4.6 MB circular, negatively supercoiled DNA molecule that contains 4319 genes. An important element associated with gene expression in this bacterium corresponds to DNA-binding Transcription Factors (TFs). These proteins provide E. coli the ability to contend against environmental changes, by blocking (negative regulation) or allowing (positive regulation) the access of the RNA polymerase (RNAP) to the promoters, depending on the operator context and ligand-binding status (Martinez-Antonio et al., 2006; Miroslavova and Busby, 2006; Wall et al., 2004). Previous analyses identified around 300 TFs that could regulate gene expression in this bacterium (Perez-Rueda and Collado-Vides, 2000; Madan Babu and Teichmann, 2003). Recently, around 180 well experimentally characterized TFs have been deposited in RegulonDB, a specialized database devoted to gene regulation in E. coli K-12 (Gama-Castro et al., 2008, 2011). Therefore, diverse questions associated to the repertoire of TFs arise, such as: how many new TFs can be identified by computational methods, ten years after the first attempt at describing the complete set of TFs in this bacterium? How many genes are regulated by these TFs? And how many genes could be associated with alternative regulatory mechanisms?

In order to identify new regulatory proteins in E. coli K-12 and to elucidate the diverse regulatory functions associated to hypothetical TFs, structural and functional analyses were performed in this organism. We found a total of 304 TFs that could be regulating, around 50% of the total genes in this bacterium. We identified eight functional modules and new putative regulons; and finally, we describe a global perspective of the functional and evolutionary role of these TFs.

@&#MATERIAL AND METHODS@&#

184 TFs experimentally characterized and deposited in RegulonDB (Gama-Castro et al., 2011) were used as seeds in BLASTP searches against the complete proteome of E. coli. E-values≤1e-6 and a coverage of 70% were considered. In addition, TFs specifically associated to E. coli K-12 and deposited in DBD database, HAMAP (Lima et al., 2009), Superfamily DB (Wilson et al., 2009) and PFAM (Punta et al., 2011) databases were retrieved.

Superfamily and family assignations were based on SUPERFAMILY annotations (Wilson et al., 2009), PFAM (Punta et al., 2011) and Conserved Domain Database (CDD) (Wilson et al., 2009; Punta et al., 2011; Gough and Chothia, 2002; Marchler-Bauer et al., 2007).

42 groups of paralogs defined by BLASTP (Altschul et al., 1990) comparisons with E-values≤1e-6, and a coverage of at least 50% of any of the proteins in the alignment, were identified in the total set of TFs. See Supplementary Table S4.

Regulated genes were classified according to their functional class based on COGs, Uniprot and genome annotations.

Functional interactions among E. coli TFs and other genes were predicted considering the Nebulon system (Janga et al., 2005). In brief, Nebulon considers and integrates four Genomic Context methods: (a) functional linkages among genes which fuse to form a single open reading frame in at least one other genome, i.e., gene fusion; (b) mutual information, measuring the coordinated presence or absence of pairs of genes across a set of nonredundant genomes, i.e., phylogenetic profiles; and the natural chromosomal association of bacterial genes in operons as detected by two alternative methods, namely (c) the tendency of genes forming operons to show small intergenic distances (Moreno-Hagelsieb and Collado-Vides, 2002; Salgado et al., 2000), and (d) conservation of gene order, in which a confidence value for each pair of adjacent genes in the same strand was used as indicator that those genes likely form an operon, as compared with the conservation of adjacent genes in opposite strands (Ermolaeva et al., 2001; Janga and Moreno-Hagelsieb, 2004).

In order to identify clusters of TFs functionally related, we constructed a corregulation matrix based on experimental data deposited in RegulonDB and from interactions obtained from Nebulon. In brief, the interactions profile of the ith position is represented by vector xi, consisting of the total of genes regulated by one transcriptional regulator or the total of interacted genes identified by Nebulon. In a second step, this interaction matrix was converted into a symmetric matrix, where Pearson correlation coefficients (r
                     st) were estimated for all pairs of vectors x
                     s and xt
                      (s
                     =1, 2, ..., M; t
                     =1, 2, ..., M). In a posterior step, two TFs were assigned into a candidate group if they were clustered together using a hierarchical clustering analysis, with an average linkage method, optimizing the leaf order, and Kendall's tau metric. The analysis was performed using the program Mev (http://www.tm4.org/mev). A cluster was considered as significant if they have a distance threshold value of 0.7. This criterion allowed us the identification of twelve clusters. Finally, all members of group were compared and analyzed in terms of their target genes.

Nebulon was considered to identify potential regulons. In brief, this method integrates diverse approaches previously described and their thresholds can be adjusted to improve the confidence of the prediction. Therefore, we considered a threshold of 0.85 of confidence value between TFs and other genes, which might be target genes. Because we are interested in the identification of potential regulons, the Markov Cluster Algorithm (MCL) program was used to discriminate between direct and indirect interactions, using an inflation value of 1.8. i.e., those genes directly linked to the TFs from those associated by another gene, like a cascade of regulation. Finally, only direct interactions were considered in this work.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Transcription factors (TFs) were defined as DNA-binding proteins needed to activate or repress the transcription of a gene, but are themselves neither part of the RNAP core nor of the Holoenzyme (Zhou and Yang, 2006). Therefore, sigma factors were not considered as TFs in this study.

Based on the information deposited in RegulonDB, literature look up and sequence analysis, 184 TFs experimentally characterized and 120 TFs predicted, were collected. (Table S1). The 184 experimentally characterized TFs regulate a total of 1579 genes, which correspond to 36% of the total genes in E. coli K-12. This number of TFs does not contrast significantly with the original set of 159 TFs regulating 933 genes, described more than ten years ago (Perez-Rueda and Collado-Vides, 2000). Indeed, in the last decade only 25 new TFs have been characterized, such as NikR (GI:16131353) (Chivers and Sauer, 2000), YdeO (GI:16129458) (Ma et al., 2004) and YqhC (GI:90111526) (Lee et al., 2010). Thus, although there are more genes with regulatory mechanism described (1579 against 933 from the first version), there are no dramatic changes in the number of new TFs and target genes.

Another interesting observation associated with the experimentally characterized TFs is the increasing of TFs that can activate and/or repress gene expression, 39% of them against 22% in the first version, and a slight decreasing in the proportion of activators (28% versus 35%) and repressor proteins (33% versus 43%). This finding suggests that with more experimental evidences the number of dual regulators has increased as a consequence of new DNA-binding sites and activities associated to them. In this regard, we found evidences of autoregulation for 112 out 184 TFs; from these, 4% are positively and negatively auto-regulated, 26% are only auto-activated and 70% are exclusively negatively auto-regulated (Fig. 1
                        ). From these results, two main results are evident, (a) that almost 81% of the total of genes regulated in E. coli K-12 are regulated by TFs with autoregulation mechanism, and (b) that negative autoregulation is the most predominant regulatory mechanism associated to TFs (McAdams and Arkin, 1997). In addition, we found a large proportion of TFs regulating other TFs, such as CRP that regulates the transcription of 52 regulators, reinforcing their role as global regulator. It is important to mention that the proportion of self-regulating TFs has not dramatically changed from previous reported data. These data indicate that autoregulation is a conserved property to exclude cross-transcriptional regulation and to preserve bacteria from over-expression of regulatory genes and their associated possibility of toxic effects, as suggested by Thieffry et al. (1998).

Finally, it has been estimated that around 400 proteins is the optimum number of TFs in the E. coli genome (Thieffry et al., 1998). However, our current set of 304 TFs suggest that we have identified similar proportions of TFs as previous works (Perez-Rueda and Collado-Vides, 2000; Madan Babu and Teichmann, 2003), and that we are close to the total number of TFs in this bacterium. Therefore, the existence of alternative regulatory mechanisms already described in this organism, such as riboswitches, DNA-curvature or attenuation could influence gene expression where there is not evidence of regulation mediated by TFs.

In general, the DNA-binding domains associated with TFs are ancient in evolution, and they have been proposed as derived from a relatively small set of folds (Aravind and Koonin, 1999). These domains have been used to classify TFs into families (Perez-Rueda et al., 2004). In this regard, the complete collection of TFs can be classified in 78 different evolutionary families based on PFAM, CDD, and Superfamily annotations (Wilson et al., 2009; Punta et al., 2011; Gough and Chothia, 2002; Marchler-Bauer et al., 2007). These families do not only vary on their number of members but also in the functions they are regulating. For instance, the most populated family of TFs identified in E. coli K-12 corresponds to LysR, a family where a large number of local regulators associated to amino acid biosynthesis have been described. This family contributes with 46 proteins (15%) of the total number of TFs. However, almost 50% of them do not have any experimental evidence. Recently, it has been proposed that this successful family is a consequence of large duplication events and lateral gene transfer (Maddocks and Oyston, 2008). A similar abundance of this family has been reported in other bacterial genomes, where the family contributes with around 24% of the TFs identified so far (Perez-Rueda et al., 2009). Two additional large families were also identified in E. coli K-12, AraC/XylS (26 proteins) and GntR (20 proteins). These families have been associated with a large diversity of regulated functions, such as carbon source assimilation, stress responses and nitrogen assimilation, among others (Ibarra et al., 2008). Additional large families (more than 10 members per family) include, LuxR, OmpR, LacI, EBP, TetR, DeoR and HTH_3. In contrast, the rest of the repertoire is integrated by small families with less than nine members each one, representing almost 40% of the collection, in which a large proportion of families exhibit only one member each, such as BirA, ArgR, and LexA families (Table S1). Interestingly, only two global regulators, Fis, and ArcA from the EBP and OmpR families respectively, are included in large families, whereas the other four global regulators were identified in small families (less than three family members each).

In addition, we asked whether the families identified here are regulating genes involved in related metabolic functions. Based on the functional categories defined by the Cluster of Orthologous Genes (COGs) to all genes in E. coli, we calculated the percentage of members for each family devoted to the regulation for one particular function. (Fig. S1). From this analysis, we found that regulators from the LysR family are regulating two main functional categories, those involved to inorganic transport and metabolism and amino acid transport, as it was previously suggested (Perez-Rueda and Collado-Vides, 2001). In addition, the MarR family contains proteins regulating carbohydrate transport and metabolism related-genes, whereas the LuxR, AraC, GntR, Ebp, OmpR families are mainly associated with the regulation of energy production and conversion processes related genes; whereas the IclR, LacI, DeoR, and MarR families regulate carbohydrate transport and metabolism; and finally the TetR family is associated with genes classified in “transcription category”. Taking all, this functional distribution suggest that TF families are regulating similar processes in the genome of E. coli, reinforcing the notion that protein families have similar evolutionary histories and are functionally consistent.

In order to evaluate the diversity of structural domains associated with the collection of TFs, the complete set of proteins was analyzed in terms of their domain organization based on the Superfamily and PFAM databases assignations. From this analysis we found that 80 out of 304 (26%) TFs were identified as monodomain proteins according to their Superfamily and PFAM assignations, where the DBD covers almost the whole length sequence, as occurs in the Tryptophan repressor, members of the Cold-shock family, H-NS, IHF and Fur families. In these TFs, the DBD includes a specific motif for ligand recognition such as occurs in members of the Fur and TrpR families, and/or the regulatory proteins do not require a ligand binding compound to bind DNA, as occurs in members of the H-NS and IHF families. 169 TFs that represent 55% of TFs are two domains proteins. These proteins exhibit a DBD and a Partner domain where the ligand binding and protein–protein interaction sites are located. 29 TFs (9.5%) exhibit three structural domains, where members of two families were included, EBP and AraC/XylS. Eight TFs (2.6%) exhibit four structural domains, where proteins belonging to the EBP and AraC/XylS families were also included; and finally, 17 (5.6%) TFs do not exhibit any domain assignation. From this data, it is evident that two domain proteins are the most abundant TFs, whereas three- and four domains are the less abundant, however these proteins belong to two main families, AraC/XylS and EBP. For a complete description of the protein domains see Supplementary Table S3.

In order to evaluate the diversity of DNA-binding domains, all TFs were evaluated considering these structures. From this analysis, we found that the most abundant DNA-binding domain is the helix-turn-helix (HTH), identified in more than 80% of TFs, as it was previously reported (Perez-Rueda and Collado-Vides, 2000, 2001) (Fig. 2
                         and Tables S2 and S3). In low proportions, DNA-binding structures, such as IHF-like DNA binding proteins, ribbon–helix–helix and flagellar transcriptional activator FlhD structures were identified. An intriguing observation is the emergence of proteins traditionally not associated with DNA-binding, such as “aminopeptidase A/I” involved in the synthesis of carbamoyl phosphate, an intermediate to the pyrimidine nucleotide pathway (Minh et al., 2009) and RelE-like identified in the regulator RelE associated with toxin–antitoxin systems (Gotfredsen and Gerdes, 1998). In this regard, a hypothetical limit in the number and diversity of DNA-binding TFs can be proposed based on the number of TFs identified and the diversity of structural domains associated with DNA-binding, whereas new DNA-binding structures associated to TFs could emerge in few proportions (Itzkovitz et al., 2006).

Altogether the diversity of DNA-binding domains, the number of TFs and the number of regulated genes, suggest that alternative regulatory mechanisms are defining gene expression in E. coli and that the combination with regulatory mechanisms mediated by TFs would increase the genetic versatility to contend against diverse environmental challenges. In this sense, supercoiling can be considered as another important source of regulation in E. coli, because it adjusts the basal levels of expression of a large diversity of genes directly (Hatfield and Benham, 2002) or indirectly, acting in combination with some TFs and sigma factors. In E. coli, nucleoid associated proteins play an important role in the DNA-supercoiling, such as IHF, Fis, HU, and H-NS expanding the regulatory response in a hierarchical manner. Indeed, 17% and 11% of the complete E. coli genome falls within the binding regions of H-NS and Fis, respectively (Kahramanoglou et al., 2010).

In this section we evaluate the role of duplicated genes, or paralogs in the repertoire of TFs. In previous works, Teichmann and Babu (2004) proposed that the loss and gain of regulatory interactions may occur following the duplication of either a TF, or a target gene, or following the duplication of both a TF as well as a target gene. For instance, 42 groups of paralogs were identified in the complete repertoire of transcriptional regulators (Table 1
                        ). From these data diverse and interesting groups were found, such as the family GalR/LacI where proteins not defined as TFs were included, such as RbsB (GI:1790192) a protein described as transporter of d-ribose or the d-allose transporter subunit AlsB (85676841) that lack the DNA-binding domain or proteins from the family NagC that contains two kinase proteins with absence of the HTH, and LexA (GI:16131869) that is paralogous of UmuD (GI:1787431) that encodes for DNA polymerase V, subunit D. These groups of paralogs show that TFs have been recruited from previous proteins with alternative functions, such as is observed in the Ribose, allose transport, kinase and DNA-polymerase proteins (Table S4).

In addition, we identified regulatory systems with a large number of duplications, both TFs and regulated genes, such as the gadXW system (Table 1 and Fig. 3
                        ). This regulatory system is associated with acid resistance, which is located in the “Acid Fitness Island” or AFI (Tramonti et al., 2008). The AFI contains 13 operons, among them slp-yhiF, hdeAB-yhiD, gadE-mtdEF, gadXW and gadAX (Tramonti et al., 2008; Kobayashi et al., 2006; Tucker et al., 2003). GadE, the master regulator, belongs to the LuxR-like family (Tucker et al., 2003; Masuda and Church, 2003), and at least nine regulators appear to converge on the gadE promoter to either activate or repress its transcription in response to different environmental conditions (Foster, 2004).

In general, these finds highlight the evolutionary plasticity of the regulatory networks (Moreno-Hagelsieb and Jokic, 2012); not only as a result of the duplication of TF interactions on the regulatory network (Teichmann and Babu, 2004), but also as a result of the divergent effect of the TF interactions, activating or repressing the transcription of paralogous genes. Divergence of paralogous genes may include the modification or acquisition of new regulatory mechanisms, changes in gene dosage (Gu et al., 2002), subdivision of ancestral functions and the evolution of new functions (Conant and Wolfe, 2008).

Previous analyses describing co-regulation as an important role in the regulatory network of E. coli K-12 have been discussed (Martinez-Antonio et al., 2003), showing that the interplay of TFs in a regulatory region will determine expression. In this regard, we asked whether using a corregulation matrix where the well-known and predicted regulatory proteins are included, functional clusters can be identified. Based on this approach, we identified 82 out of 304 (22%) TFs clustered in 12 relevant and functional modules (Fig. S2). These clusters include TFs belonging to the same evolutionary families and regulating genes involved in similar physiological functions, suggesting that in functional and evolutionary terms, those clusters are robust. In what follows, we describe the most relevant clusters identified. For a complete description of all clusters see Supplementary material Table S5.

In this cluster eight TFs experimentally described were identified, SoxR, AcrR and EnvR; MprA and MarR; and MarA, Rob and SoxS (Fig. 4
                        A). It is important to note that MarA, SoxS, SoxR, and Rob comprise the regulon involved in antibiotic and superoxide resistance, in response to nitric oxide and antibiotics (Fabrega et al., 2009). SoxR induces soxS expression, and SoxS, in turn, activates transcription of diverse genes in the regulon (Demple, 1996). In addition, MarR plays an important role in the control of resistance to multiple antibiotics, organic solvents, household disinfectants, and oxidative stress agents, among others. MarR is part of the marRAB operon and negatively autoregulates its gene expression. The marA gene encodes a transcriptional activator that activates expression of the marRAB operon and that regulates the expression of a global network of at least 40 chromosomal genes (Martin and Rosner, 2002). Finally, EnvR, represses the transcription of genes encoding a drug efflux pump that has a role in resistance to antibiotics (Hirakawa et al., 2008), whereas the “acriflavine resistance regulator”, AcrR, regulates the expression of genes involved in multidrug transport (Su et al., 2007). In summary, this cluster contains TFs involved in resistance against diverse external conditions and compounds, such as oxidative stress and heavy metals and antibiotics, suggesting that they are coordinating common regulatory processes.

This cluster includes most of the global regulators described in E. coli, such as Fnr and Crp, ArcA, Fis, IHF, and H-NS (Martinez-Antonio et al., 2003), but also other TFs described as potential global regulators, such as FruR (Ow et al., 2007), Fur, and PdhR (Fig. 4B). In this regard, FruR, that regulates around 67 genes in E. coli, has been considered as a global regulator modulating the direction of carbon flow through the different metabolic pathways of energy metabolism such as those genes encoding gluconeogenic, and glyoxylate shunt enzymes, but in an independent way of CRP (Shimada et al., 2010). The Fur regulator has been also considered as a global regulator associated with ferric assimilation (Lee and Helmann, 2007). This regulator is involved in the regulation of around 100 different genes in E. coli (Gama-Castro et al., 2008; Gama-Castro et al., 2011). Finally, PdhR, “Pyruvate Dehydrogenase complex Regulator,” regulates around 40 genes involved in the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex. This protein has been proposed as a master regulator for the formation of the PDH complex and the respiratory electron transport system (Gohler et al., 2011; Ogasawara et al., 2007a). Therefore, in this cluster well-defined global regulators and some TFs that could also be considered as master regulators were included, indeed these global TFs are regulating around 60% of the total genes described in the known regulatory network in this bacterium.

In this cluster, four TFs belonging to the GalR/LacI family were included, such as YcjW that was identified in a screen for genes that reduce the lethal effects of stress (Han et al., 2010), GalS and GalR that repress transcription of operons involved in transport and catabolism of d-galactose (Semsey et al., 2007), and EbgR that represses genes involved in the beta-galactosidase system, which constitutes an alternative for lactose utilization in cells with mutations on the lacZ gene (Swint-Kruse and Matthews, 2009). Another TF included in this cluster corresponds to the Maltose regulator, MalT, belonging to the LuxR family that activates transcription of several genes and operons involved in maltose catabolism and transport (Boos and Bohm, 2000), whereas the HU protein, for Heat Unstable protein, is a small DNA-binding protein considered as a global regulatory protein, which plays an important role in nucleoid organization and regulation (Oberto et al., 2009). An intriguing result was PhoB (OmpR family) included in this cluster. This regulatory protein has been involved in phosphorous uptake and metabolism (Baek and Lee, 2007) and glycerol phosphate metabolism (Baek and Lee, 2006). Finally, two hypothetical proteins, YagI and YgbI from the IclR and DeoR families respectively were included in this cluster, however not clear functions were identified so far (Fig. 4C).

RstA and CpxR from the OmpR family, MlrA (MerR), and CsgD (LuxR/UhpA) TFs are included in this cluster (Fig. 4D). These four regulatory proteins are associated with common physiological processes, as cell surface-associated structures, such as CsgD and MlrA. Indeed, CsgD participates in the control of biofilm formation in E. coli by controlling the production of curli fimbriae and other biofilm components (Brown et al., 2001). In concert with its regulatory role, the promoter for the csgD operon is under the control of more than 10 different TFs, each monitoring a different condition in stressful environments, such as RstA, OmpR and CpxR, included in this group, and recently MlrA (Ogasawara et al., 2010), that has been suggested to participate in control of curli formation. Therefore, the possible interplay between these activators allows E. coli to respond in a more efficient fashion to diverse stressful conditions. In addition, RstA also control genes involved in acid tolerance, and anaerobic respiration, among other processes (Ogasawara et al., 2007b). CpxR prevents a variety of extracytoplasmic protein-mediated toxicities (Batchelor et al., 2005). Finally, MlrA is associated to control curli formation (Ogasawara et al., 2010). In summary, this cluster reflects functional commonalities among the TFs identified, in particular regulation of biofilm components production.

In this section we discussed some of the putative regulons deduced by predicted associations between TFs and other genes, which might be target genes, using a clustering program (MCL) with a threshold of 0.85 of confidence value (Hu et al., 2009; Janga et al., 2010). We only considered those direct interactions as described in methods. Predicted interactions based on the total TFs involved 2404 genes, whereas the experimentally-based network comprises 1578 genes. The intersection corresponds to 1062 genes or 67% of the known network deposited in RegulonDB. Although we found a good consistency between the number of associated predictions and known regulons, further analyses are required to corroborate some of these associations. In the follow section, we describe some of the most representative groups of regulons identified in the predicted TFs. A complete list of TFs and their regulons can be accessed as supplementary material (Table S6).

In general, many bacteria use diols, such as 1,2-propanediol, or their substituted analogs, such as ethanolamine as carbon and/or nitrogen source. In this work, we identified the regulon eut in E. coli K-12 (Table 2
                         and Fig. 5
                        A and B). In E. coli, EutR was identified based on sequence analysis and 17 genes associated with ethanolamine metabolism, except one of them (puuP) associated to putrescine metabolism (Tsoy et al., 2009), were identified as members of this system (Table 2). EutR could also respond to cobalamin and ethanolamine, based on sequence comparison against EutR of Salmonella typhimurium. It is plausible that E. coli uses a conserved upstream region, previously identified as control element to coordinate production of the eutBC system and simultaneous synthesis or import of its cobalamin cofactor. Such coregulation may be achieved if EutR indeed serves as a sensor of both compounds and if its activated form upregulates the expression of both eut operons.

PerR, a member of the LysR family, has been described as responsible of oxidative stress response in diverse bacteria, such as Staphylococcus, Cyanobacteria, and Bacillales. We found that PerR is intimately associated with the hypothetical regulator YbiH from the family TetR/AcrR, i.e. they could be corregulators of the oxidative stress response system (Table 3
                         and Fig. 5C and D). Therefore, seven proteins associated with transport were also identified as related to the system. YbhF, YbhR and YbhS members of the ABC Superfamily of transporters (Saurin et al., 1994). CusC, an outer membrane factor is involved in the copper and silver ions detoxification in E. coli K-12 as part of the cusCFBA copper/silver efflux system. AcrE, a periplasmic lipoprotein associated with the drug efflux system with AcrF and TolC outer membrane protein (Elkins and Nikaido, 2003). Another protein included here is AcrB, a proton–substrate antiporter involved in the AcrAB/TolC multidrug–efflux complex, linking electrochemical-gradient energy to the efflux of drugs from the cytoplasm. Finally, YbhG described as a hypothetical protein, was included in this regulon. In summary, it is probable that PerR is involved in transport mechanisms as consequence of detoxification processes.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The compilation and analysis of regulatory elements in E. coli led us to understand the regulatory network organization of this bacterium. Despite the fact that TFs are the most extensively used element in regulatory networks, the extended repertoire of other regulatory mechanisms has resulted in a significant increase in the versatility of the network, accurately modulating the organism’s gene expression. It is interesting to note that the repertoire of TFs in this bacterium has slightly increased in the last decade, suggesting that we are close to the probable limit of regulation associated with this class of proteins. We also found diverse TFs and regulated genes duplicated, a recurrent process of the growth of regulatory networks, with posterior divergence in the effect of the TF interactions. An intriguing observation is the fact that orthologous distribution associated to TFs shows that predicted TFs are constrained to few organisms whereas known TFs exhibit a large taxonomical distribution (see Supplementary Fig. S3). In addition, we found a large proportion of TFs co-regulating similar functions and when they are analyzed together with the uncharacterized TFs, their coupling are consistent as robust clusters of similar functions. Finally, global regulators were found clustered together, suggesting functional and evolutionary relationships. Altogether, this analysis provides new clues about E. coli genetic regulation network that can be expanded to other organisms.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

Work reported here was completed during a sabbatical leave of absence supported by CONACYT Fellowship (165772) to E.P-R. Support from DGAPA-UNAM (IN-204714) and CONACYT (155116) is gratefully acknowledged.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2015.06.002.

The following are Supplementary data to this article:
                        
                           
                              Fig. S1 Functional association of protein families. COGs annotations were considered. In X-axis are indicated the family names, in Y-axis is the percentage of COGs. Families with more than 10 members were considered for this plot.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Fig. S2 Matrix of co-regulation. All the TFs (predicted and known) were included in a matrix and clustered. Clusters are indicated by color lines.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Fig. S3 Orthologous distribution of all TFs in bacteria and archaea genomes. All TFs were mapped according their orthologous distribution along bacteria and archaea cellular domains and clustered based on a Hierarchical Clustering method. 0 represents absence and 1 represents 100% of orthologous in a cellular division.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

