@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#A multilayer screening approach toward the discovery of novel Pf-DHFR inhibitors

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           300 xanthones were docked against Pf-DHFR-TS.


                        
                        
                           
                           Size effect on potency was considered.


                        
                        
                           
                           Contact footprints were generated.


                        
                        
                           
                           
                              X5, X113A and X164B were hits with contact footprints similar to known actives.


                        
                        
                           
                           Final selection of 11 compounds from ZINC database.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Contact footprint

Docking

Size normalization

Re-ranking

MolDock

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  A small yet diverse xanthone library was build and computationally docked against wild type Pf-DHFR by Molegro Virtual Docker (MolDock). For analysis of results an integrated approach based on re-ranking, scaling (based on heavy atom counts), pose clustering and visual inspection was implemented. Standard methods such as self-docking (for docking), EF analysis, average rank determinations (for size normalization), and cluster quality indices (for pose clustering) were used for validation of results. Three compounds X5, X113A and X164B displayed contact footprints similar to the known inhibitors with good scores. Finally, 16 compounds were extracted from ZINC data base by similarity based screening, docking score and drug/lead likeness. Out of these 16 compounds, 11 displayed very close contact footprints to experimentally known inhibitors, indicating there potential utility in further drug discovery efforts.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

From antiquity, diseases like malaria have been a challenge for human civilization. Last decade has witnessed millions of deaths due to this devastating disease, especially in tropic and sub-tropics (World Malaria Report, 2013; Machado et al., 2009). It imposes a great socio-economic burden on the poor economies of third world and is a major contributor of mortality and morbidity (Machado et al., 2009).

Present malarial chemotherapies mainly rely on a very few chemotypes or their allied structures such as quinolines, anti-folates and some cyclic endo-peroxides (Nayyar et al., 2012). Over the last few decades, the extensive and repetitive deployment of these drugs has stimulated resistance in the pathogen and has seriously compromised the effectiveness of current antimalarial arsenal (Rastelli et al., 2011). This selection pressure on present chemotherapies has underlined the need of testing/screening for diverse scaffolds from Available Chemical Space (ACS)/New Chemical Entities (NCEs) of small molecules.

The above-mentioned screening can be performed by “actual biochemical” or “virtual in-silico” routes. No doubt, the progress in robotics, automation and miniaturization has greatly improved the efficiency of traditional biochemical screening; nevertheless these methods have become more expensive and are still labor intensive (Durrant and McCammon, 2010).

On the other hand, screening based on “virtual platform” such as molecular docking are particularly suitable for most of the academic setup, with limited time and resources (Shoichet, 2004). Moreover, the increasing availability of 3D structure of proteins/macromolecules and advancements in NMR and X-ray, are expected to assist the development of these virtual platforms one step further. If utilized with caution and proper validation, these methods can be a very fruitful and many previous reports have shown the strength of this approach (Shoichet, 2004; Walter et al., 1998).

Consistent with this theme, we undertook a multilayer screening of xanthones like natural products (Xanthone-NPs) against Pf-DHFR (Plasmodium falciparum dihydrofolate reductase). Pf-DHFR is a well known and validated target in antimalarial chemotherapy. It specifically catalyzes the conversion of dihydrofolate to tetrahydrofolate, which is a precursor to important nitrogenous bases such as thymidine, hence plays an essential role in cell cycle and survival of the pathogen (Toyoda et al., 1997a; Abbat et al., 2015; Oliveira et al., 2011; Bhat et al., 2013; Cunha et al., 2005).

The selection of xanthones and related scaffolds was not arbitrary, but was based on the following observations/facts:
                        
                           (1)
                           Nature provides thousands of diverse xanthones and many of them have established medicinal efficacy (Fukai et al., 2003; Don et al., 2004; Hay et al., 2004; Ignatushchenko et al., 1997; Massimine et al., 2006; Kumar et al., 2014; Warhust, 1998).

Some of the xanthones have previously shown to possess anti-malarial properties, but there are very scarce reports of underlying molecular mechanism (Hay et al., 2004; Ignatushchenko et al., 1997). One such study was performed by Massimine group (Massimine et al., 2006). They have shown xanthone dyes such as eosin B and fluorescein (Fig. 1
                              ), inhibit Pf-DHFR in both enzymatic and cell line based studies (average IC50
                              =320μM) (Massimine et al., 2006). These xanthone dyes also shown to be inhibit the same enzyme of other related apicomplexan organism such as Toxoplasma gondii. This investigation further revealed that the action of these oxygenated dyes is multifaceted and may involve other damage to pathogen or inhibition of other important enzymes.

In a previous in silico study based on diverse natural products, xanthones and related scaffolds have shown remarkable affinity to wild type Pf-DHFR (Kumar et al., 2014).

Like some known Pf-DHFR inhibitors e.g. triazinobenzimidazole Inh I and a pyridoindole Inh II, typical xanthone scaffold is a fused, rigid and a planar structure (Warhust, 1998). Conversely, some conjugated xanthones such as glycopyranosylxanthones are also structurally similar to flexible inhibitor like WR99210. This flexibility in an otherwise rigid scaffold primarily arises because of the central etheric oxygen joining two halves (Fig. 2
                              ) (Warhust, 1998).

The binding mode of xanthones in Pf-DHFR active site may be similar to other antifolate drugs. While the main rigid core may interact well with the overall hydrophobic lining of the binding cavity, the carbonyl oxygen of the central ring and polar groups at side chains may get involve in hydrogen bonding interactions with key residues such as Ile14, Asp54, Ile164 and Tyr170, if located at optimal place (Warhust, 1998).

Due to their unmatched complexity, abundant structural diversity and broad medicinal spectrum, xanthone like natural products are important for drug discovery efforts. Unfortunately, from last two decades their utility remained underrepresented in drug discovery, because of difficulty in synthesis and structural modification, lower natural availability, low drug likeness, problems in further optimization etc (Harvey et al., 2015; Molinari, 2009).

Here we have attempted to address this problem by developing a framework using sequential filtering of xanthone like natural products and then applying this framework for screening of small molecules. We believe that this approach benefitted from the natural efficacy and higher diversity of natural products, while retaining higher lead/drug likeness of small molecules.

Proposed multi-layer screening approach uses a collective knowledge of “in silico”, “statistical” and “experimentally driven” results. The one obvious advantage of this multilayer screening approach is that hits are not the results of a mere computational work, but statistical factors such as molecular weight were also taken into account. Finally the interaction footprints of poses, satisfied by both docking and statistical criteria, were compared with that of well known and experimentally validated antifolates, emphasizing interactions with key residues of the protein. We believed that these hits would have a greater chance of success in actual biochemical screening and would be helpful in designing better candidates for future anti-malarial drug discovery ventures.

Detail of all the filter and validation methods used in multi-layer screening is as follow:

Filter 1: Computational Docking (in silico origin)

Validation: Results are validated by “control docking/self validation” experiment.

Filter 2: Pose clustering/Size Normalization (statistical origin)

Validation 2: Output is judged by comparing the “enrichment factor (EF experiments)” and “average ranking of active compounds” for different scaling scheme.

Filter 3: Interaction foot-prints (Experimental origin, from experimentally established inhibitors)

Validation 3: Results are counter-examined by “cluster quality indices” and “visual inspection with particular emphasis on interactions of ligands with key residues”.

All docking simulations were performed using Molegro Virtual Docker (MVD 6.0) (Thomsen and Christensen, 2006). The crystal structure of wild type Pf-DHFR-TS (PDB code 1J3I) (Yuvaniyama et al., 2003) complexed with WR99210 was retrieved from Protein data bank (RCSB PDB). Protein structure was dissect at Asn231, which correspond to DHFR portion of Pf-DHFR-TS and side chain B was chosen, because of the presence of missing residues in chain A from Asp187 to Asn190. In protein preparation step all the crystallographic water molecules and inhibitor were removed. Inclusion of NADP in docking simulation didn’t create any significant change in cross validation and re-rank score of the WR99210, but it increased the computational time (from 158s to 298s). Considering the higher flexibility (17 acyclic rotatable bonds), this change in re-rank score didn’t seem practical at the cost of computational time, specially for fast docking software such as MolDock, hence NADP was removed from further consideration. Finally, this structure was examined for its connectivity, charge and protonation state to remove any structural error (see also Table S4–S6, ESI).

A ligand data base (300 candidates) of xanthones was constructed from literature (Hui et al., 2012; Vieira and Kijjoa, 2005). This in-house library contained a wide range of diverse xanthones of natural origin (for detail see ESI). Before automated docking, all the structures were energy minimized and geometry optimized.

In defining the binding site of Pf-DHFR, WR99210 was used as a reference with search radius of 10Å. MolDock Optimizer search algorithm, which is a kind of evolutionary algorithm (EA), was implemented to explore the search space. Final ranking was done on the basis of MolDock score (grid) and Re-rank score. The selection of this particular set of search algorithm and scoring function was based on control docking experiment (see self-docking, in Results and Discussion). The following default parameter setting was used: Population size=50, Cross over rate=0.9 and scaling factor=0.5. Maximum no. of iterations=2000 and maximum no. of poses=5. The pose with best Re-ranked score was used in final ranking.

The validity and robustness of the docking engine was judged by self docking experiment taking into consideration all the available set of algorithms and scoring function.

The energy based scoring function has a tendency to give higher weightage to higher molecular weight compounds due to their greater surface area. This tendency of scoring function toward higher molecular weight is generally undesirable, because it lower the chances of many fragment-like/lead-like/drug-like hits in final ranking. The present trends based on pharmaceutical industry show that candidates with optimal physiological properties should be prioritized over hits having high potency but lower suitability. So to remove this “size effect” a heavy atom counts (HACs), based strategy was employed (Pan et al., 2003). For this purpose various power of ‘N’ (no. of heavy atoms or HACs) was tested first and finally, N4/5 was identified as an optimal value for desired MW distribution of top scorers.

All the ranking schemes were judged by their enrichment factor at different threshold limits. To calculate the EF, Known and experimentally validate DHFR inhibitors were first added in the data set and then the ability of different Schemes to identify these inhibitors, within the set limit was determined.

AuPosSOM online was used to identify the contact footprints of the top scorers (Bouvier et al., 2010). This is a relatively new approach based on the concept of “contact fingerprint similarity”. There are three basic step of the operation (1) A Kohonen self organizing map (SOM) is generated for training phase using drug-protein contact description (2) An unsupervised cluster analysis is performed in the second step (3) finally; a newick file is generated for visualization purpose. The ligands and known inhibitors are arranged in the hierarchical tree/dendogram with respect to the similarity of binding mode. The ligands/Poses present in the cluster having the maximum known inhibitors, represent the “hits”.

Two programs viz. Discovery Studio Visualizer (DSV) and Molegro Molecular Viewer (MMV) were used for visualization and inspection of docking results (Anon, 2016a,b).

A novel python based algorithms called BINANA (BINding ANAlyzer) was employed in order to extract all the interactions between a ligand and the receptor such as close contacts, hydrophobic counts, number of hydrogen bonds, salt bridges and п interactions. In brief, this algorithm provided useful information about binding interactions (Durrant and McCammon, 2011).

Finally, a similarity based screening was performed using PharmaGist-ZINCpharmer integration. The common features of the selected xanthones were identified by PharmaGist, which were then subjected to ZINCpharmer server to explore the purchasable chemical space available in ZINC database (Schneidman-Duhoyny et al., 2008; Dror et al., 2009; Koes and Camacho, 2012). The adopted methodology is depicted in Fig. 3
                        .

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

Our group has previously explored the binding cavity of Pf-DHFR against 185 diverse natural products using AutoDock (Kumar et al., 2014). Interestingly, all the xanthones displayed strong binding interactions with hydrophobic lining of binding cavity. Another very important outcome of this study was the spatial overlapping of all the xanthones in the binding cavity with conserved hydrogen-bonding interactions with Asp194 and Gly44. Motivated by these initial findings, we decided to further investigate the subject using a large and diverse library of xanthones itself. A framework based on size normalized score and pose clustering was generated, which was then applied to screen the ZINC database.

Pose predictive ability of any docking tool is generally judged by a self docking experiment. In this experiment, co-crystallized ligand is first removed from the protein complex and then re-docked. If the root mean square deviation (rmsd) between the coordinate of cognate ligand and re-docked ligand is less than 2Å, it is assumed that the software is adequately capable of predicting the native pose

Since Molegro® offers three search algorithms and four different scoring functions; hence there are 12 different combinations in total. We decided to select a specific set of algorithm and scoring function based on self docking results, obtained with all possible combination of algorithm and scoring function as delineated in Table S4 (see also Table S5 and S6, ESI for similar proteins).

All these experiments were performed with default parameter setting involving 10 separate runs. It is apparent from Table S4 (ESI) that MolDock Optimizer with MolDock Score (grid) produced lowest rmsd, hence was selected for further investigation (Fig. 4
                           ).

The docking algorithm MolDock Optimizer is based on a new search method called guided differential evolutution. It includes the benefit of both differential evolution and cavity prediction. While MolDock Score (grid) is based on piecewise linear potential (PLP), which also consider effect of hydrogen bond directionality (Thomsen and Christensen, 2006).

Although MolDock Score (and its grid version) is time-tested, however it generally uses some simplifications/approximations to decrease computational cost at the expense of accuracy (Molegro, 2016). To counteract this effect Re-ranking is a commonly adopted strategy.

Though Re-raking is computationally more expensive (20 times slower than docking score), but results in a significant improvement in the enrichment and accuracy of score. In our analysis, we have used these recalculated energies in the determination of pose selection and further ranking consideration (Molegro, 2016).

One major issue with most of the energy based scoring functions is the tendency of scoring functions to give higher rank/score to larger molecules (molecules with higher HACs), because of their larger contact area (Pan et al., 2003). This type of preference is particularly impeding, when the aim of the virtual screening is to identify drug-like hits.

To address this issue, many adjustments have been done in the literature such as ranking by ligand efficiency or use of a mathematical function that specifically penalized larger molecule (Pan et al., 2003; Abad-Zapatero and Metz, 2005; Carta et al., 2007). In present case, we have adopted a relatively new concept of size normalization, in which the biased score is divided by numbers of heavy atom or its suitable denominator until the distribution of compounds matches to the natural distribution of MW of entire data set. This is somewhat ‘trial and error’ kind of exercise, but if once established, is very useful to remove size effect of ligand (Pan et al., 2003).

Initially, we compared the natural distribution of MW of the entire data set under investigation with the top 90 compounds determined by Re-ranking score. Comparison of both results clearly indicated that the distribution based on Re-ranking score is biased toward higher molecular weight. (Average molecular weight 414, while average molecular weight of top 90 based on Re-ranking is 464). This result clearly indicates the need of a normalization method to remove the size effect on potency (Fig. 5
                           ).

In the next trial, Re-rank score was divided by N (=HAC) and final ranking was again done in this way. Comparison of natural distribution of MW of the entire data set with distribution of top 90 based on Re-rank/N showed a clear reversal of the trend (Fig. 5). The peak of the Re-rank/N curve shifted toward lower MW side with average MW now becomes 370.

We also examined the distribution on the basis of Re-rank/N1/2, Re-rank/N1/3, Re-rank/N2/3, Re-rank/N1/4 which produced the average MWs 444, 455, 424 and 456 respectively, still far from desirable situation (Fig. 6
                           ).

Finally ranking on the basis of Re-rank/N4/5 brought a drastic change in the pattern. Now MW distribution of the top scorers (90) overlapped well with the distribution of MW of entire data set (Fig. 7
                           ). Interestingly, average MW of the top scores became 402 quite near to 414 of the average MW of the entire data set. Details of the Normalization strategy are given in Table 1
                            and Table S7 (ESI).
                              
                                 Normalized Score (F)=Re-rank Score (E)×Normalizing factor (f)
                              
                           here f=1/N 4/5 (for final ranking).

In order to determine the “Credibility”/“reliance” of this proposed ranking scheme two analysis were performed. This was done by incorporating some experimentally known antifolates in the ligand database. Seven inhibitors and substrate DHF used in all validation experiments are given in (Fig. 8
                           ) with experimental IC50 (Hasting and Sibley, 2002; Sirichaiwat et al., 2004; Toyoda et al., 1997b).

This kind of enrichment is an attempt to quantify, the proportion of the known active compounds near the top of the list, when normalized score based on different ranking scheme were arranged in decreasing order. For our experiments we have used different threshold limits at 5%, 10% and 15% etc. EFs (Enrichment Factors) were determined by following formula.
                              
                                 EF (%)=(Asample
                                    ×Ntotal/Nsample
                                    ×Nactives)×100
                              
                           
                        

The detail of enrichment factors for different ranking scheme is given in Table 1. A clear cut improvement in the enrichment was observed, for ranking based on Re-rank score/N4/5 since four of the known inhibitors like PYR (rank-2), CYC (rank-4), WR99210 (rank-5) and TMP (rank-7) were ranked within top 10 scorers, while ranking solely based on re-ranked score identified no known inhibitor within top 10 rankers. So final ranking based on “Re-rank score/N4/5” was accepted in the present work.


                           3.2c Average rank analysis of active compounds
                        

In this method, average ranks of experimentally known inhibitors, in different raking scheme were calculated. In this context, it is noteworthy that Re-rank/N, Re-rank/N2/3 and Re-rank score/N4/5 recognized 6, 1 and 4 Known actives among top 10 scorers. It is also interesting that Re-rank score based ranking identified no actives among the top 10. Further, the average rank of active compounds in top 10 was 2+3+4+5+6+7/6=4.5 (for Re-rank/N) and 2+4+5+7/4=4.5 (for Re-rank/N4/5). It is important that Re-rank performed better than Re-rank/N4/5 in the EF experiment, but with average molecular weight 402 (that is very close to mean MW of entire data set, 414), highly similar distribution pattern similar to natural distribution of the data-set, with very good enrichment and average rank of known inhibitors, ranking scheme based on Re-rank/N4/5 emerged out as best performer and this justified its use in final analysis of the result (Table 1
                           ).

In this study, we were particularly interested in the hits that specifically target the key residues of the active site rather than any other portion of the cavity. Hits with contact footprints similar to the known inhibitors have greater chances to turn into competitive inhibitors (Bouvier et al., 2010). For this purpose, an interactive contact map/dendogram of 30 top scorers along with seven known inhibitors (PYR, CYC, WR99210, TMP, MTX, INH1 and INH2) and substrate DHF was generated (Fig. 9
                           ).

The resultant dendrogram indicated a total of 6 clusters with 12 sub clusters; following points are evident from dendogram (Fig. 9)
                              
                                 (1)
                                 Cluster C1 consisted of two sub-clusters SC1 and SC2 and the later contained most of the known inhibitors such as PYR, CYC, DHF, WR99210, TMP and INH1 along with compounds X5 and X113A.
                                 

Cluster C1 exhibited maximum cluster efficiency for active compounds. The following formulae were used to calculate the cluster quality indices:

(A) Active compounds in the selected leaf/all the active compounds in the entire data set.

For Cluster C1 this value turn out to be 5/8×100=62.50%.

(B) Active compounds in the selected leaf/all the compounds in the leaf. For Cluster C1 this value was 55.55%.

So having more than 60% of the total active compounds and with only 10% of the total ligands, cluster C1 was particularly important from analysis standpoint.

Compound X164B (Fig. 10
                                    ) was also presented in the first cluster but with slightly different contact footprints (Fig. 9). It can be concluded from the map that X5, X113A and X164B may be turn into competitive inhibitors because of their similar footprints to all known inhibitors.

Compound X157B (Fig. 10) presented another interesting case. It remained as highest scoring compounds in the entire rankings patterns (Re-rank, Re-rank/N, Re-rank/N1/2, Re-rank/N1/3, Re-rank/N2/3, Re-rank/N1/4 and Re-rank/N4/5), yet was found to have quite different footprints compare to known inhibitors (SC2 of C4, Fig. 9). It might be a result of different occupancy in the binding site (allosteric inhibition) or an unanticipated problem in the docking procedure, hence this compounds was not further considered.

In this section, details of ligand-protein interactions have been discussed. The two opposite termini of the active site of wild type Pf-DHFR end at Ser108 and Asp54. The remaining portion of binding site is rich in hydrophobic resides such as Ile14, Asn51, Asp54, Cys59, Ile112, Pro113 and Ile164 (Warhust, 1998).

Compounds X5 and X113A, which have contact footprints similar to the experimentally known inhibitors showed significant overlapping and interacted well with all the key residues of the hydrophobic lining mentioned above by their fused tricyclic core (Fig. 11
                           B and D). Both the xanthones showed strong hydrogen bonding with Tyr170 through their carbonyl oxygen of central ring (Fig. 11A and C). Additionally, X5 also formed two hydrogen bonds to Asp54 (Fig. 11A). Interestingly, the plane of both the compounds was approximately perpendicular to the plane of typical xanthone scaffold (Fig. 11E). This probably explains why un-substituted xanthone shows low score and also signifies the role of substituent in gaining optimal binding orientation.

Compound X164B, is a relatively large molecule and a conjugate of xanthone and monosaccharide. Because of a bend at central etheric oxygen joining two parts it showed a conformation similar to WR99210 and similarly interacted well with Ile14, Asp 54 and Ile 164 through hydrogen bonds. All other hydrophobic interaction with key residues Ile14, Cys15, Cys59 and Ile164 were also found to be conserved here (Fig. 12
                           A and B).

Compound X157B was also a glucopyranosyl-xanthone conjugate and interestingly, this compound displayed an interaction footprint quite different from experimentally known inhibitors. In its active conformation, it protruded from the main portion of the binding site and extended toward otherwise non important residues such as Leu64 and Ser111 (Fig. 13
                           A). The position of planar core was also quite different from other xanthones such as X113A (Fig. 13
                           B).

A novel python based algorithm was implemented in order to fully characterize the ligand-receptor binding. The results extracted from this algorithm are summarized below (Table S8). Interestingly, despite of tricyclic fused core, none of the compounds (X5, X113A, X157B and X164B) was found to participate in any п- interaction.

Since compounds X5, X113A and X164B have contact footprints similar to known inbitors, so their structural features can provide a valuable guideline for the designing of novel hits. Two models were generated, one on the basis of common features of X5 and X113A and other on the basis of X164B.

These extracted features were then subjected to an online interface ZINCPharmer to explore the purchasable chemical space from ZINC database. Total 29 compounds were retrieved by the server. Among them, 13 compounds were discarded, because of lower Re-rank score (than WR99210) and lower lead/drug likeness (MW>500,Nrt
                        >10). The 2D structure, ZINC id, MW, HACs, MolDock score and Re-rank scores of remaining 16 compounds are given in Fig. 14
                         and Table 2
                        .

Finally all the screened compounds along with X5, X113A, X164B and experimentally known inhibitors PYR, CYC, DHF, WR99210, TMP and INH1 were subjected to a second round of pose clustering using AuPosSOM online (Fig. 15
                        ). Resultant dendrogram displayed two very close clusters A and B. Out of 16 molecules, 11 were again grouped together in sub-cluster SC2 of cluster A, with PYR, CYC, WR99210, TMP and INH1 indicating contacts and interaction pattern similar to known inhibitors. Since ligands with contact footprints similar to the known inhibitor have greater chances to turn into competitive inhibitors, we expect that these 11 compounds can be a good starting point for further efficacy evaluations. Though experimental study is indispensable to mark our top hits as lead, this study, however, may provide a rational base for further drug discovery efforts.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

In Summary, a multilayer screening of xanthones of natural origin (Xanthone-NPs) was undertaken against Pf-DHFR. The Re-rank score of screened compounds was size normalized and interaction profile was generated using experimentally known inhibitors. Three compounds X5, X113A and X164B have contact footprints similar to known inhibitors included in the study. Based on common features of three compounds, good docking score and interaction profile to experimentally known inhibitors, 11 purchasable compounds were screened from ZINC database. We hope that these findings would be helpful in providing deeper insight to DHFR binding and in designing new and more potent inhibitors against malaria.

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENT@&#

This work was financially supported by CSIR, New Delhi (Sanction Letter No. 02(0123)/13/EMR-II dated 12.4.2013).

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2016.03.005.

The following are Supplementary data to this article:
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

