@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#The intrinsic dynamics of Cse1p and Xpot elucidated by coarse-grained models

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           The intrinsic dynamics of exportins were inherent from their cargo-bound and cargo-free conformations.


                        
                        
                           
                           Dominant modes were found to be relevant to the functional flexibilities and the binding affinities.


                        
                        
                           
                           ENM and FEA were complementary methods to study conformational dynamics of proteins.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Elastic Network Model

Finite Element Analysis

Karyopherin

Nucleocytoplasmic transport

Protein flexibility

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Cse1p and Xpot are two karyopherin proteins that transport the corresponding cargos during the nucleocytoplasmic transport. We utilized Elastic Network Model (ENM) and Finite Element Analysis (FEA) to study their conformational dynamics. These dynamics were interpreted by their intrinsic modes that played key roles in the flexibility of karyopherins, which further affected the binding affinities. The findings included that it was the karyopherin's versatile conformations composed of the same superhelices of HEAT repeats that produced different degrees of functional flexibilities. We presented evidence that these coarse-grained methods could help to elucidate the biological function behind the structures of the two karyopherins.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

In the central dogma of molecular biology, DNAs carrying the genetic information are replicated and transcribed into mRNAs in the nucleus. The RNAs and RNA-associated proteins are then transported to the cytoplasm for further protein synthesis by traveling through the nuclear pore complexes (NPCs), which are located on a double-membrane called the nuclear envelope (NE) (Allison, 2007). Consequently, the molecular trafficking between the nucleus and cytoplasm, known as nucleocytoplasmic transport (NCT), is one of the key cellular processes in the eukaryotic cells. During the process, the NPC functions as a virtual gate that not only allows the diffusion of water, sugars, ions and other small molecules, but also permits the passage of specific macromolecules (Wente and Rout, 2010). Different hypotheses for the working mechanism of the permeability of NPC have been proposed, such as the hydrogel-like model (Frey et al., 2006), the reduction of dimensionality model (Peters, 2005b), the polymer brush model (Lim et al., 2007), and the trees and shrubs model (Yamada et al., 2010). These models share a central feature that the FG-Nups (Phenylalanine and Glycine repeats-Nucleoporins) of NPC plays a significant role by forming a filament barrier that prevents the penetration of macromolecules; nevertheless, specific transport factors/receptors help conquer the barrier by interacting with FG-Nups (Frey et al., 2006; Grunwald et al., 2011; Peters, 2005a; Rout et al., 2003; Routa et al., 2000; Timney et al., 2006). Most transport factors belong to the karyopherin-β family, and those that mediate nuclear import and nuclear export are termed importins and exportins respectively (Cook and Conti, 2010; Terry et al., 2007). In general, a cargo macromolecule directly interacts with a transport factor that has a mandatory transport signal; thus the whole complex is allowed to go through the NPC (Grünwald and Singer, 2012; Madrid and Weis, 2006). The transport signal for importins is nuclear localization sequences (NLSs), and the signal for exportins is nuclear export sequences (NESs).

Over the past decade, structural studies of karyopherin proteins have given first-hand information on their biological functions (Conti et al., 2006; Cook et al., 2007; Cook and Conti, 2010; Fukuhara et al., 2004; Madrid and Weis, 2006; Mosammaparast and Pemberton, 2004). One of the important characteristics is that the karyopherins are likely to have some degrees of flexibility, which are embedded in the superhelices of HEAT repeats. This functional flexibility therefore enables the karyopherins to interact with partners in different scenarios, and results in conformational changes induced by cargo bindings. For example, Cse1p and Xpot are two of the transport factors that shuttle specific cargos from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. The conformation of cargo-free Cse1p is more closed than the cargo-bound Cse1p; however, the cargo-free Xpot has a rather open conformation as compared with the cargo-bound state (Cook and Conti, 2010).

When the conformations of a protein are involved in the biological function of the protein, normal mode analysis (NMA) is one of the useful computational techniques for studying its dynamics. NMA was introduced to structural biology three decades ago to investigate the harmonic fluctuations of a protein around its equilibrium state based on chosen empirical potential functions (Brooks and Karplus, 1983; Go et al., 1983). The main idea was to decompose the equilibrium dynamics of a macromolecule into a set of independent normal modes. Later a coarse-grained NMA, now termed Elastic Network Model (ENM), was introduced where a protein is treated as a network of point masses connected to each other with linear springs (Tirion, 1996). Since then, a variety of network constructions have been reported (Atilgan et al., 2001; Haliloglu et al., 1997; Kurkcuoglu et al., 2009; Lu and Ma, 2008; Lyman et al., 2008; Moritsugu and Smith, 2007; Tama et al., 2000). Why has ENM-based NMA become one of the most successful methods in computational biology? In addition to the simplicity that an ENM has, the answer may directly lead to the robustness of its result to the global dynamics of macromolecules (Bahar et al., 2010b; Tama et al., 2006). Some studies showed that more than half of the global motions of 3800 known proteins can be approximately captured by at least their two lowest normal modes (Krebs et al., 2002; Suhre and Sanejouand, 2004). Moreover, these dominant modes are not sensitive to the detailed chemical information but to the overall structures (Bahar et al., 2010a,b; Ma, 2005).

In a previous study (Hu and Kim, 2011), we generated possible pathways that illustrated the conformational transition of two exportins (Cse1p and Xpot) from the cargo-bound state to the cargo-free state. Cse1p transports importin alpha Kap60p and Xpot transports tRNA from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. The results showed the flexibility of exportins during the predicted transition. The objective of the present study is further to investigate the correlation between the native conformations of the exportins and their functional flexibilities. We want to know if there are normal modes that coordinate transport factors, Rans, and cargo molecules.

In the present study, we investigated two cases Cse1p and Xpot. Since both exportins showed distinguished conformational changes during the NCT, we speculated that their native structures might have contributions to the flexibility, which affects the transport mechanism. Therefore, the first case was to characterize the normal modes of cargo-bound conformation and cargo-free conformation of the exportins. The other case was the effect of the binding of RanGTP on exportins. Studies have shown that the RanGTP has to be present in the cargo-bound state of transport factors. The binding of RanGTP on the karyopherins has impacts on the large conformational changes and local allosteric effects (Cook and Conti, 2010). We wanted to know if the binding would change the flexibility of exportins that produces conformational changes. Consequently, ENMs were constructed on the binary complex of exportins and RanGTP (excluding cargos).

In addition to ENM-based NMA, we also attempted to study the mechanical properties of exportins. Therefore, Finite Element Analysis (FEA) was utilized in this study. FEA is a mature, broadly applied engineering technique in many fields, such as solid and structural mechanics, and thermo/fluid dynamics. Recently, its application has been extended to biological science, such as tissue and cell mechanics (Kaazempur-Mofrad et al., 2003) and protein mechanics (Bao, 2009; Tang et al., 2006; White and Bauer, 2004; Wolf and Mofrad, 2008). In particular, FEA has similar utility to NMA for calculating the normal modes of macromolecules (Bathe, 2008). The use of FEA in this research provided insights into the exportins by allowing us to know their mechanical responses such as strain/stress distribution.

@&#METHODS@&#

In an ENM, a protein is transformed into a network of nodes connected to each other with linear springs, where the nodes represent coordinates of the alpha-carbon atoms of the tested protein and the springs represent interaction between the atoms. k
                     
                        i,j
                      in Eq. (1) represented the atomic interaction in our ENM simulation, where 1 was the spring constant and d was the distance (cutoff distance) between the ith and the jth alpha-carbon atoms. The equation of motion for the network and the corresponding eigenvectors/eigenvalues were further obtained in our ENM calculation. We adapted the simulation codes from another research group (Kim et al., 2002), and detailed mathematical derivation can be found in their work
                        
                           (1)
                           
                              
                                 
                                    k
                                    
                                       i
                                       ,
                                       j
                                    
                                 
                                 =
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   1
                                                    
                                                   if
                                                    
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            
                                                               x
                                                               →
                                                            
                                                            i
                                                         
                                                         −
                                                         
                                                            
                                                               x
                                                               →
                                                            
                                                            j
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                   ≤
                                                   d
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   0
                                                    
                                                   if
                                                    
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            
                                                               x
                                                               →
                                                            
                                                            i
                                                         
                                                         −
                                                         
                                                            
                                                               x
                                                               →
                                                            
                                                            j
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                   >
                                                   d
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  

Finite Element Analysis is a mature engineering technique, of which the core scheme is to discretize a selected object into a number of elements that are connected to each other by nodal points. These elements are general geometric shapes (triangle, quadrilateral, etc.), for which it is easy to form corresponding governing equations to solve the displacements or strains based on applied loads. To construct a FEA model, there are three routine steps (1) generating and discretizing the examined object, (2) determining mechanical properties of the object and (3) applying boundary conditions such as constraints and applied forces.

For generating volumes of Cse1p and Xpot, we first used Python Molecule Viewer (PMV) that embeds MEMS method to calculate the solvent-excluded surfaces (SES) of a molecule (Sanner, 1999; Sanner and Olson, 1996). The calculated SES results were visualized in Fig. 1c (cargo-bound Cse1p) and Fig. 1d (cargo-bound Xpot). Followed by PMV, ANSYS was used to build volumes of cargo-bound Cse1p and cargo-bound Xpot based on SES data consisting of vertices and triangles (ANSYS). Finally, for meshing the obtained volumes, SOILD 187 (a higher order 3D element with 10 nodes) was suggested by ANSYS to model irregular subjects, which was suited to molecular shapes of a protein. In the end, there were 356,218 nodal points and 196,173 elements in the case of Cse1p (Fig. 1e), and 261,334 nodal points and 142,226 elements in the case of Xpot (Fig. 1f).

Since exportins were treated as isotropic and elastic solids in our FEA models, there were three mechanical properties (Young's modulus E, Poisson's ratio ν, density ρ) that needed to be defined in the ANSYS. Although E can be experimentally measured with apparatus such as atomic force microscopy (Guo and Akhremitchev, 2008), there are unfortunately no such data available for the exportins to date. According to some reports, however, Young's modulus of proteins were estimated ranging from 2 to 5GPa (Bathe, 2008; Kim et al., 2011; Sedeh et al., 2010). Moreover, a FEA model of NPC was built by Wolf and Mofrad, and they estimated E of nucleoporins (Nups), the proteins composing NPC, to be 2.2GPa and ν to be 0.4 (Wolf and Mofrad, 2008). The E in their study actually was from the experimental measurement of actin proteins (Wagner et al., 1999). In our study, the same values of E and ν were adapted. Finally, density ρ was calculated to be 1410kg/m3 based on a study by Fischer et al. (2004). Since we only performed free-vibration analysis to obtain the natural vibrational modes of exportins, there was no need to consider boundary conditions.

@&#RESULTS@&#

In this study, we used the values of overlap (I) (Tama et al., 2000) and quality of motion description (Q
                        
                           d
                        ) (Nicolay and Sanejouand, 2006) to determine appropriate cutoff distances for our ENMs. I calculates the cosine value between two given vectors, so it indicates how close the direction of a given normal mode is to a known conformational change of a macromolecule. Q
                        
                           d
                         is for examining how accurately a set of calculated normal modes describes the collective motions of a macromolecule.

In the case of Xpot, we first tried a cutoff distance of 9Å, which was the minimum distance required for obtaining only six zero eigenvalues from the equation of motion. Eigenvectors having zero eigenvalues represent the rigid-body motions in space which are three translational and three rotational motions. For a protein having a total of N atoms, the total number of non-zero eigenvalues is 3N
                        −6. Finally, we calculated the overlap of Xpot, and the values of the first 10 non-zero-eigenvalue normal modes were 0.042 (1st), 0.678 (2nd), 0.509 (3rd), 0.043 (4th), 0.097 (5th), 0.067 (6th), 0.177 (7th), 0.031 (8th), 0.062 (9th), 0.017 (10th). For the quality of motion description, the value was up to 91.26% in the first three modes. These results suggested that the first few modes were sufficient to describe the global collective motions of Xpot. We further tried cutoff distances up to 30Å in an increment of 1Å, and the results showed that the first three modes had the most contributions with respect to the rest of the modes. In the end, a cutoff distance of 11Å was chosen and the corresponding result was shown in Fig. 2
                        . It indicated that the first mode was the most dominant mode with the overlap of 0.705, and the quality of motion description was up to 96.34% within the first five modes. The same procedure of choosing an appropriate cutoff distance was applied on Cse1p, and a cutoff distance of 13Å was decided. The results showed that the first three modes displayed similar degrees in terms of overlap, which were 0.545, 0.533, and 0.599 (Fig. 3
                        ). In addition, the quality of motion description was 95.07% for combining the first three modes. In the end, we studied the first two modes of Xpot and the first three modes of Cse1p to investigate their conformational changes induced by cargo bindings.

In order to test the assumption that the normal modes of exportins might be relevant to the functional flexibility, we did ENM both on the cargo-bound Cse1p (Matsuura and Stewart, 2004) and the cargo-free Cse1p (Cook et al., 2005). We referred to the structure of Cse1p as an N-terminal arch (HEAT 1 to HEAT 8) and a C-terminal arch (HEAT 9 to the C terminus) (Cook et al., 2007). On the cargo-bound Cse1p, we observed that the first mode was a one-hinge bending mode (Fig. 4a), the second mode was a torsion mode (Fig. 4b), and the third mode was identified as a two-hinge bending mode (Fig. 4c). In addition to studying how each mode moved directionally, we calculated normalized atomic fluctuations of the corresponding modes with respect to each HEAT repeat (Fig. 5
                        , top) (Tama et al., 2000). In the one-hinge bending mode, the region of HEAT 7 to HEAT 13 had the least atomic fluctuations that divided the structure of cargo-bound Cse1p into three parts. The other two parts (HEAT 1 to HEAT 6 and HEAT 14 to HEAT 20) move toward each other. As a result, a hinge region could be located near HEAT 10. In the torsion mode, HEAT 9 to HEAT 11 was the most inflexible region compared to other HEAT repeats. In the third mode, two hinges were considered near HEAT 7 and HEAT 13, respectively, which divided cargo-bound Cse1p into three parts (HEAT 1 to HEAT 6, HEAT 8 to HEAT 12, and HEAT 14 to HEAT 20). This two-hinge bending motion was asymmetric such that HEAT 1 moved toward HEAT 13 when HEAT 20 moved away from HEAT 7. Animations of these three modes can be seen in the supplementary data (S-1).

In the ENM of cargo-free Cse1p, the first three normal modes were considered as a bending mode (Fig. 4d), a twisting mode (Fig. 4e), and a complex mode composed of a twisting and a bending motion (Fig. 4f), respectively. These three modes all showed that the N-terminal arch had fewer atomic fluctuations than the C-terminal arch (Fig. 5, bottom). In the first mode, a hinge was considered to locate near HEAT 13, resulting in a bending motion such that the end of C-terminal arch moved toward the inner surface of HEAT 7 to HEAT 9. In the twisting mode, the motion included two separated rotations, which were HEAT 1 to HEAT 12 and HEAT 16 to HEAT 20. In the third mode, the complex motion consisted of one rotating movement of HEAT 17 to HEAT 20 and one bending movement, which had a hinge located near HEAT 5. Animations of these three modes can be seen in the supplementary data (S-2).

The general structure of Xpot consists of two arches, which are amino-terminal arch (HEAT 1 to HEAT 9) and C-terminal arch (HEAT 10 to C terminals) (Cook et al., 2009). In the case of cargo-bound Xpot, the first normal mode was a bending motion such that a hinge was considered to be located near HEAT 11 (Fig. 6a). The bending movement caused the end of the C-terminal arch to move toward the inner surface of HEAT 5 to HEAT 7. The second normal mode was considered as a twisting mode (Fig. 6b), which included two separated rotation motions (HEAT 1 to HEAT 11 and HEAT 12 to HEAT 19). Animations for these two modes can be seen in the supplementary data (S-3).

In the case of cargo-free Xpot, the first normal mode was a bending motion that led to the discovery of a hinge near HEAT 11. The bending mode made two arches of Xpot attractive to each other. The second normal mode was a twisting mode that included two separated rotating HEAT regions (HEAT 1 to HEAT 12 and HEAT 14 to HEAT 19). Animations for these two modes can be seen in the supplementary data (S-4).

Ran plays a central role during the NCT. It regulates dissociations of cargos for importins and associations of cargos for exportins. In order to study the effect of binding RanGTP to exportins, we simulated the binary structure of the cargo-bound Cse1p and the cargo-bound Xpot, which excluded the cargos (Kap60p and tRNA). In the first mode of cargo-bound Cse1p (Fig. 8a), we observed a bending motion. The bending showed that a hinge was located near HEAT 13 and the end of Cse1p was moving toward the region of HEAT 8 to HEAT 10. The second mode of cargo-bound Cse1p was considered as a torsion mode in that the region of HEAT 13 and HEAT 14 had the least movements (Fig. 8b). The third mode was a complex mode, which consisted of a rotational motion in the end of Cse1p and a bending motion in the middle part of Cse1p (Fig. 8c). A hinge might be considered near HEAT 8. Animations of these three modes can be seen in the supplementary data (S-5).

In the case of the complex structure of cargo-bound Xpot, the first mode could be considered as a bending motion such that a hinge region was found near HEAT 13 (Fig. 8d). The end of the C-terminal arch was moving toward the region of HEAT 7 to HEAT 9. The second mode was a torsion mode so that HEAT 13 seemed to have the fewest movements (Fig. 8e). Animations of these two modes can be seen in the supplementary data (S-6).

In this study, we built FEA models for the cargo-bound Cse1p and cargo-bound Xpot, and then performed the free-vibration analysis to study their natural vibrational modes. To evaluate the obtained natural modes, we also used values of overlap to quantify how close the mode shapes of these modes were to actual conformational changes induced by the cargo bindings. Prior to this, we mapped nodal points of the generated FEA models to known coordinates of alpha carbons of exportins and then calculated values of overlap for the first 20 modes.

In the case of Cse1p, the first three modes were the dominant ones with the values of overlap 0.592 (1st), 0.452 (2nd), and 0.607 (3rd), respectively. The first mode (Fig. 9a) showed a bending motion where most strains were distributed on the inner surface of the middle region of cargo-bound Cse1p. Moreover, the maximum strains were localized near the inner helix of HEAT 7 and 8, which resulted in a possible hinge region of cargo-bound Cse1p. The second mode was a torsion motion such that most distributions of strain were located on the middle part of cargo-bound Cse1p (Fig. 9b). In addition, the maximum strains were on the concave surface of the C-terminal arch near the inner helix of HEAT 12 and HEAT 13. For the third mode (Fig. 9c), the motion was considered as a two-hinge bending. Similar to the first two modes, the strains were mostly located on the inner surface of cargo-bound Cse1p. However, it was mainly localized on two separate regions, the concave surface of the N-terminal and C-terminal arches. Therefore, it resulted in two possible hinge-like areas. Changes in the distributions of strain during these natural vibrational modes can be seen in the supplemental data (S-7). In general, the mode shapes obtained from FEA were similar to the ones from ENM, which were a one-hinge bending (Fig. 4a), a torsion motion (Fig. 4b) and a two-hinge bending (Fig. 4c).

In the case of Xpot, the first two modes were the dominant ones with the values of overlap 0.739 (1st) and 0.406 (2nd). The first mode (Fig. 10a) was a bending motion such that the distribution of strain was mainly located on the inner surface of cargo-bound Xpot, ranging from B helix of HEAT 7 to B helix of HEAT 18. The maximum strains were located near B helix of HEAT 12. The second mode was a twisting motion such that strains were distributed all over the middle part of Xpot, ranging from HEAT 5 to HEAT 17. However, the maximum strain was localized on the concave surface of the C-terminal. Changes in the distributions of strain during these natural vibrational modes can be seen in the supplemental data (S-8). Like the FEA model of Cse1p, these mode shapes were similar to the ones from ENM, which were a one-hinge bending (Fig. 6a) and a twisting motion (Fig. 6b).

One quantitative datum for evaluating conformations of proteins is root mean square deviation (RMSD), which can indicate where flexible residues are during conformational changes. We utilized VMD to superimpose the cargo-bound and cargo-free conformations of the exportins, and then calculated the RMSD with respect to alpha carbons of individual HEAT repeat (Fig. 11
                        ). The result showed that HEAT 7 of Cse1p was the one to have the least conformational change with RMSD of 1.56Å. This agreed with the finding from the FEA model of cargo-bound Cse1p that the first bending mode generated a one-hinge region with concertized higher strains near HEAT 7 and HEAT 8. In the case of Xpot, the HEAT 11 was the smallest one with RMSD 1.16Å, which was close to the location of maximum strain in the bending mode of FEA model of cargo-bound Xpot. From the RMSD profiles of two exportins, good agreement was found between the experimental conformational changes and calculated virbational modes of FEA models.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

From our ENM analysis, we gave evidences that the conformations of exportins were important to their flexibilities that further affected the accommodation of cargo molecules. According to the mode shapes in Fig. 4, the harmonic motions of cargo-bound Cse1p made Cse1p more flexible than the motions of the cargo-free Cse1p. This feature was more profound in the region of HEAT 1 to HEAT 7 in the N-terminal arch. The region had less freedom in the first two normal modes of cargo-free Cse1p (Fig. 4d and e). The different flexible regions could partly explain why the conformation of cargo-bound Cse1p was capable of binding both RanGTP and Kap60p. In the two-hinge motion of cargo-bound Cse1p (Fig. 4c), HEAT 1 was moving toward the region of HEAT 13 and a part of the HEAT 19 loop. The movement helped Cse1p to bind with RanGTP. This confirmed the finding from the report of Matsuura et al. that the binding sites of RanGTP were located at HEAT 1 to HEAT 3 and HEAT 13 to HEAT 14 (Matsuura and Stewart, 2004). Consequently, the two-hinge bending mode of cargo-bound Cse1p could be the dominant mode for binding RanGTP. However, there was not much harmonic motion for separating HEAT 1 and the region of HEAT 13 to HEAT 16 in the normal modes of cargo-free Cse1p (Fig. 4d–f). In other words, the conformational dynamics of cargo-free Cse1p prevented the entry of Ran.

As suggested by Cook et al. (2005), there was strong electrostatic attraction between HEAT 1–2 and HEAT 14–16 that drove the formation of cargo-free Cse1p. The attraction was surpassed in the cargo-bound Cse1p by binding of RanGTP and Kap60p. This intramolecular interaction was also observed in a study of MD simulation on the cargo-bound Cse1p (Zachariae and Grubmuller, 2006). From ENM of cargo-bound Cse1p, the majority of harmonic motions in the one-hinge bending mode (Fig. 4a) and two-hinge bending mode (Fig. 4c) were between the N-terminal arch and the C-terminal arch. This harmonic dynamics might have a similar effect to the reported electrostatic attraction.

In the case of Xpot, the mode shapes of both forms were similar in the way the two arches displayed rigid-body harmonic domain motions, which were one bending and one twisting mode. Their atomic fluctuations (Fig. 7
                        ) also behaved similarly in that the middle regions of Xpot were relatively less flexible (HEAT 6 to HEAT 14) in the first mode, and the second mode had local similarity (HEAT 4 to HEAT 9 and HEAT 13 to HEAT 15). As the normal modes of Cse1p, however, the cargo-free conformation was less flexible than the cargo-bound conformation. The variance in Xpot and Cse1p implied that the building block of transport factors was the same HEAT-repeat structure; however, it played different roles in the individual protein structures. It was the overall topology of conformations that changed the functionality of karyopherins on the cargo-bound and cargo-free forms.

By studying the mode shapes of the binary complexes, we found that the binding of RanGTP was important to karyopherins. First of all, the binding helped stabilize the cargo-bound form of Cse1p, particularly on the N-terminal arche. The modes of cargo-bound Cse1p (Fig. 4a–c) showed that the N-terminal arch was very flexible. However, this characteristic was altered after binding to RanGTP. The binding not only sandwiched RanGTP between HEAT 1 to HEAT 3 and HEAT 12 to HEAT 13, but also made the N-terminal arch move together with RanGTP which increased the rigidity of Cse1p (Fig. 8a and b). This change of flexibility found on the N-terminal arch may support the statement in a recent review by Cook et al. (2007) that the cargo-bound conformation of Cse1p was induced or stabilized by RanGTP. A similar effect of stabilizing the N-terminal was also found on the binary complex of Xpot (Fig. 8d and e).

Secondly, a dominant mode was found on both exportins after binding to RanGTP. This mode could be the one to capture the corresponding cargos. In the case of Cse1p, the binding of RanGTP shifted the hinge region form HEAT 10 (Fig. 4a) to HEAT 13 (Fig. 8a). This shifting made the C-terminal arch function like tongs that bend to grip the Kap60p. We also observed that the N-terminal arch and RanGTP were moving together in a rigid-body motion. This also partly explained why Kap60p contacts both RanGTP and Cse1p in the cargo-bound form. From these observations, we speculated that the ability of binary structure to accommodate the cargo might result from the observed harmonic motions composed of the gripping motion of the C-terminal arch and the rigid-body motion of the N-terminal arch.

A similar gripping mode was also found on Xpot such that the hinge region was shifted from HEAT 11 (Fig. 5a) to HEAT 13 (Fig. 8d). This mode made the binary structure more able to capture tRNA than the one obtained from individual Xpot (Fig. 6a). This advantage could be validated from the fact that tRNA interacted with HEAT 8 to HEAT 18 of Xpot in the ternary complex (Cook et al., 2009). In summary, we used normal modes to illustrate that the different conformation due to the absence of RanGTP changed the binding affinity for the cargo macromolecules (Cook et al., 2007).

ENM and FEA are two fundamentally different coarse-grained methods. FEA is an approach of continuum mechanics, and ENM is an anisotropic approach. However, both methods produced the similar mode shapes. This may indicate that the nature vibrational modes of exportins are the same as the normal modes of exportins. This consistence agreed with a recent review (Meireles et al., 2011) describing normal modes as pre-existing and intrinsic modes that were determined by the topology of proteins. In other words, the flexible regions and the harmonic motions of the two exportins were inherent from the conformations of cargo-bound and cargo-free forms.

Revealing the relationship between structures and functions in proteins is one of the most important tasks in the area of computational biology. MD simulation is the most valuable and irreplaceable tool that can lead to great insights into the proteins’ dynamics (Karplus and Kuriyan, 2005; Karplus and McCammon, 2002). However, computational cost is a considerable factor for running MD simulation on a protein, especially when the size of the protein structure is large or the timescale of its dynamics is long (on the order of microseconds). Therefore, it is important that coarse-grained model should provide valuable insights into biological functions of proteins as well as the advantage of computational efficiency. In this study, all the simulations were conducted on an Intel Xeon 2.83GHz with an 128 GB RAM computer. Table 1
                         shows the computational cost of performing ENM and FEA in terms of the time of solving eigenvalues and eigenvectors, and both methods delivered good computational efficiency compared to traditional MD simulations.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

In this study, we used two coarse-grained methods (ENM and FEA) to study conformational dynamics of Cse1p and Xpot. We gave evidences that these intrinsic dynamics were inherent from their native cargo-bound and cargo-free conformations, and that dynamics had influence on their functional flexibilities that further affected the binding affinities. The most interesting finding was that it was the karyopherin's versatile conformations composed of the same superhelices of HEAT repeats that produced different degrees of functional flexibilities. Moreover, the mode shapes of natural vibrational modes from FEA were not only similar to normal modes from ENM, but also the distribution of vibrational strains was in good agreement with the observed conformational changes in the crystal structures, indicating that there are flexible and hinge-like regions. Visualization of the dynamic distribution of strains based on FEA can aid as a complementary tool to ENM for studying conformational dynamics of proteins. Since FEA allows the incorporation of external force for the simulation of mechanical response, it is therefore promising in simulating the physical contacts between the participating macromolecules during the NCT.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The authors thank Dr. Moon Kim of Sungkyunkwan University for providing simulation codes of ENM, and Dr. Mary Mckitrick for reading the manuscript.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2013.11.003.


                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

