@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#The frequency of poly(G) tracts in the human genome and their use as a sensor of DNA damage

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           The frequency of occurrence of poly(G) sequences was determined in the updated human genome.


                        
                        
                           
                           There was an exponential increase in the frequency of poly(G) sequences for lengths above eight nucleotides.


                        
                        
                           
                           Could poly(G) sequences be a sensitive sensor of cellular DNA damage?


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Cisplatin

DNA damage sensor

Exponential increase

Poly(G)

Poly(A)

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Tandem repeats of short DNA sequences are commonly found in human DNA. These simple sequence repeats or microsatellites are highly polymorphic in the human genome. Since the anti-tumour agent cisplatin preferentially forms DNA adducts at runs of consecutive guanine nucleotides (poly(G)), the position and frequency of occurrence of poly(G) sequences in the updated human genome was investigated. There are more runs of consecutive guanines than would be expected by random chance. This especially true for poly(G) sequences longer than approximately n
                     =9. A plot of poly(G) length against log(observed/expected) frequency produced a straight line for n
                     >9. A similar observation was also found for poly(A) DNA sequence repeats. This data implied that the increase in observed/expected frequency is directly related to length of DNA repeat. It was proposed that long runs of consecutive guanine nucleotides could be a sensitive sensor of cellular DNA damage since a number of DNA damaging agents cause lesions at poly(G) sequences.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Microsatellites or simple sequence repeats are a feature of the human genome. Simple sequence repeats are tandem repeats with a very short repeat unit of 1–13 nucleotides (Lander et al., 2001). Approximately 3% of the human genome is thought to consist of simple sequence repeats with dinucleotide repeats being most common (Lander et al., 2001).

Variations in the number of tandem repeats are common at simple sequence repeats and lead to a high frequency of polymorphisms at these sites. These polymorphisms are thought to be caused by slippage during replication (Ellegren, 2004; Bhargava and Fuentes, 2010). Alternatively recombination-based unequal crossing-over could also contribute to the production of these polymorphisms (Charlesworth et al., 1994; Bhargava and Fuentes, 2010).

Runs of consecutive nucleotides (repeat unit of one) are common in the human genome especially for poly(A) and poly(T) sequences. Poly(A) repeats are very frequent due to the re-integration of processed genes into the genome from mRNA with an attached poly(A) tail (Lander et al., 2001). Poly(G) and poly(C) repeats are less common than poly(A) or poly(T) repeats in the human genome since they are not part of this integrative mechanism.

The anti-tumour drug, cisplatin, preferentially forms DNA adducts at runs of consecutive guanines (Murray et al., 1992a,b, 2012; Murray, 2000; Murray and Kandasamy, 2012). As part of examining the frequency of occurrence of runs of consecutive guanines, we wished to observe the position and extent of poly(G) DNA sequences in the human genome. During this study, it was noticed that there are more runs of consecutive guanines than would be expected by random chance (Ellegren, 2004; Bhargava and Fuentes, 2010), and we explored the impact of the larger than expected poly(G) tracts on the DNA damage caused by cisplatin and other G-targeting DNA damaging agents.

The updated human hg19 DNA sequence was analysed to ascertain the frequency of occurrence of consecutive nucleotides. This was accomplished using Perl scripts where the frequency of occurrence of consecutive G, A, T or C nucleotides was determined. The use of repeat masker programs (Chen, 2002) did not reveal all of the poly(G) and poly(A) DNA sequences in the human genome.

The expected frequency of occurrence of a run of consecutive guanines is: (1−
                     x)xn
                     (1−
                     x) where x is the fraction of G in the human genome, and n is number of consecutive Gs. If xn
                      is the frequency of occurrence of consecutive Gs, then at each end of a run of consecutive nucleotides, there must be a non-G nucleotide that has a frequency of occurrence of 1−
                     x. A similar equation is utilised for the expected frequency of A, C and T. Since poly(G) sequences are equivalent to poly(C) on the complementary strand of DNA, the poly(G) and poly(C) frequencies were combined and described in the text below as poly(G) sequences; similarly the poly(A) and poly(T) frequencies were combined and described as poly(A).

@&#RESULTS@&#

In Table 1
                     , the observed frequency of occurrence of consecutive guanine nucleotides is depicted for poly(G) repeats. The observed frequency was found to be much higher than expected, especially when the number of repeats was greater than nine. The poly(G) observed/expected value reached 1.23×1012 for n
                     =31 and was 4.08×105 for n
                     =20.

The ratio of the observed/expected for successive nucleotide repeats (e.g. the ratio of n
                     =12/n
                     =11 was 3.05) is shown in Table 1. The ratio of the observed/expected for successive nucleotide repeats was surprisingly similar from n
                     =10 to n
                     =22 with an average of 2.98. This effect can be clearly observed in a plot of repeat length against log10(observed/expected) in Fig. 1
                      where a straight line can be drawn for values above n
                     =9. Using the linear portion of the graph from n
                     =10 to n
                     =25, the extrapolated graph intersected the x-axis at 8.4. This indicated that the exponential nature of the poly(G) DNA sequences begins at values of n
                     >8.

The ratio of observed/expected for successive nucleotide repeats includes an extra x in the formula (1−
                     x)xn
                     (1−
                     x); for example, with the successive nucleotide repeats n
                     =12 and n
                     =11, the expected frequency for successive nucleotide repeats is (1−
                     x)x
                     12(1−
                     x) divided by (1−
                     x)x
                     11(1−
                     x) which is equal to x. Since for guanine, x
                     =0.205, the average value for obsn+1/obsn
                     =2.98×0.205=0.61. Hence instead of the expected obsn+1/obsn value of 0.205, the average observed value was 0.61 which was approximately three (2.98) times higher than expected. This means that there was a 0.61 increase in slippage potential for each additional guanine nucleotide in the repeat.

The observed frequency of occurrence of consecutive adenine nucleotides is shown for poly(A) repeats in Table 2
                     . When the number of repeats was greater than six, the observed frequency was also found to be much higher than expected. For n
                     =31, the poly(A) observed/expected value was 6.15×1010 and was 1.25×106 for n
                     =20.

The ratio of the observed/expected for successive poly(A) nucleotide repeats was similar from n
                     =10 to n
                     =31 with an average of 2.71. This was slightly lower than the poly(G) result of 2.98. The plot of repeat length versus log10(observed/expected) in Fig. 2
                      shows that a straight line can be drawn for values above n
                     =7. Utilising the linear section of the graph from n
                     =10 to n
                     =31, the extrapolated straight line intersected the x-axis at 6.2. Hence the exponential increase in the repeat length of the poly(A) DNA sequences occurred at values of n
                     >6. This was slightly lower than the poly(G) value of 8.

Since the ratio of observed/expected for successive adenine nucleotide repeats includes an extra x in the formula (1−x)xn
                     (1−
                     x) and for adenine, x
                     =0.295, the average value for obsn+1/obsn
                     =2.71×0.295=0.80. The obsn+1/obsn value was expected to be 0.295 and, since the average observed value was 0.80, this was approximately three (2.71) times higher than expected. This value is slightly lower than the poly(G) value of 2.98. This indicates that the increase in slippage potential was 0.80 for each additional adenine nucleotide in the repeat.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The observed frequency of runs of consecutive nucleotides is higher than expected (Ellegren, 2004; Bhargava and Fuentes, 2010). In this study, the updated human genome was utilised and the observed/expected values began to increase exponentially above a repeat length of approximately six to eight. Extrapolation of the linear portion of the graphs in Figs. 1 and 2, indicated that the exponential nature of the poly(G) DNA sequences began at repeat length values greater than eight and this is slightly higher than the poly(A) value of six.

The ratio of the observed/expected for successive nucleotide repeats was surprisingly similar from n
                     =10 to n
                     =22 with an average of 2.98 for poly(G) and 2.71 for poly(A) from n
                     =10 to n
                     =31. Since the average values for poly(G) and poly(A) are also similar, this implies that the production mechanism is also similar.

Poly(A) tracts arise due to reverse transcription of poly(A)-containing mRNA and integration into the genome (processed genes) (Lander et al., 2001); whereas poly(G) tracts are due to replication slippage. However, once the poly(A) tracts are present in the genome, then replication slippage can occur in a similar manner to poly(G) tracts.

The linear nature of the logarithmic graph (Figs. 1 and 2) shows that mechanism is probabilistic. This means that the probability of replication slippage increases by a constant factor with repeat length. This can be interpreted as indicating that the larger the number repeat nucleotides that are present, the greater chance of slippage occurring and that this increase is a constant factor.

During DNA replication, a DNA sequence that contains a large number of repeats, will permit repeat slippage whereby a repeat can “loop-out” on the newly synthesised strand or on the DNA template (Bhargava and Fuentes, 2010). The longer the number of repeats, the more likely that “looping-out” can occur. A possible threshold value for this phenomenon has been postulated and estimated to be eight (Rose and Falush, 1998) and nine for mononucleotide repeats (Lai and Sun, 2003). The value found in this paper for poly(G) was eight but was lower for poly(A) at a value of six.

The difference in the threshold value for poly(G) and poly(A) could be due to the difference in stability between GC and AT base pairs. GC base pairs are more stable than AT base pairs and hence it would be more difficult for the poly(G) sequences to “loop-out” compared with poly(A). This could lead to a lower threshold value for poly(A) compared with poly(G).

The correlation of mutation rate with repeat length has been explored in previous studies and has suggested an exponential relationship rather than a linear one (Halangoda et al., 2001; Webster et al., 2002; Lai and Sun, 2003; Leopoldino and Pena, 2003; Whittaker et al., 2003). In this study, we have demonstrated an exponential relationship with updated DNA sequencing data from the human genome. The ratio of the observed/expected for successive nucleotide repeats was very similar for both poly(G) (2.98) and poly(A) (2.71) repeat sequences that indicated that a similar mechanism was operating.

It should be noted that the expected frequencies of poly(G) tracts in the human genome were determined using a simple random probabilistic model and the assumption that sites were independent. More complex models for calculating expected frequencies of DNA sequences in genomes have been devised, for example, Markovian chains (Dai et al., 2006; Bai et al., 2007; Vergne, 2008). In addition long-range correlations in the DNA sequences of genomes have been proposed (Li and Kaneko, 1992; Voss, 1992; Buldyrev et al., 1995). These more extensive models may provide a deeper understanding of the evolution of poly(G) tracts in the human genome that can only be determined if long-range and more complex correlations are explored. For example, the higher than expected frequency of poly(G) tracts may be due to duplication of key DNA sequences during evolution. Also the integrity of chromosomes may depend on a higher order DNA sequence organisation that includes the presence of poly(G) tracts. An analysis utilising these more complex models may unravel more elaborate genomic interactions.

The original impetus for investigating this area, was to determine the frequency and position of poly(G) tracts in the human genome, since the anti-tumour drug cisplatin preferentially forms adducts at runs of consecutive guanines (Murray et al., 1992a,b, 2012; Murray, 2000; Murray and Kandasamy, 2012). If transcribed, poly(G) tracts will put a strain on the transcriptional machinery to supply sufficient substrate nucleotides without causing polymerase pausing. A similar situation exists during the DNA replication of runs of consecutive guanine nucleotides.

The presence of DNA lesions at these poly(G) tracts will cause extra difficulty for polymerases to pass. Thus these consecutive nucleotide tracts would be a highly sensitive sensor for DNA damage and would signal to the cell that this type of stress is occurring. A number of anti-tumour drugs and agents present in the environment cause lesions at poly(G) tracts (Murray, 2000).

Hence could poly(G) tracts act as a sensitive sensor for DNA damage? A sensor protein could be present at poly(G) sequences and signal activation of repair processes if DNA damage is present. This sensor protein could accomplish this by linking to ATR protein and activating subsequent signal transduction pathways (Jung and Lippard, 2007; Kelland, 2007). If the level of DNA damage was considerable, induction of apoptosis could occur when high levels of DNA damage are present at these DNA sequences. A number of transcription factors bind to poly(G) sequences, for example MAZR (Kobayashi et al., 2000) and could fulfil the role of sensor protein.

Actively transcribed genes are preferentially repaired due to transcription-coupled repair (Hanawalt and Spivak, 2008; Iyama and Wilson, 2013). It should be noted that non-transcribed genes will have higher levels of DNA damage, due to a lack of transcription-coupled repair, and hence would be a better sensor for DNA damage during DNA replication.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENT@&#

Support of this work by the University of New South Wales, Science Faculty Research Grant Scheme is gratefully acknowledged.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

