@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Systems biology approach reveals possible evolutionarily conserved moonlighting functions for enolase

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Enolase interaction networks were designed for four distantly related organisms.


                        
                        
                           
                           Enolase was identified as a bottleneck node in all designed networks.


                        
                        
                           
                           Enolase non glycolic partners indicate several moonlighting functions.


                        
                        
                           
                           Enolase connectivity patterns indicate partial conservation in its interactions.


                        
                        
                           
                           Some enolase moonlighting functions seem to be evolutionary conserved.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Enolase

Glycolytic enzyme

Moonlighting functions

Systems biology

Protein–protein interaction network

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Glycolytic enzymes, such as enolase, have been described as multifunctional complex proteins that also display non-glycolytic activities, termed moonlighting functions. Although enolase multifunctionality has been described for several organisms, the conservation of enolase alternative functions through different phyla has not been explored with more details. A useful strategy to investigate moonlighting functions is the use of systems biology tools, which allow the prediction of protein functions/interactions by graph design and analysis. In this work, available information from protein–protein interaction (PPI) databases were used to design enolase PPI networks for four eukaryotic organisms, namely Homo sapiens, Drosophila melanogaster, Caenorhabditis elegans, and Saccharomyces cerevisiae, covering a wide spectrum of this domain of life. PPI networks with number of nodes ranging from 140 to 411 and up to 15,855 connections were generated, and modularity and centrality analyses, and functional enrichment were performed for all of them. The performed analyses showed that enolase is a central node within the networks, and that, in addition to its canonical interactions with proteins related to glycolysis and energetic metabolism, it is also part of protein clusters related to different biological processes, like transcription, development, and apoptosis, among others. Some of these non-glycolytic clusters, are partially conserved between networks, in terms of overall sharing of orthologs, overall cluster structure, and/or at the levels of key regulatory proteins within clusters. Overall, our results provided evidences of enolase multifunctionality and evolutionary conservation of enolase PPIs at all these levels.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

One of the major challenges of post-genomic biology is to understand how genes, proteins and other molecules interact to compose cellular systems (Zhang et al., 2007). Nowadays, the idea of “one gene, one protein, one function” has been replaced by the knowledge that many proteins display multiple functions (Jeffery, 2009). For example, the so called moonlighting proteins could display two or more different functions within a single polypeptide chain (Copley, 2012). The functions of a moonlighting protein may depend on cellular localization, cell type, oligomeric state, and/or the cellular concentration of ligands, substrates, cofactors or products (Jeffery, 1999). These different factors are not mutually exclusive and, in many cases, the functions of a protein depend on the overall physiological status of the cell. Therefore, the identification of one or more non-canonical, moonlighting functions of a given protein can be a difficult task, and, in this context, protein–protein interactions (PPI) databases can be useful tools. Systems biology approaches using PPI databases have been successfully applied for inferences on moonlighting functions for different proteins (Campanaro et al., 2007; Delprato, 2012; Gómez et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2013a).

The development of high-throughput methods for the study of biological molecules interactions, such as protein microarrays(Jones et al., 2006), two-hybrid assays (Yu et al., 2008), co-immunoprecipitation (Hegele et al., 2012) and peptide phage display (Carducci et al., 2012), allowed the generation of robust PPI databases for four eukaryotic organisms, namely the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the free living nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster, and man Homo sapiens. To understand how cellular events are coordinated at the molecular level, the information contained in these databases can be arranged in a graph context to create PPI networks (Milenković and Przulj, 2008; Simonis et al., 2009). The properties of PPI networks can be explored to identify interaction possibilities whose effectiveness depend on physical binding events (Deeds et al., 2012). The cumulative effect of such events results in a distribution of protein complexes that ultimately determines cellular behavior.

Enolase, also known as phosphopyruvate hydratase, is a glycolytic enzyme that catalyzes the dehydratation of 2-phosphoglycerate to phosphoenolpyruvate. This protein is present in all three domains of life and is one of the most abundantly expressed cytosolic proteins in many organisms (Piast et al., 2005). In addition to its classical involvement in glycolysis, other functional roles have been described for enolase. For example, enolase plays an important role in mouse mast cell differentiation (Ryu et al., 2012). Knockdown of enolase expression in different tumor cell lines causes a dramatic increase in their sensitivity to microtubule targeting drugs, suggesting that enolase expression levels can affect the sensitivity of tumor cell lines to anti-tubulin drugs (Georges et al., 2011). Moreover, enolase (and other glycolytic enzymes) has been involved in a specific apoptosis mechanism, in which it is externalized and participate in immune modulation, holding promise for understanding and addressing causes of autoimmune and inflammatory pathology (Ucker et al., 2012). Although the multifunctionality of enolase has been increasingly evident, it is not yet clear how many different functions this protein can play and whether its non-glycolytic functions are evolutionarily conserved or not.

In this work, a systems biology approach was used to investigate the moonlighting functions of enolase in different eukaryotic organisms. This approach allowed the comparison of possible enolase interactions and functions in S. cerevisiae D. melanogaster, C. elegans and man. Our results showed that enolase is a central node in all designed networks and is involved in conserved interactions with proteins related to different cellular functions. Besides its canonical interactions with proteins related to glycolysis and energetic metabolism, enolase was also found as part of conserved proteins clusters associated with several other biological processes. The importance of enolase moonlighting functions in such evolutionarily conserved networks is discussed.

@&#MATERIAL AND METHODS@&#

Multiple sequence alignments were performed with the Clustal Omega software (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/msa/clustalo/) (Sievers et al., 2011) to define enolase orthologs used for network design. Human enolase α isoform (gi|1167843|emb|CAA34360.1| alpha-enolase [H. sapiens]) was established as reference, along with the single S. cerevisiae enolase (gi|171457|gb|AAA88713.1| enolase [S. cerevisiae]). Enolase A (gi|22945470|gb|AAN10458.1| enolase, isoform A [D. melanogaster]), and enolase 1 (gi|3879986|emb|CAA92692.1| Protein ENOL-1, isoform a [C. elegans]) were defined by sequence identity and similarity criteria as the orthologs in D. melanogaster and C. elegans, respectively.

Enolase PPI networks of model organisms were designed using the metasearch tool STRING 8.2 (http://www.string-db.org). In this sense, the following parameters were used: active prediction methods all enabled except text mining; no more than 50 interactions; and high confidence score (0.700). To calculate the confidence score of a specific connection, various major sources of interaction/association data were benchmarked independently by STRING (Szklarczyk et al., 2011), and combined scores were computed to indicate higher confidences when more than one type of information supported any association. Taking these parameters into account, networks were generated for H. sapiens, D. melanogaster, C. elegans and S. cerevisiae. STRING searches were subsequently analyzed using Cytoscape 2.6.3 (http://www.cytoscape.org) (Shannon et al., 2003). The networks were analyzed in terms of global topology, to define the number of protein clusters (subnetworks), using Cytoscape AllegroMCODE plugin (http://www.allegroviva.com/allegromcode) (Gudbjartsson et al., 2000). The parameters used in AllegroMCODE to generate subnetworks were: loops included; degree cutoff 2, node score cutoff 0.2, K-Core 2, and maximum depth of network 100. Each subnetwork obtained from this analysis was evaluated in terms of gene ontologies (GOs).

Networks centralities (Scardoni et al., 2009), based on node degree (the number of edges connected to each node) and betweenness (the number of shortest paths from all vertices to all others that pass through each node), were calculated by Cytoscape CentiScaPe 1.21 plugin (http://www.cbmc.it/∼scardonig/centiscape/centiscape.php). Highly connected nodes, considered hubs, were defined as those with node degree value higher than the node degree value threshold for the total network. Bottleneck nodes were defined as those with betweenness values higher than the network betweenness threshold.

The generated protein clusters were analyzed by the Biological Networks Gene Ontology (BiNGO) (version 2.44) Cytoscape plugin http://www.cytoscape.org (Maere et al., 2005) to identify major associated biological processes. The degree of functional enrichment for a given cluster and category (P-value) was calculated using hypergeometric distribution, and multiple test correction was also valued by the false discovery rate (FDR) algorithm, fully implemented with a significance level of P
                        <0.05.

The degree of evolutionary network conservation among different organisms was evaluated by analyzing the type and number of ortholog proteins found in each network. For this purpose, we compared ortholog proteins between each two networks, considering all possible pairs, and, finally, among all networks. Amino acid sequences from probable ortholog proteins were submitted to multiple alignments using the Clustal Omega software. Only proteins with similarity higher than 50% were considered, according to Pearson (2013), in order to define orthologs. The functional categories of the orthologs were identified using the KOG tool (http://genome.jgi.doe.gov/Tutorial/tutorial/kog.html) (Götz et al., 2011). To compare the proteins present in the networks, the identity of proteins were verified in specific databases for each organism (H. sapiens: http://www.genecards.org; D. melanogaster: http://flybase.org; C. elegans: http://www.wormbase.org; S. cerevisiae: http://www.yeastgenome.org).

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

In an attempt to explore evolutionarily conserved structures from different enolase interaction networks, we selected enolase ortholog isoforms from four distantly related species, representative of mammals (H. sapiens), arthropods (D. melanogaster), helminths (C. elegans) and yeast (S. cerevisiae). Extensive protein interaction data are available for these species, and a network was generated for each organism from the PPI data available in the corresponding database.

The global shape of the designed enolase networks is shown in Fig. 1
                        , and protein components and their centrality parameters are shown in S-Table 1. The number of enolase interaction proteins (nodes) recovered from databases varied from 140 to 411, while the number of connections varied widely (from 3137 to 15,855) among the networks. Interestingly, the number of proteins directly connected to enolase or that are its first neighbors varied only slightly among the networks, from 20 to 39 proteins. The H. sapiens alpha-enolase network contains 411 proteins and 4643 connections. Among these proteins, 20 are directly connected to human alpha-enolase (Fig. 1A). Likewise, we designed the D. melanogaster enolase A-associated network, with 390 proteins, 15,855 connections and 39 enolase first neighbors (Fig. 1B); the C. elegans enolase 1-associated network, with 140 proteins, 3147 connections and 24 enolase first neighbors (Fig. 1C); and the S. cerevisiae enolase-associated network, with 397 proteins, 3367 connections and 31 enolase first neighbors (Fig. 1D).

In order to obtain reliable networks, only interactions with a high confidence score (>0.700) were considered, which means that the reported interactions were confirmed by more than one approach (Larkin et al., 2007). This reinforces the fact that the observed enolase interactions can be taken as representative of biological events. The use of a stringent confidence score inevitably restricts the size of the networks, which is more evident for smaller PPI databases, as in the case of the C. elegans enolase 1 network (140 nodes). The use of small networks has also been described elsewhere (Abul-Husn et al., 2011; Lilburn et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2013b), and despite the relatively small sizes of the enolase networks describe here, reliable PPI information was extracted from them.

The centrality analyses evaluate each network node according to the node degree and betweenness (see S-Table 1) to select the most central nodes within the network (Lilburn et al., 2011; Scardoni et al., 2009). It was used to identify proteins that are bottleneck nodes, hubs or hub-bottlenecks (proteins combining bottleneck and hub properties into a scale-free biological network (Yu et al., 2007), which are suggestive of key regulatory functions for these proteins in the cell. The centrality analyses identified the following numbers of bottleneck, hub, and hub-bottleneck proteins, respectively, in the designed networks: 8, 98 and 51 for H. sapiens; 20, 153 and 56 for D. melanogaster; 20, 64 and 141 for C. elegans; and 14, 92 and 74 for S. cerevisiae.

As shown in Fig. 2
                        , enolase was identified as a bottleneck node in all designed networks, indicating it is an important protein connecting other proteins and also clusters for the four studied species. Enolase was found as a hub only in S. cerevisiae (Fig. 2D), which suggests that enolase play more regulatory roles in this species, as also evident from the connectivity shown by the modularity analysis (Fig 2D).

High aggregation is an essential characteristic of biological systems, and can be visualized in the form of high modularization in PPI networks (Li et al., 2014). Therefore, in the context of high complexity of a PPI network of any given organism, a large number of protein clusters (subnetworks) is expected. Besides, functional investigation of the protein cluster components is expected to generate a better understanding of cellular functions, processes, and overall organization of a biological system.

From the overall topologies of the enolase networks shown in Fig. 1, several clusters can be inferred. The connections between different clusters and between them and enolase for each network are shown in Fig. 3
                        . Seven clusters of highly connected proteins were found in H. sapiens, D. melanogaster and S. cerevisiae networks, while four clusters were found in C. elegans network.

Although clusters were primarily identified based on network topology, the assumption underlying this approach is that clusters will identify groups of proteins which perform similar functions (Koh et al., 2012). For a multifunctional protein as enolase, functional analyses of clusters within PPI networks are expected to demonstrate not only its canonical glycolytic interactions, but also its moonlighting interactions in the context of other cellular processes. Thus, gene ontology (GO) analyses were performed using BiNGO to assign functions to the proteins found in each network (S-Table 2). For all clusters of the four designed enolase networks, protein components could be assigned to 1 (H. sapiens cluster 3) to 13 (C. elegans cluster 1) biological functions. However, the functional enrichment in terms of larger numbers of proteins associated to a certain function (see S-Table 2) allowed us to assign a main biological function to each cluster in all networks, and these cluster main functions are indicated by colors in Figs. 1 and 3. A glycolysis cluster, initially expected for an enolase network, was identified only in the H. sapiens network (cluster 3), and, interestingly, enolase is not part of this cluster, although directly connected to it. Other glycolytic enzymes are also present in the D. melanogaster, C. elegans and S. cerevisiae networks, but, for these organisms, they are in different clusters or out of them. The presence of enolase and some of the other glycolytic enzymes as external hubs (connecting clusters) or as components of essentially non-glycolytic clusters was interpreted as a consequence of the interactions of these enzymes with non-glycolytic protein partners in different clusters. This reflects their multifunctionality, previously described for enolase and other glycolytic enzymes (Díaz-Ramos et al., 2012; Gómez-Arreaza et al., 2014; Kim and Dang, 2005), and is an evidence of moonlighting.

Although moonlighting functions have been described for enolase (Díaz-Ramos et al., 2012), our results pointed out to a broader range of enolase interactions, which implicate possible participation of this protein of biological processes as diverse as cell death and growth, or apoptosis and transcription. Some of these interactions are conserved from S. cerevisiae to human, such as those related to development and transcription, possibly in consequence of their ancestrality, although coevolution can not be discarded as an alternative explanation at this point. On the other hand, the also observed nonconserved enolase functions are indicative that, throughout evolution, enolase has been coopted to perform different functions and to participate in different biological processes in different organisms.

The connectivity between different clusters, and between clusters and enolase was then examined, showing complex patterns of cluster–cluster and enolase–cluster connections for all networks (Fig. 3). Considering the connectivity between clusters, the H. sapiens, D. melanogaster and S. cerevisiae networks, all with 7 clusters each, presented similar numbers of cluster–cluster interactions (9 or 10). These connectivity patterns, somewhat similar for the 3 species, are likely to reflect the biological complexity of enolase interactions. The smaller complexity observed for the C. elegans enolase network, with just 3 clusters and 2 cluster–cluster interactions, possibly reflects lack of information in the C. elegans PPI dataset.

The analysis of enolase–cluster interactions allowed to demonstrate enolase connectivity with most of the clusters in all networks, indicating its functional involvement with 10 different, non-glycolytic biological functions. Five of these non-glycolytic clusters (related to development, transcription, growth, multicellular organismal aging and embryonic development) were found connected to enolase in at least two of the designed networks, which can be taken as evidence of evolutionary conservation of at least some of the putative enolase non-glycolytic (moonlighting) functions. While H. sapiens alpha-enolase, and D. melanogaster enolase A are out of clusters, C. elegans enolase 1 and S. cerevisiae enolase are within a specific cluster (cluster 3 and 4, respectively). This results from the larger number of enolase connection within these clusters and points out to a more direct involvement of the protein with multicellular organismal aging, in C. elegans, and with apoptosis, in S. cerevisiae.

The hypothesis of evolutionary conservation of enolase moonlighting functions and enolase PPI networks was further explored by analyzing the overall presence of ortholog proteins between networks, by comparing the structures of clusters assigned to same functional processes in different networks, and by integrating the orthology and centrality analyses to compare only hub-bottleneck ortholog proteins between networks.

The identification of ortholog proteins shared between the designed networks is presented in S-Table 3 and summarized in Figs. 4A. A total of 55 proteins had orthologs identified in at least two networks, with 18 being present in three of them, and nine being present in all four networks. The GO terms applied to the 55 orthologs by Blast2GO assigned them to different cellular components, molecular functions, and biologic processes, as shown in Fig. 4
                        B–D.

Considering cellular components (Fig. 4B), shared orthologs between networks were predominantly assigned to the cell (40%) and organelle (30%) categories, which is in line with the idea of enolase as a typical cytoplasmic protein. However, extracellular (1%) and membrane-enclosed lumen (11%) proteins were also identified, which may indicate ectopic enolase localization and interactions, already described for this protein and suggestive of moonlight (Lorenzatto et al., 2012; Mouveaux et al., 2014; Falabella et al., 2009). Regarding molecular functions (Fig. 4C), the catalytic activity category, although underrepresented (2%), includes all glycolytic enzymes, as expected based on the canonical function of enolase. The most represented molecular functions among orthologs found in the enolase PPI networks were molecular transducer (52%) and transcriptional regulator (45%) activities. Such alternative activities for enolase have been proposed in studies performed with different species (Díaz-Ramos et al., 2012; Gómez-Arreaza et al., 2014). Finally, classification of orthologs according to biological processes showed a predominant involvement of these conserved proteins with metabolic (25%) and cellular (24%) processes, essentially as expected for enolase counterparts. However, it is interesting to note that some alternative biological processes were also relatively well represented, namely biological regulation (7%), multicellular organismal (7%), and developmental (6%) processes.

In order to further explore conserved features between enolase PPI networks, the structures of clusters assigned to same biological processes (ortholog clusters) were compared. In relation to cluster sizes (see S-Table 1), it was observed that for most of the identified ortholog clusters there is a considerable difference between the number of proteins assigned for each of them. For instance, clusters 2 and 6 from H. sapiens and S. cerevisiae, both associated to growth, have, respectively 56 and 11 proteins, clusters 6 and 3 from D. melanogaster and C. elegans, both associated to molecular organismal aging, have, respectively 25 and 15 proteins, and clusters 4, 3 and 1 from H. sapiens, D. melanogaster and C. elegans, all associated to embryonic development, have, respectively 17, 35 and 75 proteins. Such variation can be a result of evolutionary variation between networks from divergent organisms, although differences between the PPI datasets of the different species can not be excluded as an alternative cause (especially in the case of the C. elegans dataset, as discussed above). For 3 cases, however, similar sizes were observed between ortholog clusters. This was observed for the transcription clusters of H. sapiens (cluster 1) and S. cerevisiae (cluster 1), with 37 and 35 proteins, respectively; for the DNA replication clusters of H. sapiens (cluster 6) and S. cerevisiae (cluster 7), with 13 and 12 proteins, respectively; and for the development clusters of H. sapiens (cluster 7) and S. cerevisiae (cluster 5), with 21 and 19 proteins, respectively. Such cases are also indicative of evolutionary conservation of these functions in enolase PPI networks.

To better evaluate the evolutionary conservation of enolase putative moonlighting functions, we also analyzed the whole set of ortholog proteins found in the enolase PPI networks (55 proteins) to identify those that act as hub-bottlenecks in more than one network. Of the total of 55 ortholog protein species, 13 (∼24%) were identified as hub-bottlenecks, with 10 being hub-bottlenecks in two networks, and 3 appearing as such in three networks (Table 1
                        ). Therefore, conserved proteins among enolase PPI network include a significant fraction of key network regulatory proteins. None of these proteins were identified as hub-bottlenecks in all four networks, which can be also a result of a deficient PPI dataset for C. elegans, with only one ortholog hub-bottleneck protein, while H. sapiens, D. melanogaster and S. cerevisiae presented 7, 9, and 12, respectively.

To identify the functional processes in which the 13 different hub-bottleneck ortholog proteins are involved, we mapped their functional cluster distribution within networks. It was found that, most of hub-bottleneck ortholog proteins do not belong to the same functional cluster in different species (see Table 1 color codes). For example, the H. sapiens glycolytic proteins fructose-bisphosphate aldolase, glucose-6-phosphate isomerase, transaldolase, and transketolase are in the glycolysis cluster, while the corresponding orthologs are in the cell death cluster in S. cerevisiae. Also, the D. melanogaster pyruvate carboxylase and elongation factor gamma proteins are in the mitotic cell cycle cluster, while their corresponding orthologs are in the DNA replication, apoptosis clusters, respectively, in S. cerevisiae.

On the other hand, transcription seems to be an evolutionary conserved process both at the cluster level and at the hub-bottleneck level. As also shown on Table 1, the hub-bottleneck proteins nucleoside diphosphate kinase and RNA polymerase II subunit have their orthologs in the same functional cluster (transcription) for both H. sapiens and S. cerevisiae, although they appear in the mitotic cell cycle cluster and the embryonic development cluster, respectively, in D. melanogaster. These results, along with those from functional modularity analysis, suggest that the degree of evolutionary conservation in enolase PPI networks differ depending on the analyzed parameter. Different degrees of conservation between networks were observed in terms of overall sharing of orthologs, overall cluster structure, or at the level of key regulatory proteins within clusters. However, there are evidences of enolase multifunctionality and evolutionary conservation of enolase PPI at all these levels.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

We have used a systems biology approach to describe PPIs that define enolase moonlighting functions, including some that are conserved among distantly related eukaryotic species. The systems biology pipeline established for enolase can also be used for other glycolytic enzymes, including for pyruvate kinase, whose involvement in cancer cell metabolism has been described (Zhang et al., 2013c).

Several studies have shown that enolase is a multifunctional protein (Georges et al., 2011; Lorenzatto et al., 2012; Piast et al., 2005; Ryu et al., 2012) and the use of enolase (and other proteins) for additional tasks in the cell seems to be recurrent. However, it is not so clear whether these functions were evolutionarily conserved. It is known that PPI is among the mechanisms that can determine enolase additional (moonlighting) functions, and, here, we provided evidence of PPIs that define enolase moonlighting functions, some of which conserve from yeast to human. The observed conservation of enolase non-glycolytic functions is partial and may be the result of common ancestrality or convergent evolution, a distinction that will require specific studies to be done.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This work was supported by Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior (CAPES) and Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico (CNPq). G.P.P. was a recipient of a CNPq undergraduate fellowship. K.R.L. was a recipient of a CNPq Ph.D. fellowship.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2015.04.010.

The following are Supplementary data to this article:
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

