@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Identification of chebulinic acid as potent natural inhibitor of M. tuberculosis DNA gyrase and molecular insights into its binding mode of action

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Checking multiple and extensively drug resistant TB by targeting wild type and three mutant variants of DNA gyrase.


                        
                        
                           
                           After exhaustive screening of natural compounds, one compound namely, chebulinic acid (CA) was identified as active against all 4 variants.


                        
                        
                           
                           Molecular dynamics revealed binding stability of CA with DNA gyrase chain A.


                        
                        
                           
                           Two mechanisms are proposed for its antibacterial activity: displacement of crucial residue and steric hindrance due to DNA binding.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Chebulinic acid

DNA gyrase

Multiple drug resistance

Tuberculosis

Virtual screening

Molecular dynamics simulations

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Drug resistant tuberculosis has threatened all the advances that have been made in TB control at the global stage in the last few decades. DNA gyrase enzymes are an excellent target for antibacterial drug discovery as they are involved in essential functions like DNA replication. Here we report, a successful application of high throughput virtual screening (HTVS) to identify an inhibitor of Mycobacterium DNA gyrase targeting the wild type and the most prevalent three double mutants of quinolone resistant DNA gyrase namely A90V+D94G, A74S+D94G and A90V+S91P. HTVS of 179.299 compounds gave five compounds with significant binding affinity. Extra presicion (XP) docking and MD simulations gave a clear view of their interaction pattern. Among them, chebulinic acid (CA), a phytocompound obtained from Terminalia chebula was the most potent inhibitor with significantly high XP docking score, −14.63, −16.46, −15.94 and −15.11 against wild type and three variants respectively. Simulation studies for a period of 16ns indicated stable DNA gyrA–CA complex formation. This stable binding would result in inhibition of the enzyme by two mechanisms. Firstly, binding of CA causes displacement of catalytic Tyr129 away from its target DNA-phosphate molecule from 1.6Å to 3.8–7.3Å and secondly, by causing steric hindrance to the binding of DNA strand at DNA binding site of enzyme. The combined effect would result in loss of cleavage and religation activity of enzyme leading to bactericidal effect on tuberculosis. This phytocompound displays desirable quality for carrying forward as a lead compound for anti-tuberculosis drug development. The results presented here are solely based on computations and need to be validated experimentally in order to assert the proposed mechanism of action.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#


                     Mycobacterium tuberculosis causes one of the most severely affecting human diseases called tuberculosis. With present scenario of time-taking, inappropriate use of the first line of tuberculosis therapeutics led to emergence of multiple-drug resistant M. tuberculosis (MDR-TB) and has threatened the TB control programme at global stage (World Health Organization, 2013a). According to WHO report of 2012, 750,000 cases of MDR-TB cases of MDR-TB have been reported and near about 170,000 deaths have been attributed to MDR-TB. Along with this, 92 countries have reported cases of extensively-drug-resistant (XDR) TB with half of the cases coming from China, India, and the Russian Federation (World Health Organization, 2013a,b). In case of MDR-TB, WHO advocates fluoroquinolone drugs like ofloxacin when predisposition to the first line drug’s report are not available in the continuation period (18 months) before changing the course of treatment or if resistance to at least two drugs rifampicin and isoniazid is proven (Walwaikar et al., 2003). However, in light of emergence drug resistance cases, key for controlling both wild type and MDR-TB is the search of a common inhibitor of tuberculosis DNA gyrase and its drug resistant mutant gyrase.

Type II topoisomerases are crucial enzymes involved in controlling, modifying DNA’s topology and regulating supercoiling of DNA (Champoux, 2001). DNA gyrA aids in relaxing of DNA at the replication forks by inducing a nick and DNA topoisomerase IV mediates the process of unlinking of interlocked daughter chromosomes (Levine et al., 1998). DNA gyrA is a part of type II topoisomerase and performs both the functions of supercoiling DNA and inducing breaks in DNA, relieving the tension in DNA strands supercoil and after DNA replication unlinking of daughter DNA efficiently (Aubry et al., 2006a; Cole et al., 1998). Both type II topoisomerases comprises two subunits of gyrA and gyrB and together they form the catalytically active heterotetrameric enzyme (i.e. A2B2). Subunit A consists of two domains, the N-terminal breakage-reunion domain also known as G segment at the DNA gate. It functions by binding the DNA segment, cleaving and resealing it. The second domain is C-terminal domain (CTD). Subunit B is also comprised of two domains, ATPase domain and the toprim domain (Schoeffler and Berger, 2008). Fluoroquinolone shows its powerful bactericidal activity by meddling with the enzymatic reaction process of bacterial type II topoisomerases. The drug binds to the enzyme–DNA complex with high affinity and stabilizes the covalent bond formed between catalytic 129 tyrosine residue of enzyme and DNA phosphate. Stabilization of this ternary complex hinders with normal function of the enzyme and halts the DNA replication process which ultimately causes bacterial cell death (Oates et al., 1991). However, resistance was reported against fluoroquinolone-based drugs. A study conducted by Shi et al. in 2003 on 109 clinical isolates showed that 87 samples of them were fluoroquinolone resistant. Sequencing of quinolone binding pocket (QBP) of DNA revealed many drug resistant mutations, however, we would focus on more frequently occurring mutations, specifically at 74, 90, 91, and 94 codon position. At 94th codon position four different type of point mutations are observed (Asp94 to Gly/Ala/Tyr/Asn) (Shi et al., 2006). This study mostly confirmed the findings of other researchers (Alangaden et al., 1995; Cheng et al., 2004; Xu et al., 1996). However, two unique observations were made for the first time, one observation was that 49 of the 87 ofloxacin-resistant isolates (56%) had double point mutations and the second was presence of a unique Ala74-Ser mutation in 20% (10/49) of the isolates (Shi et al., 2006). The high rate at which these double point mutations were observed in gyrA and emergence of Ala74-Ser mutation showed rise in development of fluoroquinolone resistant strains (Cheng et al., 2004; Xu et al., 1996). A real threat of rise in extensively drug-resistant (XDR) strains has been posed by the findings of this study (An et al., 2009; Sun et al., 2008; van Doorn et al., 2008). This QRDR segment is located in the breakage-reunion domain of gyrA subunit (QRDR-A) and with low frequency it also has been seen in the toprim domain of gyrB (QRDR-B) (Aubry et al., 2006b; Veziris et al., 2007).

Despite of having a number of potent drugs for tuberculosis, hunt for new potential drug candidates are continuously on the rise owing to increasing incidence of drug resistance. Screening of potential drug compounds using computational techniques possesses great potential to expedite the process of drug discovery. (Sun, 2008; Goyal et al., 2014; Dhiman et al., 2013; Dhanjal et al., 2014). Considering the need for drugs effective against both wild type and fluoroquinolone resistant mutants caused by mutations in A90V+S91P, A90V+D94G, and A74S+D94G (Piton et al., 2010), natural compounds were docked against M. tuberculosis DNA gyrase. A phytocompound library of 169,109 natural compounds taken from zinc database along with 10,000 compounds from Myria-screening databases and 190 self-created compounds was screened using parallel high throughput virtual screening (Dhanjal et al., 2014; Goyal et al., 2013). The study identified chebulinic acid (CA), a natural phytocompound obtained from Terminalia chebula as the most potent drug candidate to treat both TB and fluoroquinolone resistant mutant gyrase by inhibiting DNA gyrA. T. chebula is one of the three constituent of triphala (Lu et al., 2012) and is being used since ages in the Indian Ayurvedic discipline for curing many ailments related to the gastrointestinal and cardiovascular systems (Singh et al., 2008; Pawar et al., 2009; Baliga, 2010). Recently, in vivo studies in mice has demonstrated that triphala constituents can inhibit the growth of stomach cancer, murine thymic lymphoma and human pancreatic cancer, it also has antibacterial properties but its effect particularly on TB have not been studied much (Baliga, 2010; Deep et al., 2005; Shi et al., 2008; Malekzadeh et al., 2001). The study attempts to find a natural compound which has bactericidal properties against wild type M. tuberculosis DNA gyrA and which can also be effective against multi-drug resistant (MDR)-TB.

The crystal structure of M. tuberculosis DNA gyrA, consisting of two domains i.e. the N-terminal breakage-reunion domain and a C-terminal domain (CTD) having PDB accession code—3IFZ and Streptococcus pneumoniae topoisomerase IV catalytic core with PDB accession code—3FOF was retrieved. Crystal water molecules and all non-bonded heteroatoms including the docked ligand were removed from the protein structures using Accelerys Viewerlite 5.0 (Accelrys, 2015). For the sake of reducing the computational time, only A chain of DNA gyrase subunit A was chosen for docking and molecular dynamics studies. Using tfmodeller, DNA was docked with M. tuberculosis DNA gyrase subunit A taking S. pneumoniae topoisomerase IV as a reference structure already docked to DNA (Laponogov et al., 2009). Tfmodeller screens a library of known experimental protein structures in complex with DNA to drive docking of the query protein with the DNA molecule. The model was validated using protein structure validation suite (PSVS) (Bhattacharya et al., 2007) which comprises a number of software. PROCHECK (3.5.4) (Laskowski et al., 1993) and Molprobity (Davis et al., 2007) provide a Ramchandran plot analysis.

The DNA-protein docked structure was used for analyzing the impact of inhibitors obtained after screening. As crystal structures of mutant DNA gyrA were not available, the three double mutants were created by incorporating point mutations in the primary structure. The first double mutant of DNA gyrA chain A was obtained by mutating Ala90 to Val90 and Asp94 to Gly94. The second double mutant of DNA gyrA chain A was obtained by introducing mutation at 74th and 94th positions corresponding to Ala to Ser and Asp to Gly point mutations, respectively. Similarly, in the third double mutant, Ala90 was mutated to Val and Ser91 to Pro through Schrodinger’s protein preparation wizard (Wizard, 2009). The wild type and three mutant DNA gyrA structures were stabilized through several structural modifications and energy minimization (Madhavi Sastry et al., 2013; Schrödinger, 2013). In this process hydrogen atoms were added, bond lengths were augmented, disulphide bonds were generated, capping of terminal residues were done and selenomethionines were converted into methionines. Molecular dynamic simulations were then performed for a period of 12ns to stabilize the mutant structure forms to be used for high throughput virtual screening and evaluation of interaction patterns.

In search for a single drug that can inhibit both wild type and mutant type, choice of ligand binding cavity which can produce the desired inhibitory effect is of fundamental importance. Binding cavity was predicted using Q-SiteFinder server (Laurie and Jackson, 2005). Q-SiteFinder uses energetic criteria to identify binding cavity. This method uses a methyl probe and calculates the Van der Waals interaction energies of probe with the protein. Only those probes are retained which show favourable interaction energies and then are ranked according to their total interaction energies (Laurie and Jackson, 2005). The cluster ranked one was picked as it was most energetically favoured.

To perform HTVS, a data set consisting of 169,109 phytocompounds from ZINC database, 190 compounds of the in-house library and 10,000 compounds were downloaded from the MyriaScreen database of drug/lead-like compounds in SMILES format (Irwin and Shoichet, 2005). By using LigPrep’s ligand preparation protocol (Ligprep, 2009), the 179,299 compounds were prepared for docking. This protocol generated diverse stereochemical, ionization and tautomeric variants of the 179,299 compounds after energy minimization. This dataset was used further for virtual screening and docking studies.

Docking of ligands was directed at specific sites on the target enzymes. The site was specified by forming a cubic grid (20Å×20Å×20Å) around the selected residues using the receptor grid generation platform of Schrodinger’s Glide module (Friesner et al., 2004; Halgren et al., 2004). The grid was generated while keeping the centroid of the selected residues as the center. The scaling factor was kept at a default value of 1.0, with a partial charge cutoff value of 0.25. No constraints were defined during the generation of the receptor grid.

High throughput virtual screening of the dataset was done against DNA gyrA targeting the residues inside the cubic grid by using Schrodinger’s Glide HTVS docking protocol which does not involve a rigid docking procedure and is thus very fast. Compounds with a Glide score below −5.50 were retained and the rest were discarded. Further, the selected compounds were subjected to extra precision (XP) docking targeting the same site using Glide’s XP protocol (Friesner et al., 2006) for docking score refinement. The same procedure was carried out targeting DNA gyrA chain A of all the three double mutants, i.e. (a) A90V+D94G, (b) A74S+D94G, and (c) A90V+S91P. HTVS cut-off was kept at −5.5 and XP docking cut off was kept at −7.00 for the screening. After HTVS and XP docking, the top scoring compounds obtained after screening with the wild type strain were compared to the compounds screened for the first mutant and then compared to those obtained for the second and the third mutants in progression. This progressive screening yielded the compound which shows good binding affinity for all the four DNA gyrA variants targeting the desired sites. This compound was then inspected through MD simulations to study in detail its dynamic mode of molecular interaction with the respective protein molecules.

To get more insight into protein–ligand complex and its stability, molecular dynamics simulations were performed using Schrodinger’s Desmond MD module (Jorgensen et al., 1996) which uses optimized potentials for liquid simulations all-atom force field 2005 (Kaminski et al., 2001). Prepared protein–ligand complexes were solvated with TI4P water model in a triclinic periodic boundary box. To prevent the direct interaction of protein complex with its own periodic image a boundary box is created and distance between protein complex and box wall is kept at 10Å. Steepest descent method was used to minimize the energy of the prepared structures for a maximum of 5000 steps till a threshold of 25kcal/mol/Å is achieved. After that minimization using Low-memory Broyden–Fletcher–Goldfarb–Shanno quasi-Newtonian minimizer was done until a convergence threshold of 1kcal/mol/Å was attained. Other parameters were kept as default for system equilibration. MD simulations were carried out for a period of 12–16ns at a constant temperature of 300K, pressure 1atm and at time step of 2fs. Smooth particle mesh Ewald method was used for calculating long range electrostatic interactions (Essmann et al., 1995) during the MD simulations. Coulombic short range interaction was calculated using a cut-off scheme, with a cut-off radius of 9Å for calculation. The protein–ligand complex was prepared for MD simulations using the above mentioned parameters. MD Simulation was then carried for a time period of 12–15ns.

The root mean square deviation (RMSD) of the protein–ligand complexes with the wild and three mutants DNA gyrA chain A variants was calculated for the entire simulation course with the reference to 1st frame. To study the interaction between ligand and protein, Ligplot tool was used to map hydrophobic interactions and hydrogen bonds formation (Wallace et al., 1995). For H-bond formation, maximum distance between acceptor–donor atoms was set as <3.3Å and acceptor-H donor angle greater than 90°.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

The DNA gyrase experimental structure obtained from PDB was not in complex with DNA. It was obtained after docking DNA with S. pneumoniae as the reference. It showed sequence identity of 42% with an e-value of 3e-132 with M. tuberculosis DNA gyrase subunit A in the BLAST result (Fig. 1
                        A). The DNA gyrase model in complex with DNA obtained from tfmodeler shows conformation overlapping between the two as in Fig. 1B. The Ramchandran plot for validity of the model is given in Fig. 1C. As a result of Procheck analysis, 70.4% of DNA gyrase residues were found to lie in the favoured regions and no residue in the disallowed region. A model having of 70% residues falling in the favoured region can be considered to be good one on account of the analysis of 118 structures of resolution 2.0Å. According Richardson’s Lab molprobity analysis, 70% of the residues fall under the favoured regions and 5.8% under the disallowed regions. A total of 24 outlier residues were encountered. The average PROCHECK G factor value for phi–psi angles was −1.12 and for all dihedral angles was −0.44. The G score is the log odds score of observed distribution of torsion angles and covalent geometries and quantifies the goodness of the structure. The higher the value of G score better is the value of a dihedral angle in the structure in terms of falling under the favourable regions in a Ramchandran plot. As the average G score is negative, high number of residues was seen having distortions in dihedral angles.

This DNA gyrase+DNA complex was MD simulated and the three variants formed after introducing double point mutations were also simulated. Their RMSD and RMSF values over 12ns long MD simulations have been graphically depicted in Fig. 2
                        A and B. The RMSD plot regions between 6 and 12ns show a stabilized conformation for all the four wild and variant DNA gyrases. The aligned protein structures can be seen in Fig. S1 (Supplementary information).

Q-SiteFinder server predicted 5 binding cavities and ranked them according to most energetically favoured conformations. The final selected binding cavity constituted 36 residues namely Leu41, Glu43, Gly47, Leu48, Lys49, His52, Ser95, Leu96, Arg98, Met99, Trp103, Ser104, Leu105, Arg106, Val110, Asp111, Gly112, Pro119, Gly120, Asn172, Asn176, Ser178, Gly179, Ile180, Ala181, Asn188, Ile189, Pro191, Val270, Leu274, Tyr276, Gln 278, Asn279, His280 and Phe341 with a cavity area of 611A2 and cavity volume of 1100.7A3. The cavity area and volume data for all DNA gyarse variants has been provided in Table 1
                        . The same binding cavity was used for cubic grid generation in the wild type and double mutant DNA gyrA chain A variants for docking.

In order to identify potent inhibitors against M. tuberculosis wild and mutant DNA gyrA, 1, 79, 299 drug-like natural compounds were screened. About 5200 compounds were obtained with HTVS docking score below −5.50kcal/mol. All these ligands were then subjected to XP docking protocol against the wild type DNA gyrA chain A. About 2011 compounds were obtained with an XP docking score below −6.00kcal/mol. In order to identify common inhibitors of the wild type and mutant DNA gyrA variants, the same library was screened using same cutoffs and protocols. The comparison of final XP screening results from all the wild and mutant variants resulted in a number of compounds with similar binding affinity with all variants. 122 compounds (XP score of −7.00kcal/mol) obtained after comparison of the wild type and the first mutant (A90V+D94G) were compared for their affinity with the second (A74S+D94G) yielding 11 compounds and third (A90V+S91P) mutants finally yielding 5 compounds with respective XP score range of −15.94 to −7.42kcal/mol and −15.11 to −7.08kcal/mol.

Among these five, chebulinic acid, a natural phytocompound obtained from T. chebula showed highest binding affinity with XP score −14.63kcal/mol against the wild type, −16.46kcal/mol, −15.94kcal/mol, and −15.11kcal/mol against the three mutant variants respectively. The second top compound (ZINC ID: 67912578) had XP docking score of −11.09kcal/mol against the wild type, −9.83kcal/mol, −10.34kcal/mol, and −11.05kcal/mol against the three mutant variants, respectively (Table 2
                        ). Owing to good binding affinity and well-known medicinal properties of CA, all further analysis were carried out on it.

Detailed MD simulations analysis was carried out to obtain insights into the binding mode and interaction pattern of CA with each of the four DNA gyrA models. Since molecular docking provides only a static view of the interactions between protein and ligand, molecular dynamics simulations were performed to study the dynamical behaviour of the interactions. The final stabilized complexes were analysed to deduce the possible mechanism which might cause inhibition of the DNA gyrase enzyme in M. tuberculosis. Along with strong binding affinities, all four complexes showed low variation in terms of very low root-mean-square-deviation (RMSD) (Fig. 3
                        A). Root-mean-square-fluctuation (RMSF) plot also showed low variation for residues 50–300 corresponding to the binding cavity (Fig. 3B). The pre-MD interaction analysis of CA docked with wild type DNA gyrA with an XP score of −14.63kcal/mol showed the formation of 12 hydrogen bonds and 13 residues were involved in hydrophobic interaction with the ligand (Wallace et al., 1995). The post-MD interaction analysis revealed 13H-bonds and 16 residues were involved in hydrophobic interaction (Fig. 4
                        A; Table 2).

The MD simulation analysis of the CA–mutant DNA gyrA complexes were also carried out revealing stable and strong interaction pattern. The MD simulated structure of A90V+D94G DNA gyrA mutant–CA complex revealed the formation of 11H-bonds from 12H-bonds formed in the pre-MD structure. The pre-MD structure was also stabilised by 8 residues involved in hydrophobic interaction which increased to 13 post-MD simulations (Fig. 4B; Table 2).

The representative structure obtained after 16ns long MD simulations, the A74S+D94G DNA gyrA–CA complex involved 13H-bonds and 17 residues showing hydrophobic interaction with the ligand. Prior to carrying out MD simulations, 10 residues were found to be involved in hydrogen bonding and 18 in hydrophobic interactions. This clearly shows that the dynamic interaction is in line with the high docking score −15.94kcal/mol (Fig. 4C; Table 2). Similarly in the third mutant A90V+S91P enzyme–CA complex, 16ns long MD simulations revealed its stability. The number of H-bonds halved from 13 before simulation to 6 after simulation but residues involved in hydrophobic interaction doubled from 8 to 17 indicating a stable enzyme ligand interaction (Fig. 4D; Table 2).

All the four complexes showed that the enzyme–CA interaction is very stable in the presence of water as solvent and has high affinity for the enzyme. As the interactions were observed with gyrase subunit A (and its variants) without subunit B which is also known to play a role in DNA binding, the MD simulation of the complete complex (gyrase A+gyrase B+CA) may decrease the stability of CA binding. For the sake of saving computational time and the quinolone-resistant mutations being observed majorly in subunit A, only this was chosen for all analyses. The high binding affinity and stability of these complexes point towards CA as a potent DNA gyrA inhibiting compound. CA has been reported as a potential drug candidate against MTB by computational analysis and paves way for further wet lab investigation to elaborate its role in controlling MTB. A figure showing the variation of hydrogen bonds for CA bound protein structures exhibits that bonding between CA and protein structures was also stable (Fig. S2).

The DNA molecule is known to bind to the G-segment of DNA gyrA involving the catalytic residue Tyr129 which binds to the phosphate group of DNA. Hindrance in H-bond formation due to steric factors will lead to improper binding of DNA with DNA gyrA and thus form a less stable complex due to altering in the binding distance between Tyr129 and DNA phosphate group. Tyr129 is involved in the cleavage and religation of the DNA strand and is negatively affected by the increase in distance. Inhibition of this cleavage and religation process will render DNA gyrase non-functional. This fatal effect on the bacterial cell should be a good strategy in combating MTB.

When compared to the DNA bound-DNA gyrase model having a distance of 1.6Å between Tyr129 and DNA phosphate, the docked complexes of DNA and CA-bound DNA gyrA wild and mutant variants showed larger distances between their respective Tyr129 and DNA phosphate bonds. These distances were obtained after superimposing DNA strands at the same site on the DNA gyrA+CA complex. Here, the DNA gyrA+CA complex was obtained after docking and simulation and the DNA gyrA+DNA complex obtained by tfmodeler was structurally superimposed to yield the difference in distances. This distance was 5.5Å in CA-bound wild type DNA gyrA in complex with the DNA as obtained after 16ns long MD simulations. Also, the same distance was found to have increased values of 6.1Å, 3.8Å, and 7.3Å for CA-bound mutant DNA gyrA, namely, A90V+D94G, A74S+D94G, and A90V+S91P, respectively (Fig. 5
                        A–D). Fig. 5 shows the distance between the Tyr 129 of native DNA gyrase+DNA docked complex and DNA phosphate being 1.6Å (in blue) and distances between Tyr129 of post-MD simulated DNA gyrA+CA complex (in brick red). The following observation was obtained after superimposing the two complexes. So it can be seen that in all the four CA-bound DNA gyrA structures in complex with DNA, there has been significant increase in distance between the catalytic Tyr129 residue and the phosphate group of the nucleotide. This increase in distance will have inhibitory effect on catalytic activity of Tyr129 and thus will render DNA gyrA enzyme non-functional.

Another inhibitory effect of the drug is through steric hindrance. Major steric clashes will occur when DNA tries to bind in the DNA gate for cleavage and religation as bulk of the CA structure occupies the same space which is required for binding of the DNA. This will lead to improper placement of DNA strand in DNA gate and will affect the functioning capability of the enzyme (Fig. 5A–D).

Apart from these CA is also involved in hydrophobic interaction with many residues like Leu12, Arg14, His52, Asp94, Arg98, Ala100, Gln101, Ser104, Leu105, Gly117, Pro119, Trp103, Gly120, Asn121, Asp122, Gly177, Ser178, Gly179, Gly180, Thr230, Leu274, Tyr276, Gln277, Val278, Asn279, His280, Phe283 and Phe341 (Fig. 6
                        A–D). Many of these residue are also predicted by the 3dligandsite to interact and stabilise the DNA in the DNA gate by H-bond formation, hydrophobic interaction and other weak interactions (Wass et al., 2010). Due to the proximity of CA to the DNA binding site and its hydrophobic interaction with DNA gyrase residues might interfere with the DNA and DNA gyrase enzyme interaction and have negative impact on the enzyme function. Also, in comparison to the mode of action of quinolone binding, which binds to the DNA gyarse+DNA complex with good affinity and not with DNA gyrase alone (Mdluli and Ma, 2007), CA shows good binding affinity to the DNA gyrase molecule alone. This observation can be hypothesized to state that CA has a significantly different mode of action and binding site against M. tuberculosis DNA gyrA than quinolone based compounds. It is found to be potent against the wild and mutant types and thus can be taken as MDR-proof drug candidate for the time being.

Thus all the evidences obtained by XP docking and molecular dynamic simulation study suggests that CA has strong binding affinity for DNA gyrase enzyme and also can have strong inhibitory effect on the DNA gyrase and act as a strong anti-tuberculosis drug. However, owing to the speculative nature of results provided by computational evidence, an experimental validation of CA as potent anti-tuberculosis compound and the role of novel binding site as reported in our study in mechanism of inhibition might be a quantum leap in treatment of drug resistant tuberculosis.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

MTB remains to be a serious health issue affecting the masses and causing huge number of deaths every year in numerous developing countries. Due to long and complex treatment period cases of MDR TB and XDR TB is on the rise. Identifying suitable drug target is essential for effective drug development. In this study we have carried out the screening of natural compound library against M. tuberculosis DNA gyrase, a unique target suitable for rational drug design. Molecular dynamic simulations were also carried out to understand the dynamic mode of interaction of reported drug with the target enzyme to deduce its possible effect on enzyme function.

By introducing three double point mutations in the wild type DNA gyrA structure, three mutant structures were modelled and the compounds were screened against all of them to ascertain their inhibiting potency against MTB. Among them CA was the most effective against all the wild and mutant type DNA gyrase enzymes showing very high XP docking score. CA was also reported to change the shape of the enzyme in such a way that it increases the distance between catalytic tyrosine residue at 129 position and DNA phosphate. Also, the bulk of CA structure binds to the DNA binding site of DNA gyrA thus causing steric hindrance to its binding.. This will render non-functionality to DNA gyrase enzyme and this inhibition will lead to DNA replication failure in M. tuberculosis resulting in its death. Thus, this study presents CA as a potential drug candidate for further novel drug development for treating wild type as well as a MDR and XDR TB. It also showcases the application space of computational approaches as preliminary yet crucial technique in rational drug discovery. The reported compound can be directly evaluated experimentally for its inhibition properties against multi-drug resistant TB.

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

AG is thankful to Jawaharlal Nehru University for usage of all computational facilities. AG also thanks University Grants Commission, Government of India for the Faculty Recharge position.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2015.09.006.

The following are Supplementary data to this article:
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

