@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Enzyme function is regulated by its localization

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           MurG membrane localization is determined by an amphipathic helix.


                        
                        
                           
                           Cardiolipin also plays a role in MurG localization to the membrane.


                        
                        
                           
                           Membrane localization correlates with MurG function in cells during sporulation.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Enzyme localization

MurG

Cell wall

Cardiolipin

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  To better understand how enzyme localization affects enzyme activity we studied the cellular localization of the glycosyltransferase MurG, an enzyme necessary for cell wall synthesis at the spore during sporulation in the bacterium Bacillus subtilis. During sporulation MurG was gradually enriched to the membrane at the forespore and point mutations in a MurG helical domain disrupting its localization to the membrane caused severe sporulation defects, but did not affect localization nor caused detectable defects during exponential growth. We found that this localization is dependent on the phospholipid cardiolipin, as in strains where the cardiolipin-synthesizing genes were deleted, MurG levels were diminished at the forespore. Furthermore, in this cardiolipin-less strain, MurG localization during sporulation was rescued by external addition of purified cardiolipin. These results support localization as a critical factor in the regulation of proper enzyme function and catalysis.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The study of the mechanisms of protein localization in bacteria is simplified by their lack of multiple sub-cellular structures. Bacillus subtilis is a particularly tractable model, as during sporulation it generates a specialized intracellular compartment, the forespore. Sporulation occurs in exponential cells undergoing starvation and begins with asymmetrical division producing two sister cells of dramatically different size with a specialized spore septum. The smaller of the two cells, the forespore, is engulfed by the larger mother cell generating a double membrane around the forespore. The cortex is synthesized between the two membranes while the spore coat is generated on the outside of the spore. Finally, the mature spore is released upon lysis of the mother cell (Errington, 1993).

Several proteins localize specifically to the forespore through a diverse array of mechanisms such as diffusion and capture, targeted insertion, or selective degradation (Rudner et al., 2002; Shapiro et al., 2002, 2009). The caveat of such mechanisms is that they assume a pre-existing asymmetric distribution of the target molecule that is then transmitted to other proteins without explaining the origin of the asymmetry.

A recent study discovered that the basis for the localization during sporulation in B. subtilis of the membrane bound protein SpoVM was in part due to hydrophobic residues on an amphipathic helix (Ramamurthi et al., 2006; Ramamurthi and Losick, 2009). SpoVM can discriminate between the different curvatures of membrane surfaces and localize specifically to the forespore. Conversely, the protein DivIVA involved in cell growth and sporulation recognizes zones of negative curvature in the cell septum and poles and binds to membranes through a specific phenylalanine residue in its N-terminal coiled-coil domain (Lenarcic et al., 2009; Oliva et al., 2010; Ramamurthi and Losick, 2009)

A third example invoking geometric cues during sporulation, involves the anionic phospholipid cardiolipin (diphosphatidylglycerol) that has an uncommon dimeric structure in which two phosphatidyl moieties are linked by a glycerol generating a highly curved conic shape (Lecocq and Ballou, 1964). In eukaryotic cells, cardiolipin is known to organize mitochondrial topology and stabilize protein complexes (Schlattner et al., 2009), but also determines the distribution of essential mitochondrial proteins such as the pro-apoptotic factor Bid (Kim et al., 2004; Lutter et al., 2000; Petit et al., 2009), cytochrome c (Demel et al., 1989; Kagan et al., 2005) and the nucleoside diphosphate kinase NDPK (Tokarska-Schlattner et al., 2008). In the bacterium Escherichia coli, cardiolipin determines the localization of the osmosensor ProP, the mechanosensitive channel of small conductance MscS (Romantsov et al., 2009), the cell division protein MinD (Mileykovskaya and Dowhan, 2000; Mileykovskaya et al., 2003) and the protease HtrA (DegP) (Romantsov et al., 2007; Skorko-Glonek et al., 1997).

In B. subtilis cardiolipin is synthesized mainly by a membrane-bound enzyme encoded by the clsA gene (Kawai et al., 2004). Although cardiolipin represents only 1.4% of the total lipids of cells growing exponentially, at 4h after initiation of sporulation (T4) its levels go up to 5.4% (Kawai et al., 2004) and to 26.5% in spores (Kawai et al., 2006). Cardiolipin-deficient cells sporulate with 50% less frequency than wild type cells (Kawai et al., 2004). Additionally, cardiolipin-deficient spores show increased sensitivity to wet heat and oxidizing agents (Griffiths and Setlow, 2009a). Cardiolipin can specifically accumulate at the spore although a GFP fusion to its synthase ClsA did not show a preferred distribution (Kawai et al., 2006). How then, does cardiolipin mainly localize to the spore? One model states that the preference of cardiolipin for the spore is due to its self-organization into domains that intrinsically prefer zones of high curvature which can be found at the poles and forespore membrane (Huang et al., 2006). An alternate possibility is based on the fact that lipids with overall conical shapes and wide hydrophobic tails such as cardiolipin prefer structures with negative curvature (Antonny, 2006; van den Brink-van der Laan et al., 2004). Although the forespore presents a globally positive curvature to the mother cell compartment (Ramamurthi et al., 2009), during engulfment the curvature at the migrating septal junction becomes extremely negative in the mother cell and could thus be a zone for cardiolipin accumulation

During sporulation in B. subtilis, cell wall synthesis becomes restricted to the forespore (Meyer, 2010). Cell wall gives shape to the bacterial cell and is composed of peptidoglycan, a rigid molecule made of repeated subunits of disaccharide peptide monomers (van Heijenoort, 2001). Studying cell wall synthesis during sporulation is tractable system for the study of enzyme activity, as once engulfment is finished, spore cell wall synthesis is only obligatory for its resistance to high temperature. Therefore, inactive enzyme mutants essential for sporulation are generally not otherwise lethal. The glycosyltransferase MurG is the last cytoplasmic enzyme of the peptidoglycan synthesis pathway, which is critical for sporulation, and although it is not an integral membrane protein, it transforms the membrane bound lipid I into lipid II by adding soluble UDP-GlcNAc. MurG localizes to zones of peptidoglycan synthesis and in E.coli, lipids that co-purify with MurG are enriched in cardiolipin (van den Brink-van der Laan et al., 2003).

Given recent interest in understanding how changes in cellular localization could regulate enzymatic activity (Meyer et al., 2014; Scheu et al., 2014), we investigated the mechanism of MurG localization to the forespore during sporulation. We found that localization of MurG directly impacts its function. During sporulation, MurG initially distributed diffusely throughout the cell and then gradually localized to the membrane patch where cell wall synthesis is active, the forespore. We show that MurG localization is dependent on an amphipathic N-terminal helical domain through which it inserts into membrane. Conversely, we show that the phospholipid cardiolipin is necessary to achieve this particular distribution of MurG. Finally, sporulation efficiency is severely affected in both cardiolipin-deficient and MurG-delocalized mutants. Thus the specific localization of the enzyme MurG through the mechanism that we here uncover is essential to perform effectively its catalytic functions.

@&#METHODS@&#

Purified E. coli cardiolipin was obtained from Avanti Polar Lipids, Inc., FM4-64 from molecular probes.

For cultures in resuspension medium at 30°C, 100μL of sporulating cells were taken at designated times after resuspension. To each sample, 0.5mL of FM4-64 (100mg/mL) was added just before the cells were collected by centrifugation. The pellet was resuspended in 10mL PBS, and added to a poly-l-lysine pre-treated coverslip. All microscopy was performed on a Nikon Eclipse 90i with a 100× objective using phase contrast and captured by a Hamamatsu Orca-ER camera using Nikon Elements BR software. Exposure for YFP, FITC and TRITC was 400ms for all pictures taken.

We determined the forespore-specific localization of fluorescent signal from MurG-YFP as in (Real et al., 2008). In brief for each cell, we measured the maximum YFP fluorescence across a 10-pixel-wide window along the middle of the forespore and the maximum YFP fluorescence across across a 10-pixel-wide window in the middle of the mother cell while subtracting background noise for both. We took the average YFP fluorescence of the window for the forespore and mother cell for each cell and used these numbers to calculate the ratio of forespore to mother cell fluorescence. We repeated this for 100 cells from at least 3 experiments for each strain tested. Sporulating cells selected at random represented both engulfing and engulfed forespores. All operations were performed using software programmed with Matlab.

Imaging with 1.2% agarose pads were prepared as in (Becker and Pogliano, 2007). FM 4-64 (Molecular Probes) was added to a final concentration of 0.5μg/mL in a 1.2% solution of molten agar/media (CH or LB diluted 1:5 in water) and added to the well of a culture slide and covered with a glass slide. After cooling, the slide was removed and two air pockets were cut out of the agar leaving a 3 to 5mm agar bridge in the center of the well. Sporulating cells resuspended in 25% LB with 0.5μg/mL FM4-64 at 30°C were added at T2 to the agar bridge and covered by a glass cover slip. To prevent drying during the experiment, 50% glycerol was applied to the region of contact between the slide and the coverslip. The slide was then allowed to equilibrate in an environmentally controlled chamber at 30°C (Precision Control Weather Station) for at least 30min prior to visualization. Images were acquired using an Applied Precision Spectris microscope.

Percentages of cell engulfment in a culture of sporulating cells in CH resuspension media was measured as in (Sharp and Pogliano, 1999). Briefly at different time-points during sporulation, a sample of cells is incubated briefly with the red membrane dye FM4-64 and Mitotracker-green. Forespores from cells that have finished engulfment will be stained with Mitotracker-green but not FM4-64 as this dye does not cross membranes. At each timepoint we calculate the ratio of engulfed vs total sporulating cells.

10mg of cardiolipin (Avanti Polar Lipids) were resuspended in DMSO to a 100mM concentration and aliquoted for storage at −20°C in glass tubes. Strains JDB1689 and JDB2238 (see Supplemental methods) were grown and resuspended in parallel. At T3 after the start of sporulation 30μL of 100mM cardiolipin were added to 3mL of JDB2238 cells in resuspension to have a final concentration of 1mM cardiolipin, while 30μL of DMSO were added in parallel to 3mL of JDB2238 cells in resuspension.

@&#RESULTS@&#

We constructed a C-terminal YFP fusion and imaged the localization of the glycosyltransferase MurG to study its sub-cellular distribution during sporulation (Supplemental Materials). The MurG-YFP fusion is functional as growth in cells where the genomic MurG copy was deleted (JDB2501) is indistinguishable from wild type cells.

We followed the distribution of MurG-YFP in single cells early in sporulation, taking images every 5min for 1h starting at T3 (Fig. 1
                        A). At the beginning of the time-lapse experiment YFP signal from the MurG-YFP fusion was homogeneously distributed around the mother cell cytoplasm, but over time MurG-YFP accumulated progressively at the forespore as indicated by the co-stained FM4-64 images (Fig. 1A). Although MurG does not have any obvious transmembrane domains, when the movie ended at T4, MurG-YFP had clearly redistributed and was contiguous around the forespore membrane. The ratio of fluorescence across the forespore to the fluorescence across the mother cell also reflects the re-distribution of MurG-YFP as it changed from 1 at T3 to 2.5 at T4 (Fig. 1B and D).

To obtain a survey of MurG-YFP distribution in a population of sporulating cells, starting at T3, we acquired images at half hour intervals from cells in resuspension medium. MurG-YFP also had a clear membrane-like distribution starting around T3.5 of sporulation (Fig. 1C and E) and MurG-YFP signal both qualitatively and quantitatively accumulated at the spore over the course of sporulation, reaching its maximum after engulfment with a spore/mother cell fluorescence ratio of 2.81±.40 around T4.5 (Fig. 1C, D and F). Control cells expressing free CFP (JDB2157) showed no particular accumulation of fluorescence, or enrichment at the spore (Fig. 1D, S1A, S1B).

To determine the biochemical mechanism of MurG localization to the forespore and its close interaction with the membrane, we mutated a region of MurG from the N-terminal patch predicted in E. coli to be a membrane binding interface (Ha et al., 2000). We chose an 18 amino acid region predicted to form an amphipathic helix as analyzed with the program Heliquest (Gautier et al., 2008) (Fig. 2
                        A). In B. subtilis this region is composed by the hydrophobic residues F68, V71, V74, M75, F77, M78, V81 and by the basic residues K72, R76, K79, K82, K83 (Fig. 2A). Although there is 30% sequence identity between MurG in B. subtilis and E. coli, this region shows very little conservation (ExPASy SIM). Unlike the amphipathic helix predicted in B. subtilis these residues correspond to a small helical domain followed by a loop and the N-terminal portion of helix α3 in E. coli (Ha et al., 2000).

We changed the hydrophobic residues in the B. subtilis amphipathic helix to glutamic acid by performing the mutations V74E, F77E and V81E in murG-gfp, and expressed them in merodiploid strains where the genomic copy of murG was present (JDB2552, JDB2559, JDB2602, respectively). In these strains, the fluorescent signal from these point-mutant versions of MurG-GFP became delocalized during sporulation (Fig. 2B and D, S5). The mutation M75E did not affect MurG-GFP localization (JDB2542), but when the serine at the center of the amphipathic helix was mutated to glutamic acid (S67E), MurG-GFP (JDB2601) also delocalized from the membrane during sporulation (see Fig. 2B and D, S5).

Spore resistance to heat treatment is dependent on the formation of a thick layer of cell wall cortex and thus heat-resistance is a useful assay to detect sporulation efficiency. Engulfment has also been recently shown to depend on cell wall synthesis and polymerization and can be used to measure the temporal dynamics of sporulation (Meyer et al., 2010). When the genomic murG allele was deleted, serious defects in localization, engulfment, and heat resistance were observed during sporulation in cells expressing delocalized murG-gfp point mutants (Fig. 2C and D and Table S1). Wild type murG-gfp (JDB2501) and murG(M75E)-gfp (JDB2542) strains showing MurG localization to the forespore sporulated normally in DSM medium and their spores were heat-resistant (see Table S1). A dramatic reduction in heat resistance and engulfment was detected in V74E and F77E mutants (JDB552, JDB2559) as cells were blocked in septation. V74E and F77E show 1000-fold fewer CFU/mL postheat compared to heat resistant strains which maintain similar CFU/mL preheat and postheat. (Fig. 2B, S5 and Table S1). Finally, V81E and S67E mutants (JDB2602, JDB2601) showed a lower frequency of sporulation (see Table S1) and decreased heat resistance in DSM, while engulfment was delayed when compared to wild type cells (Fig. 2B, S5).

During exponential growth, MurG has been shown to localize in a FtsZ-dependent manner to septa of C. crescentus, a zone of active peptidoglycan synthesis (Aaron et al., 2007). In B. subtilis MurG-GFP expressed during exponential growth also localized to septa (JDB2501) (Fig. 3
                        A). MurG-GFP signal from the V74E point mutant also localized to the septum during exponential growth (Fig. 3A) and protein levels were as wild type (Fig. S2). None of the point mutations showed lethality and cells expressing MurG-GFP point mutants grew normally in absence of the wild type murG allele (Fig. 3B). Thus, MurG localizes to zones of peptidoglycan synthesis during exponential growth and its N-terminal amphipathic helix is dispensable.

Normal exponential growth of murG point-mutant strains indicates that both the enzymatic function and the localization of MurG is not affected (Fig. 3B). However, during sporulation, lack of MurG localization heavily affected engulfment dynamics and sporulation efficiency, indicating a defect in MurG enzymatic activity linked to its diffuse localization.

To determine how MurG changes its distribution and gradually localizes to the forespore, we tested if MurG localization depended on SpoVM. However, in a Δspovm strain where spoVM was deleted, MurG-YFP still localized preferentially to the forespore (Fig. S3A).

It has been shown that lipids that co-purify with MurG in E. coli cells are enriched in cardiolipin content (van den Brink-van der Laan et al., 2003). As cardiolipin levels are high during sporulation and it localizes preferentially to the spore, cardiolipin could influence MurG re-distribution in the cell. We tested if MurG-YFP spore localization was affected in. triple null-mutant ΔclsA ΔywiE ΔywjE cells (JDB2238), which synthesizes 20 times less cardiolipin than wild type cells during sporulation (Kawai et al., 2004). Furthermore, cardiolipin-deficient strains (JDB2232) showed a lower frequency of sporulation (see Table S1), decreased heat resistance in DSM and a delay in engulfment.

When this cardiolipin-null strain sporulated, MurG-YFP distribution was far less prominent at the forespore than in wild type cells, as shown by a spore/mother cell fluorescence ratio of 1.60±.20 (Fig. 4
                        A and B). As a control we monitored FtsW-YFP localization in sporulating wild type cells (JDB2171) and find no difference from a cardiolipin-null background (JDB2285) (Fig. S4). Also, SpoVM localization was not affected in a ΔclsA background (Fig. S3B). These results show that cardiolipin is necessary and specific for MurG localization to the spore.

To test if cardiolipin is necessary to localize MurG to the forespore, we directly added purified cardiolipin to the strain with deleted cardiolipin synthesis genes (JDB2238). At T3 after initiation of sporulation, when MurG-YFP signal is first detected, a final concentration of 30μM purified cardiolipin was added to sporulating cultures. We compared at different time points the localization pattern of MurG-YFP in the cardiolipin-null strain, wild type (JDB1689) and cardiolipin-null strain with added cardiolipin. Addition of cardiolipin to the cardiolipin-null strain rescues the main localization of MurG-YFP to the spore (Fig. 4C, S6). At its maximum, the spore to mother cell fluorescence ratio is 2.43±.18 for wild type cells (JDB1689), 1.59±.14 for the mutant strain (JDB2238) and 2.16±.18 for the mutant strain with added cardiolipin (Fig. 4D). Thus, images and quantification of the localization demonstrate that cardiolipin is necessary to localize MurG-YFP to the forespore and restore its wild type distribution.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

In bacteria several examples illustrate the existence of specialized microcompartments or enzymatic megacomplexes presumably built to perform highly specialized functions; from magnetosomes (Komeili et al., 2006; Scheffel et al., 2006), to polyketides (Straight et al., 2007) and the carboxysome (Fan et al., 2010; Savage et al., 2010). These complexes are functionally defined by the enzymes and structural proteins that localize and assemble to form them. In B. subtilis, sporulation leads to the formation of a specialized compartment where the genome is protected by thick layers of cell wall. To determine the origin for the localization of cell wall synthesis enzymes to this specialized forespore compartment (Meyer et al., 2014), we studied the sub-cellular distribution of the glycosyltransferase enzyme MurG, a member of the cell wall synthesis pathway. We found that in sporulating B. subtilis, MurG function and localization to the forespore membrane depends on an N-terminal amphipathic helix and cardiolipin, which is produced at high levels during sporulation (Kawai et al., 2006, 2004).

Structural considerations suggested that E. coli MurG could be associated to the membrane via a putative amphipathic helix, an N-terminal hydrophobic patch surrounded by basic residues (Ha et al., 2000). Consistent with this possibility, point mutations of the hydrophobic residues on the homologous B. subtilis MurG N-terminal domain delocalize MurG-GFP from the membrane and forespore (Fig. 2A). Importantly, the point mutations that delocalize MurG-GFP do not affect its catalytic activity during sporulation, as growth of cells having only these mutant copies of murG is indistinguishable from wild type cells (Fig. 3B) as are MurG protein levels (Fig. S2). Interestingly, this region of MurG does not show conservation between B. subtilis and E. coli (Fig. 2A). These residues may correlate with the lack of sporulation in E. coli compared to the additional function of MurG in B. subtilis sporulation. Amphipathic helices are thought to interact with membranes in three steps, the unfolded peptide approaches the negatively-charged membrane, then the hydrophobic side-chains insert between the lipid acyl-chains, and finally the helix folds in order to contain hydrophilic residues and lower its energy (Drin and Antonny, 2010). Hence the hydrophobic patch (Fig. 2A, 5B, yellow residues) of the MurG 18 amino acid amphipathic helix is probably embedded within the lipid aliphatic chains of the membrane, whereas the side chain of positively charged (Fig. 2A, blue residues) amino acids interacts with the polar head of negatively charged lipids (Fig. 5
                        B).

It is not completely understood how an amphipathic helix would bind negatively curved membranes (Drin and Antonny, 2010). As cardiolipin has been shown to be enriched in membranes interacting with MurG (van den Brink-van der Laan et al., 2003), it is possible that cardiolipin may attract MurG to the forespore through direct interactions with its amphipathic helix. But cardiolipin (diphosphatidylglycerol) is not chemically different than phosphatidylglycerol, one of the main components of bacterial membranes, so it is unlikely that MurG mutant interacts specifically with cardiolipin. We favor a second possibility where the insertion of cardiolipin into the zones of negative curvature in the forespore membrane (Fig. 5A) may induce loose lipid packing in the bilayer which could facilitate the insertion and folding of MurG amphipathic helix into such zones. The increase in fluidity of the bilayer is generated by the separation of lipid polar heads, a phenomenon favored by the presence of conical lipids such as cardiolipin (Antonny, 2006; Drin and Antonny, 2010). Once inserted and its amphipathic helix properly folded, MurG could diffuse around the forespore membrane, explaining the observation that MurG is found throughout the forespore membrane. Point mutations in MurG disrupting its amphipathic helix may lead to the disruption of the folding process of its N-terminal peptide into an amphipathic helix and loss of MurG forespore localization.

Cardiolipin has previously been reported to localize proteins to cell poles, which are zones of negative curvature (Romantsov et al., 2007). Here we show that cardiolipin is important for the preferential localization of the enzyme MurG to the forespore, which presents a globally positive curvature to the mother cell compartment (Ramamurthi et al., 2009). This apparent paradox vanishes if one considers the process of spore formation—precisely engulfment. During engulfment, the septal junction as seen from the mother cell-side presents a zone of extremely negative curvature and could thus be a zone for cardiolipin accumulation (see Fig. 5A). It is important to note that this cardiolipin-amphipathic helix mechanism is not the sole method of localization for MurG, as very slight forespore localization of MurG was still observed in cardiolipin-null cells (Fig. 4A).

An absence of cardiolipin also affects cell-wall biogenesis in other biological systems (Zhou et al., 2009). Cardiolipin is necessary for the formation of respiratory supercomplexes in mitochondria (Fry and Green, 1981; Xu et al., 2006; Zhang et al., 2005) and to stabilize the bacterial translocon SecYEG complex (Gold et al., 2010).

Restricting the distribution of enzymes to a specific cell site has been shown to enhance their enzymatic activity (Dueber et al., 2009; Mukai et al., 2009), but also serve as sequestration zones when in excess (Michaelis and Gitai, 2010), suggesting that that the link between localization and enzyme activity may go in two directions. However, several lines of evidence support the hypothesis that during sporulation in B. subtilis, MurG has to localize to the forespore membrane in order to efficiently catalyze the reaction transforming the membrane bound Lipid I and the soluble UDP-GlcNAc into the membrane bound Lipid II (Fig. 5C).

First, point mutations that delocalize MurG-GFP in B. subtilis sporulating cells show severe delays or blockage in engulfment that translate in sporulation deficiencies (Fig. 2C, Table S1). Additionally, in absence of cardiolipin MurG does not localize to the forespore, and although peptidoglycan synthesis still occurs it presumably happens in a less efficient way as spores in a mutant strain show 40% less heat-resistance and engulfment is delayed (Fig. 2C, Table S1 and (Griffiths and Setlow, 2009b; Kawai et al., 2004)). This interpretation is also consistent with data showing that cardiolipin-based recruitment enhances enzymatic activity of MurG (van den Brink-van der Laan et al., 2003) and other enzymes. The enzymatic activity of MurG during sporulation seems to be dependent on its ability to reach the forespore membrane and MurG point mutants may not effectively catalyze the reaction transforming Lipid I into Lipid II. Lipid II synthesis might be totally abrogated in mutants V74E and F77E (Fig. 2C), explaining why these mutants are blocked in septation as it has been shown that cell wall synthesis is necessary for engulfment (Meyer et al., 2010). Mutants V81E and S67E, as wild type MurG in absence of cardiolipin, may have reduced Lipid II synthesis during sporulation (Fig. 2C, S6), but the observation that these mutants showed a less severe phenotype suggests that other mechanisms governing optimal MurG localization may exist in addition to interactions between cardiolipin and the MurG N-terminal helix. Finally It may be possible that in addition to mislocalization during sporulation, the MurG-GFP mutants show overall reduced enzymatic activity, but that this reduced function is still sufficient to support exponential growth. However, the residues found to mislocalize MurG-GFP during sporulation are not located near the conserved UDP-glycosyltransferase active site and are therefore unlikely to affect enzyme activity (Ha et al., 2000).

As MurG forms a complex with MraY, the membrane-bound enzyme that synthesizes Lipid I (Mohammadi et al., 2007), the cytoplasmic and membrane bound parts of the peptidoglycan biosynthetic pathway converge to the forespore membrane and may also form a cardiolipin-dependent metabolic supercomplex. Such complex could serve to channel metabolic precursors and enhance the efficiency of the peptidoglycan synthesis pathway. It is becoming increasingly clear that protein supercomplexes, such as the divisome, are important in a large number of bacterial biological processes (Rudner et al., 2002). Mislocalization of these proteins directly affects enzyme activity. Enzymes unable to localize properly may not be able to reach their target substrate. They may also be unable to bind activating protein partners. In cases where substrate is still present, the enzyme may not be generating product in a location useful to the cell. We provide further evidence through MurG that enzyme localization in bacteria is critical to its function.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2015.08.004.

The following are Supplementary data to this article:
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

