@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Abundance of intrinsic structural disorder in the histone H1 subtypes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           The disorder-promoting amino acids are dominant in the histones H1 sequences.


                        
                        
                           
                           The disordered segments occur in all domains of histone H1 subtypes.


                        
                        
                           
                           The histone H1 subtypes contain MoRFs and ANCHOR binding modules.


                        
                        
                           
                           The histone H1 subtypes have widespread low-complexity regions and high folding rate.


                        
                        
                           
                           The disorder is a permanent structural and functional feature of histone H1 subtypes.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Amino acid composition

ANCHOR protein binding regions

Folding rate

Intrinsic structural disorder

Histone H1 subtypes

Molecular recognition features

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The intrinsically disordered proteins consist of partially structured regions linked to the unstructured stretches, which consequently form the transient and dynamic conformational ensembles. They undergo disorder to order transition upon binding their partners. Intrinsic disorder is attributed to histones H1, perceived as assemblers of chromatin structure and the regulators of DNA and proteins activity. In this work, the comparison of intrinsic disorder abundance in the histone H1 subtypes was performed both by the analysis of their amino acid composition and by the prediction of disordered stretches, as well as by identifying molecular recognition features (MoRFs) and ANCHOR protein binding regions (APBR) that are responsible for recognition and binding. Both human and model organisms—animals, plants, fungi and protists—have H1 histone subtypes with the properties typical of disordered state. They possess a significantly higher content of hydrophilic and charged amino acid residues, arranged in the long regions, covering over half of the whole amino acid residues in chain. Almost complete disorder corresponds to histone H1 terminal domains, including MoRFs and ANCHOR. Those motifs were also identified in a more ordered histone H1 globular domain. Compared to the control (globular and fibrous) proteins, H1 histones demonstrate the increased folding rate and a higher proportion of low-complexity segments. The results of this work indicate that intrinsic disorder is an inherent structural property of histone H1 subtypes and it is essential for establishing a protein conformation which defines functional outcomes affecting on DNA- and/or partner protein-dependent cell processes.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Contrary to the canonical view that fixed structure defines protein function, the data gathered over the past decade demonstrate the occurrence of abundantly represented proteins without well-defined conformation. Instead of possessing a stable and rigid structure, they contain unstructured (intrinsically disordered) regions, or they are unstructured as a whole as a result of adopting differently compacted, native-coil or native pre-molten globule, structures (Turoverov et al., 2010; Topma, 2012; Uversky, 2013). A low content of secondary structures and the ability to form labile conformation, characteristic of intrinsic disorder state, corresponds well to the increased flexibility and plasticity facilitating recognition and binding. Therefore, the intrinsically disordered proteins are able to form complexes with various partners due to a high specificity/low affinity, transient and reversible, interactions (Tompa et al., 2005). Interactions with different partners, coupled to transition from disordered to ordered state, are essential for the activity of those disordered proteins which function as assemblers, chaperones, display sites, effectors, entropic chains and scavengers and participate mainly in signaling pathway, cell cycle regulation and the control of gene activity (Tompa, 2005).

Transcription factors constituted a large protein group with abundantly disordered regions. They possess amino acids composition characteristic of intrinsically disordered conditions, in which disorder-promoting residues of Asn, Gln, Pro and Ser are highly prevalent. In more than 94% of transcription factors, the disorder-promoting amino acid residues are located in long disordered regions, covering transactivation domains and the DNA-binding domains (Liu et al., 2006). Intrinsic disorder is also correlated with a regulation of gene activity controlled by the proteins that build chromatin structure, which consequently determine their functions. The members of large classes of chromatin proteins, such as HMG and histones, are also considered as intrinsically disordered. A component of HMG family, HMGN, evokes special effects and thus affects local and global chromatin conditions, which leads to fix variant-specific transcriptional profile. One of possible mechanism by which HMGN(s) sets a competence for transcription is their ability to interact with specific regulators, hormone receptors and transcription factors. This interaction is set throughout several disorder-to-order transition regions enriched in the main disorder-promoting amino acid residues. All HMGN variants possess long disordered regions, significantly exceeding an average degree of intrinsic disorder in other proteins, which have a significant impact on their functions (Rochman et al., 2011). A transient binding of HMGN to DNA and to the nucleosome heavily influence chromatin looseness and transcriptional stimulation, run on the competition with histones H1, the proteins widely regarded as the condensers of chromatin structure and the repressors of transcription. The histone H1 strongly influences chromatin action and gene activity, as well as the course of a variety of cell processes, i.e. apoptosis (Garg et al., 2014), differentiation (Zhang et al., 2012), cell growth and proliferation (Happel et al., 2009). In many instances, the histone H1 activity is implemented individually by several ubiquitous subtypes and specialized variants (Kowalski and Pałyga, 2012). Despite the reports indicating structural disorder propensity of histone H1 in relation to amino acid composition promoting disordered state (Hansen et al., 2006; Lu et al., 2009) and in accordance with prediction of disorder conditions in H1/H5 class as one entity (Peng et al., 2012), there is no detailed description characterizing histone H1 subtype-specific structural disorder in case of various organisms.

The purpose of this work was to explore the range of intrinsic disorder in the histone H1 subtype sequences for both human and model organisms. The identification of amino acid composition, prediction of a degree of disordered regions in a whole amino acid chains and in the individual domain, as well as evaluation of an abundance and location of molecular recognition features (MoRF) and ANCHOR protein binding regions (APBR) was performed. All of the analyzed histone H1 subtypes proved to be typical intrinsically disordered proteins of amino acid composition enriched in the residues promoting disordered state and forming long disordered regions consisting of over 100 and 200 amino acid residues in somatic and specialized subtypes, respectively. The average level of disorder in histone H1 sequences equals up to 65.42%, whereas up to 100% disordering corresponds to amino acids covering its terminal domains. Uniformly short MoRF segments (5–11 amino acid residues) and varying in length APBR motifs (6–140 amino acid residues), located in both globular domain and in the terminal domains, were detected as overlapping. Moreover, low-complexity regions were found widespread in the H1 histones, with a high rate of folding as characteristic feature. It may be concluded that histone H1 subtypes contain numerous structural elements that are conductive for the intrinsic disorder. Localization of disordered stretches, recognition motifs and the binding sites in all domains, which determine the functioning of histone H1, suggest that a state of intrinsic structural disorder might direct the histone H1 activity governed by specific interactions with DNA and partnering proteins.

@&#METHODS@&#

The histone H1 subtypes were collected from the literature by PubMed database search, according to their known structural and functional features in the selected organisms (Table 1
                        ). The UniProt database was then screened for selection of the full-length histone H1 sequences. In order to select the sequences of control proteins (Table 2
                        ), the PubMed was searched by keywords i.e., globular and fibrous proteins. The collected sequences were retrieved from UniProt database. The histone H1 subtypes and the control proteins were further processed in the FASTA format.

The amino acid composition of analyzed sequences was determined by the usage of the Composition Profiler, a tool which detects enriched and depleted amino acid residues according to their physico-chemical and structural characteristic (Vacic et al., 2007). As a background for the amino acid complement of histone H1 subtypes, i.e., reference sample, the sequences of DNA ligase originating from corresponding organism were utilized. The only exception was the Mytilus edulis histones H1, which sequences were compared to the serine-protease (AC-Q3S2W5). As a reference sample for determining the amino acid composition of ordered proteins, a sequence of a protein HMG-14, selected from DisProt database (DP00038), was used. The amino acid composition of histone H1 subtypes was also checked with the ProtParam tool of ExPasy proteomic server, which additionally predicts the amino acid residues distribution in percentage.

ProtParam tool of ExPasy proteomic server in the form of GRAVY was used to establish the grand average hydrophobicity of histone H1 subtypes sequences. They was calculated as a sum of hydropathy level of all amino acid residues divided by a number of residues in the sequence.

A range of intrinsic disorder in the histone H1 subtypes was determined by PrDos (Ishida and Kinoshita, 2007) and FoldIndex (Prilusky et al., 2005) predictors. PrDos predicts disordered and ordered protein regions from two combined predictors, i.e., from a local amino acid sequence, using SVM for the position specific score matrix of the input sequence, and from proteins template, using PSI-BLAST sequence similarity. PrDos sets the protein disorder with a yield of over 90% and with the sensitivity of 0.56. FoldIndex enables the identification of those sequence regions that tend to fold differently from the entire sequence, which is based on the average hydrophobicity of the residue and a net charge of a sequence.

The content of long disordered fragments in the histone H1 sequences was established with SLIDER tool. This program predicts an occurrence of at least 30 successive disordered residues based on logistic regression model. It was formulated as a combination of amino acid composition, sequence complexity and the selected physicochemical amino acids properties (Peng et al., 2014).

The folding rate of analyzed proteins was established with the CIpred tool of FDserver. CIpred is capable of performing ab initio, a rate of protein folding based on their amino acid sequence. It estimates a dependence from folding on amino acids weight, degeneracy and hydrophobicity (Ma et al., 2006).

The occurrence of low-complexity regions together with the amount of amino acid residues which form the segments were established with SEG program. The SEG algorithm filters sequence by both low entropy threshold and high entropy threshold. The former leads to the extension of low-complexity regions, whereas the latter establishes the borders of low-complexity regions (Wootton, 1994).

The MoRF segments responsible for binding to partner proteins were identified by the usage of the MoRF predictor. The aim of MoRF method is to show a probability of MoRFs formation. It is based on the estimation of a propensity of amino acid residues for disordering. This prediction comes as a result of transforming input sequence into a vector that characterize amino acid chain properties and their tendency to create MoRFs region, obtained by fast liblinear Support Vector Machine-based prediction (Disfani et al., 2012).

APBR regions were predicted by the usage of ANCHOR server. It shows protein fragments as capable of intermolecular interactions with partner proteins. ANCHOR predictor operates by the usage of the amino acid traits which correspond to localization in a long disordered region without contacting globular sections. The amino acids properties are associated with their individual tendency to form well-defined structure, but also with the creation of efficient complexes with the globular proteins (Dosztànyi et al., 2009).

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

In this work, the complete amino acid sequences retrieved from UniProt database (Table 1) were processed to estimate the extent of intrinsic structural disorder in the histone H1 subtypes. The selected histone H1 sequences from both human and model organisms, representing animals, plants, fungi and protists (Table 1), were compared with globular proteins in accordance with their physic-chemical (i.e. amino acids complement and hydrophobicity) and structural (i.e., disordered regions and binding motifs) properties. Consequently, the intrinsic structural disorder was proved to be an inherent feature of histone H1 subtypes. The results are presented below along with the discussion about the likely importance of intrinsic disorder for the proper functioning of histone H1 subtypes.

A peculiar amino acid composition of intrinsically disordered proteins is clearly visible in contrasting ratio of poorly represented hydrophobic residues and the firmly occurring charged residues. Consequently, disordered molecules are the ones with a low hydrophobicity level and a contemporary high charge degree (Uversky et al., 2000; Romero et al., 2001). Based on such proportion, a significant depletion of so-called order-promoting residues (i.e., Asn, Cys, His, Ile, Leu, Phe, Trp, Tyr and Val) and a considerable enrichment in disorder-promoting ones (i.e., Ala, Arg, Gln, Glu, Gly, Lys, Pro, Ser and Thr) remain a distinctive feature for typical set of amino acids in the disordered proteins (Romero et al., 2011; Uversky, 2013 
                        Uversky, 2013).

A set and distribution of amino acids in the histone H1 subtypes were evaluated by means of ProtParam tool of ExPasy, which provides a percent share of each residue in a given sequence. As shown in Fig. 1
                         and also in Table S1, the content of amino acid residues in the subtypes of histone H1 is similar regardless of the organism. What is characteristic for all the subtypes of histone H1 is the highest level of Lys residues (from 22.0% in human to 26% in animals and fungi) and Ala residues (from 13.1% in fungi to 20.1% in animals). The residues of Pro, Ser and Thr occur in lower proportions–respectively 7.94%, 8.58 and 7.58% for all of the organisms. The mean contribution of Gln, Glu and Gly residues equals 3.35%, whereas the residues of Asn, His, Ile, Met, Phe and Tyr form 1.49% of a whole set of amino acids chains and almost complete lack is characteristic of Cys (0.23%) and Trp (0.14%) residues. Thus, in the amino acid composition of histone H1, the disorder-promoting residues are highly abundant and the order-promoting residues are rarely represented, which was confirmed by means of Composition Profiler. It also proved that in a vast majority of histone H1 subtypes, the residues of Ala, Lys, Pro, Ser and Thr are significantly enriched, while the residues of Asn, Cys, His, Ile, Met, Phe, Trp and Tyr are significantly depleted (Table S1). The only exception of histone H1 amino acid composition predicted as typical of disordered state, is a relatively high share (by a mean 5.78%) of hydrophobic Val residues, usually linked to the promotion of ordered protein fragments (Uversky 2013). Besides, the calculation of grand average hydropathy revealed that all of histone H1 subtypes possess negative GRAVY indexes (in the range from −0.387 to −1.252, mean value −0.811) (Table S1). Therefore, histones H1 appear not as hydrophobic, but typically polar and charged proteins. The amino acids composition of histone H1 subtypes turned out to be definitely distinct from those which was detected in the globular proteins (Table 2). The reports of Composition Profiler show that Ala and Lys residues are depleted in all examined proteins and nearly 50% of the sequences possesses significantly lower content of Pro and Glu residues. The amount of the above amino acid residues inversely correlates with the proportions of order-specific amino acids. The Ile and Leu residues enrichments were identified in all protein sequences together with an increased participation of the Phe and Tyr residues, constituting 42% and 12% of sequences, respectively. These results, as well as similar findings (Hansen et al., 2006; Lu et al., 2009; Peng et al., 2012), indicate that a peculiar amino acid composition constitutes a distinctive criterion by which histone H1 subtypes might be classified as intrinsically disordered.

Evaluated with the usage of PrDos, a sequence-based prediction of disorder shows that over a half of amino acid chain is disordered in all H1 histones. The exceptions are H1 subtypes of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Dictyostelium fasciculatum (Table 1). Whereas disorder of H1 subtypes covers slightly below a half of sequence (mean 45.73%) in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and 29.33% of H1 amino acid chain is disordered in Dictyostelium fasciculatum, the remaining H1 subtypes contain disordered regions covering from 51.47% (Rattus norvegicus subtype H1ss) to 85.42% (Mus musculus subtype H1t2) of the sequence. According to the results presented in Table 1, the disorder content for the majority of H1 subtypes oscillates around 67%. The average value is 67.84% in human, 65.63% in animals, 68.91% in plants, 64.08% in protists and only 51.11% in fungi. The range of disorder predicted for histone H1 subtypes in the organism changes only to small extent. Hence, it reflects the values of coefficient of variation between 0.003 (Mytilus edulis) and 0.15 (Rattus norvegicues), which is below a threshold value of 0.25 (Table S2). However, specialized subtypes of histone H1 show the increasing tendency for disordering. Whereas a mean disorder degree of ubiquitous H1 subtypes in human, mouse and rat amounted to 65.2%, the testis-specific histones (H1t2, H1t2 and H1ts) of these organisms were disordered in 81.1%. It is thus likely that more disordered state is needed not only for a proper chromatin activity, but especially for a proper run of a cell and tissue-specific processes influencing on the right course of spermatogenesis and male fertility (Catena et al., 2006). However, a higher proportion of disordering in the histone H1 subtypes was indicated by FoldIndex (Table 1). This program proved that the human and mammalian histone H1 subtypes disorder reaches above 75% and is similarly high for other animals and plants species. For example, a mean level of disorder varies from about 80% in Xenopus laevis to about 90% in Drosophila and Pisum sativum. Regardless of the discrepancy in the propensity to disordering, which most likely comes as a result of a difference in the predictors scoring systems, a high level of disorder constitutes a common feature of all histone H1 subtypes.

The following step characterizing disorder of histone H1 subtypes was aimed to identify the length and location of disordered fragments in their sequences. At first, the presence of long, i.e., ≥30 amino acid residues (Peng et al., 2014), disordered stretches was probed with SLIDER tool. It recognized histone H1 subtypes as having scores which exceeds a threshold value of 0.5380. These indicates that the histone H1 subtypes possess long disorder segments which may serve as functional domains, associated with DNA and protein binding. They are also necessary for transcriptional regulation and formation of the complexes (Tompa et al., 2009), similarly to the regions of conserved disorder prediction that are responsible for binding of nucleic acids and formation of ribosome structure (Chen et al., 2006). What is interesting in this context are the proteins classified as partnering histone H1.0 (Kalashnikova et al., 2013). They comprise of over a hundred of elements involved mainly in the pre-RNA splicing, rRNA biogenesis and translation. It is very likely that interaction histone H1.0-ribonucleoprotein can occur via disordered parts of histone H1.0, located in the terminal domains of the molecule (Kalashnikova et al., 2013). These assumptions are consistent with the results of an analysis performed in this work, which are presented in the Fig. 2
                        . PrDos predicted disordered sections of histone H1 subtypes sequences, as well as of H1.0, which are mainly located in the N- and C-ending domain and occasionally show short disordered motifs in the globular domain (Table S3). Whereas globular domains of histone H1 subtypes are virtually ordered as a whole (mean value of disorder 1.22%), their terminal domains are almost completely disordered, at the level of mean value 97.86% and 96.68% in N-terminal and C-terminal domain, respectively. Nevertheless, the FoldIndex prediction shifts the proportions of histone H1 within domain disorder (Fig. 2, Table S3). Whereas the C-terminal domain remains disordered in almost 100%, the disorder of N-terminal domain is lower (mean value 76.42%) and grows up in the globular domain (mean value 51.16%). However, unlike disordered terminal domains (Lu et al., 2009; Fang et al., 2011), capable of forming bound and ordered functional fragments through the transition from unbound and disordered state (McBryant and Hansen, 2012), the binding regions of central domain exhibit a stable conformation, may raise some doubts. The conserved histone H1 globular domain is folded into the winged helix motif, responsible for binding nucleosomal DNA (Ramakrishnan et al., 1993). Thus, a disordered state of the histone H1 globular domain may be a result of its need to adopt a slightly different conformation upon binding DNA. The winged helix motifs, containing partly flexible amino acid composition (Jin et al., 1999), may undergo the conformational rearrangements to become more ordered in the DNA-bound state (Gajiwala and Burley, 2000). A disordered character of the central domain may be confirmed by the ANCHOR predictions. They prove that all of histone H1 subtypes contain the disordered binding regions, located in their globular domains (see Section 3.3). It may be stated that a lower level of N-terminal domain disorder reported in some of the histone H1 subtypes can lead to a scope of their interactions, usually limited to the stability of globular domain. It also modestly influences the functioning of histone H1 (Hendzel et al., 2004). By contrast, a highly disordered C-terminal domain is responsible for a broad range of histone H1 activity, realized by interaction with DNA in order to stabilize nucleosome and by participating in formation of higher order chromatin structure. Moreover, the C-terminal domain is active in creating the complexes with various partner proteins (McBryant and Hansen, 2012).

The obtained data indicate that intrinsic disorder of histone H1 molecule comes as a result of the presence of both less disordered (more ordered) globular part and a highly disordered terminal tails. It seems that the capability of transition from disordered to ordered state constitutes an essential feature of histone H1, since it greatly influences its proper functioning. Consequently, it has much to contribute to a right course of H1-dependent chromatin processes.

A transition of proteins from disordered to ordered state is coupled with the binding connected to the folding (Dyson and Wright, 2002), which rate is driven by a decrease of the total Gibbs free energy (Liu et al., 2012). The logarithm (log K/) of folding rate, correlating with the folding kinetics (Plaxco et al., 2000), is usually higher in the disordered conditions, relatively to the fully ordered states (Schulenburg and Hilvert, 2013). Besides the methods of predicting the folding rates of proteins from their 3D structures (Muños and Eaton, 1999), the evaluation of a folding time is also possible through the analysis of amino acid sequences in relation to the physical-chemical, as well as energetic and conformational characteristics of their amino acid residues (Gromiha, 2005; Ma et al., 2006). By comparing amino acid sequences of histones H1 and globular proteins with CIpred tool, it was found that a folding rate of histone H1 subtypes is faster (mean value of log(K/f)/s=−2.23) than that of the globular proteins (mean value of log(K/f)/s=−3.45) within all of the organisms (Table 3
                        ). As large and compacted proteins usually fold slowly (Portman 2010) and the time of ordered structures formation (α-helix and β-hairpin) is longer than for disordered loops (Kubelka et al., 2004), histone H1 subtypes have a tendency to fold faster, which very fact also points to their propensity of disordering. Whereas a low-complexity regions negatively correlate with the 3D structures (Sagi and Sternberg, 1994), their presence might be also indicative of the proteins disorder, owing to their engagement in rapid and reversible interactions with a large number of partners (Coletta et al., 2010). The usage of SEG server enabled to evaluate the amount of amino acid residues that form low-complexity segments. As shown in Table 4
                        , a percent of amino acid residues located in the low-complexity regions ranges from 37.95 to 67.15 and from 3.23 to 13.66 between the organisms in the histones H1 and in the globular proteins, respectively. Thus, a ratio of low-complexity is above two-fold higher in the histone H1 proteins (0.58) compared to the globular proteins (0.23).

Based on the collected findings, derived from the amino acids composition and a disorder degree, as well as from folding rate level and low-complexity segments abundance, histone H1 subtypes might be considered as proteins possessing the wide variety of features attributable for disordered state.

As functioning of disordered proteins is closely linked to the molecular recognition and binding, the regions which recognize and bind the partners with simultaneous transition from disordered to ordered state are essential for their operation. As a result of binding, short MoRFs regions, situated within longer disordered stretches, create α-helices, β-strands and irregular secondary structures. They are enriched in the positively charged amino acid residues and contain a high concentration of the Pro residues. The characteristic feature of MoRF is also the occurrence of aromatic amino acids, usually the residues of Phe, providing the stability and specificity of interaction (Mohan et al., 2006; Xue et al., 2010).

The results of MoRF’s prediction in histone H1 subtypes are presented in Fig. 3
                        . All of histone H1 subtypes comprise of one to four short MoRFs of 5–12 amino acid residues. The predominant (more than 62.5%) are histone H1 sequences possessing two MoRFs, while less frequent (25.0%) are those that contain three binding regions. Occasionally, the proteins including one (7.1%) and four (5.4%) MoRF segments are also predicted. The number of MoRFs attributable to a single sequence is similar among various organisms. While the same content (2.2) of MoRF regions per chain was indicated in histone H1 subtypes of human, plants and fungi, a higher (2.5) and a lower (1.8) proportion of these regions was found in animals and protists, respectively. These results are close to findings proving that the H1/H5 histone class contains 2.7 MoRFs assigned to a single sequence (Peng et al., 2012). The majority of MoRF regions, which is 48.5%, are composed of nine amino acid residues, whereas shorter (39.3%) and longer (12.2%) segments occur less frequently. An amino acid composition of histone H1 MoRFs is consistent with the compositional biases characteristic of both ordered and disordered state, manifested by the presence of order-promoting, as well as disorder-promoting residues (Mohan et al., 2006). The histone H1 MoRFs reflects the great majority of Ala, Glu and Lys residues supplemented with other disorder-promoting amino acids. The residues of Arg, Gly and Ser constitute approximately 45% and 25%, respectively, of MoRFs amino acid residues in the organism. However, the order-promoting residues of Ile, Leu and Val are also frequent (on average 20%), as well as Met and Pro residues and the residues of aromatic amino acids (Fig. 3). It may be concluded that the compositional bias of MoRFs can serve as indicator of histone H1 subtypes disorder. The strong and specific MoRFs interaction, characteristic for the side chains of aromatic residues, is mainly conditioned by the presence of the Tyr residues. They appear, however, in only 14.2% of all MoRF regions. The residue of Phe is very poorly represented and marks the belonging of MoRFs to the human histone H1.t2, which is the only subtype that contains also Trp residue. Moreover, the Phe residues were identified in the nematode histones H1.2 and H1.5, as well as in the tobacco subtypes H1C and H1D (Fig. 3). The Met-containing MoRF segments, implicated of multiple non-specific recognition (Vacic et al., 2007), are variably represented between the organisms, varying from about 10% in human and animals to 40% in plants and 20% in fungi and protists. According to the occurrence of the Pro residues, considered as a α-helix structure destabilizer, histone H1 MoRF segments can form disparate secondary structures. Approximately 35% of MoRFs containing Pro residues may be effective in the creation of β-structures and/or irregular structures, while the remaining (about 65%) MoRF regions can likely adopt α-helical structures. This complies with a highly increased MoRFs content in the residues of Ala and Lys, which shows a strong propensity of α-helix formation (Pace and Scholtz, 1998) when histone H1 bind the DNA (Roque et al., 2005).

The short histone H1 MoRFs are usually located inside the longer disordered APBRs, the motifs capable of recognizing and binding the partnering proteins (Dosztànyi et al., 2009). In the histone H1 sequences, the ANCHOR predicted binding regions with more than six amino acids long and with a score above 0.5 (Dosztànyi et al., 2009). The length of histone H1 APBRs varies from six or seven amino acids to over a hundred residues (Fig. 4
                        A and B, Fig. S1), which may cover almost a whole (on average 90%) C-terminal domain. Such long binding regions are characteristic for the human histone H1.3 and H1.4 and of the all chicken H1 subtypes. Nevertheless, the abundance of APBRs per sequence remain uniform in the organisms. The smallest number (4.8) was found in protists, as compared to a nearly the same amount in human (5.7) and fungi (5.4), as well as in the animals and plants (5.3). In general, the majority of APBRs is spread in histone H1 globular domain (54%) and C-terminal domain (40%), but occasionally it is also present in the N-terminal domain (6%) (Fig. 4A and 4B). It may be thus concluded that all of three histone H1 domains may be perceived as a potential binding surface. The ANCHOR-predicted motifs located in the globular domain might be capable of recognizing and binding the DNA sequences, while the motifs arranged in the C-terminal domain could be efficient in interactions with the sequences of partnering proteins.

The data gathered in this work indicate that intrinsic disorder constitutes a permanent feature of histone H1 subtypes. What is characteristic of all histone H1 subtypes are the predominant share of disorder-promoting amino acids, designating the overall negligible hydrophobicity, and the constant occurrence of long disordered regions, located in almost entirely disordered domains. What is more, all of them contain the unique sites capable of undergoing disorder-to-order transition and possess the low-complexity segments which constitute the surfaces for flexible and reversible interactions. Consequently, the intrinsic disorder may be perceived as a conserved trait that can significantly affect the proper functioning of histone H1. The potential of adopting the divergent structures by both terminal domains (Vyas and Brown, 2012) and globular domain (George et al., 2010) indicates that all aspects of histone H1 activity which are attributed to the regulation of chromatin effects (i.e., organization, stabilization and interactions), depend on a transit from unbound disordered state to the ordered DNA-bound state. A suitable example showing that the operation of histone H1 subtypes is dependent from a disordered status is the identification of functional sub-regions within histone H1.0C-terminal domain (Lu and Hansen, 2004), which may form α-helix structures upon binding DNA (Lu et al., 2009). Likewise, histone H1.4 N-terminal domain, recognized as a determinant of histone H1 binding affinity and specificity (Öberg and Belikov, 2012), may function as utilizing the ability to create structured motifs by conversion from unstructured stretches. The potential of histone H1 to recognition and binding is also used for interactions with partnering proteins–some of them were identified as mediated by a specific region of histone H1 domain. For example, fully effective in the interaction between histone H1 and nuclease DFF40/CAD, turned out to be the ending segment of H1-0C-terminal domain only (Widłak et al., 2005). While heterochromatin protein HP1 binds peculiarly to Lys26 in histone H1.4 (Daujat et al., 2005), the N-terminal domain may serve also as a binding surface for certain proteins. As it was detected in the same experiment (Daujat et al., 2005), the HP1 is able to interact with methylated Lys26 residue, but formation of the complex HP1-H1.4 is not possible when phosphorylated Ser27 is present. Thus, histone H1 activity is conducted by a proper recognition and binding throughout its disordered regions. It is also repeatedly governed by post-translational modifications that customarily correlate with the accessible and flexible protein sites (Dunker et al., 2002). Among post-translational modifications with strong preferences for an occurrence in disordered regions (Xie et al., 2007; Kurotani et al., 2014) are those which abundantly modify histone H1 subtypes. As acetylation neutralizes a positive charge of Lys residue and phosphorylation introduces the negative charge to Ser and Thr residues, the methylation reduces Arg and Lys polarity and therefore makes them more hydrophobic. These frequently occurring histone H1 modifications (Harshman et al., 2013) may consequently lead to structural rearrangements (Xin and Radivojac, 2012). They serve as conformational selection signals (Ma and Nussinov, 2009) confirming that binding DNA and/or binding proteins regulate a range of histone H1 actions, i.e. chromatin condensing capacity and transcriptional activity (Godde and Ura, 2008; Wood et al., 2009), as well as the course of cell cycle (Sarg et al., 2006) and a run of spermatogenesis (Kamieniarz et al., 2012). Furthermore, apart from plenty of histone H1 subtypes-dependent interactions which take place in the chromatin milieu (Kowalski and Pałyga, 2012), histone H1 participate also in the network of protein–protein interaction to integrate the structure and functionality of the nucleolus (Szerlong et al., 2015). In accordance with those findings, it can be stated that the cornerstone of the multifaceted histone H1 operation is their capability to adopt the various conformations, associated with the transition from disordered to the ordered state, on the purpose of the transient and reversible interactions.

Finally, the evidences provided within this work unequivocally show that the histone H1 subtypes belong to the abundantly disordered proteins. Therefore, intrinsic disorder state should be perceived as a key determinant that controls histone H1 function. While histone H1 subtypes disorder to order conversion may influence the course of genetic processes, modifications of their disordered sites may also participate in the epigenetic events.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2015.08.011.

The following are Supplementary data to this article:
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

