@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Structural evaluation of BTK and PKCδ mediated phosphorylation of MAL at positions Tyr86 and Tyr106

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Protein docking indicated that BTK bind within region of Tyr86 and Tyr106 of MAL.


                        
                        
                           
                           Protein docking indicated that PKCd bind within region of Tyr106 of MAL only.


                        
                        
                           
                           Charge distribution on surface of BTK and PKCd were distinct.


                        
                        
                           
                           Competitive action of both BTK and PKCd is present at site of Tyr106.


                        
                        
                           
                           Residues of MAL interact with other TIR domains are also involved with kinases.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

MAL

TIRAP

BTK

PKCδ




                  

Protein–protein interactions (PPIs)

Tyr86

Tyr106

Adenosine triphosphate (ATP)

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  A number of diseases including sepsis, rheumatoid arthritis, diabetes, cardiovascular diseases and hyperinflammatory immune disorders have been associated with Toll like receptor (TLR) 2 and TLR4. Endogenous adaptor protein known as MyD88 adapter-like protein (MAL) bind exclusively to the cytosolic portions of TLR2 and TLR4 to initiate downstream signalling. Brutons tyrosine kinase (BTK) and protein kinase C delta (PKCδ) have been implicated to phosphorylate MAL and activate it to initiate downstream signalling. BTK has been associated with phosphorylation at positions Tyr86 and Tyr106, necessary for the activation of MAL but definite residual target of PKCδ in MAL is still to be explored. To produce a better understanding of the functional domains involved in the formation of MAL–kinase complexes, computer-aided studies were used to characterize the protein–protein interactions (PPIs) of phosphorylated BTK and PKCδ with MAL. Docking and physicochemical studies indicated that BTK was involved in close contact with Tyr86 and Tyr106 of MAL whereas PKCδ may phosphorylate Tyr106 only. Moreover, the electrostatics charge distribution of binding interfaces of BTK and PKCδ were distinct but compatible with respective regions of MAL. Our results implicate that position of Tyr86 is specifically phosphorylated by BTK whereas Tyr106 can be phosphorylated by competitive action of both BTK and PKCδ. Additionally, the residues of MAL which are necessary for interaction with TLR2, TLR4, MyD88 and SOCS-1 also play their roles in maintaining interaction with kinases and can be targeted in future to reduce TLR2 and TLR4 induced pathological responses.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

There are about 10 different types of TLRs which belong to a family of transmembrane proteins and super-family of interleukin-1 receptor/Toll-like receptors (Trinchieri and Sher, 2007; Takeda and Akira, 2005). Pathogen associated molecular patterns (PAMPS) attach with the extracellular portion of TLRs and initiate innate immune responses (Bianchi, 2007). In case of TLR2 and TLR4, PAMPS bind with the extracellular portion of TLRs and induce oligomerization of their juxtamembrane parts followed by dimerization of their cytosolic portions known as Toll/interleukin-1 receptor (TIR) domains (Trinchieri and Sher, 2007). TLR2 makes heterodimer with TLR1 or TLR6 whereas homo-dimerization takes place between two TLR4s to initiate downstream signalling (Farhat et al., 2008; Lu et al., 2008; Nez Miguel et al., 2007). TIR domains have been reported for their importance to induce downstream signalling by recruiting other TIR domain containing adaptor proteins such as TIR domain-containing adapter inducing Interferon (IFN)-β, known as TLR adaptor molecule 1 (TICAM-1 or TRIF), TRIF-related adaptor molecule, known as TLR adaptor molecule 2 (TICAM-2 or TRAM), myeloid differentiation factor 88 (MyD88) and MyD88-adaptor-like protein (TIRAP or MAL)(Fitzgerald et al., 2003; Yamamoto and Akira, 2005; Kawai et al., 1999; Gray et al., 2006).

TIR domains mostly consists of five parallel β-sheets, designated as βA–βE surrounded by 5 α-helices, termed as αA–αE (Xu et al., 2000). Both of these secondary structures are linked by loops of variable lengths, which provide specificity to TIR–TIR domain interactions with different TLRs and their adaptor proteins. Different TLRs recruit individual adaptor proteins. Among others, TLR2 and TLR4 have the ability to recruit MAL protein. Formation of MAL–MyD88 complex with either TLR2 or TLR4 dimers have been implicated for the induction of nuclear factor κ B (NFκB) and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) dependent induction of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as interferon (IFN) γ, tumour necrosis factor (TNF) α, interleukin (IL) la, IL1β and IL6 (Dinarello, 2000). MAL has been also found in association with other multiple regulatory events after interacting with plasma membrane, interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase (IRAK)-1, IRAK-2, IRAK-4, TNF-receptor-associated factor (TRAF) 6, suppressor of cytokine signalling protein (SOCS)-1, BTK and PKCδ (Kagan and Medzhitov, 2006; Verstak et al., 2009; Dunne et al., 2010; Muzio et al., 1997; Mansell et al., 2006).

Phosphorylation of tyrosine (Tyr) residues in MAL have been suggested as an important event for the activation of MAL and for TLR2 and TLR4 downstream signalling (Piao et al., 2008). BTK, a Tec family tyrosine kinases, has been observed to induce phosphorylation at positions Tyr86 and Tyr106 of MAL (Gray et al., 2006). It has been associated with pathological conditions in case of autoimmunity and TLR mediated hyperinflammatory responses (Ahmad et al., 2012; Barral, 2013). Study of Kubo-Murai et al. suggested the involvement of PKCδ in TLR4 signalling through phosphorylation of TIR domain of MAL (Loegering and Lennartz, 2011; Kubo-Murai et al., 2007). However, site of phosphorylation is yet to be determined. Phosphorylation at sites Tyr159 and Tyr187 have also been associated with activation of MAL, but the available data is controversial (Gray et al., 2006; Piao et al., 2008). Mutagenic studies of MAL at positions 96, 100, 108,115, 117, 121, 132, 143, 165, 180, 184, 190 and 197 are suggested for their possible roles in loss of the function of MAL (Nagpal et al., 2009; Khor et al., 2007; Fitzgerald et al., 2001). This phenomenon suggests that with modulating the structure of MAL, immune disorders related with TLR2 and TLR4 can be controlled.

Previous study of our group was about the characterization of PPI of MAL with MyD88 and SOCS-1 (Niazi et al., 2011). In extension, current study is presented for characterization of the possible interaction sites of MAL with BTK and PKCδ. The findings of the studies suggest that BTK may specifically be involved in the phosphorylation of Tyr86 whereas, BTK and PKCδ can play their competitive roles in the phosphorylation of Tyr106. Moreover, several sites reported for the loss of function are also discussed for their presence in binding interfaces and support the interaction of BTK and PKCδ with MAL, which can affect not only the interaction of MAL with TLR2, TLR4, MyD88 or SOCS-1 but can also affect the phosphorylation of MAL and may result into partial or complete loss of its activation.

The AB loop in crystal structure of human TIR domain (residues 80–221) of MAL (PDB ID: 3UB2-crystal structure of TIR domain of MAL/TIRAP) deposited in protein data bank (PDB) (www.rcsb.org/pdb) was not resolved due to its flexible nature (Lin et al., 2012). So the AB loop was modelled using MODELLER (Eswar et al., 2006) and 100 loop models were generated. Loop confirmations were refined using 500 steps in variable target function method (VTFM) with conjugate gradients (CG), and then use slow refinement in molecular dynamics (MD) with simulated annealing (SA) refinement stage as implemented in MODELLER (Sali and Blundell, 1994). Optimizations were repeated three times for the generation of loop models. Models were clustered into groups based on root mean square distance (RMSD) between corresponding residues of each structure using NMRCLUST (Kelley et al., 1996). Clustered models were evaluated for the selection of representative model. ERRAT score (Colovos and Yeates, 1993), Verify3D (Bowie et al., 1991), potential energy of complete structure and of AB loop, Ramachandran plot (Ramachandran et al., 1963), and energy score calculated by MODELLER were used as criteria for evaluation of models.

The sequence of catalytic domain of PKCδ (Phe349-Lys669) was obtained from Uniprot (www.uniprot.org) (ID No. Q05655). Sequence was submitted to NCBI provided protein specific iteration (PSI)-BLAST facility to obtain the homologous sequences of three dimensional (3D) structures present in PDB. Two structures including PDB IDs: 1XJD (crystal structure of kinase domain of human PKC theta (PKCθ) complexed with Staurosporine resolved at 2Å) (Xu et al., 2004) and 2JED (crystal structure of kinase domain of human PKCθ in complex with Nvp-Xaa228 resolved at 2.32Å) have maximum sequence identity and smallest distance on the phylogenetic tree from kinase domain of human PKCδ. These 3D structures were used as templates for the homology modelling of PKCδ. 3D-Coffee was used for the structural alignment among the sequences of PKCδ and its templates (Poirot et al., 2004). MODELLER was used for the homology modelling of PKCδ. One hundred models were produced, which were clustered into groups according to RMSD between corresponding residues in their structures using NMRCLUST. Representative models were selected from each cluster based on scores provided by ERRAT, Qmean, PROSA (Wiederstein and Sippl, 2007), PROCHECK (Laskowski et al., 1993), Ramachandran plot, MODELLER and their potential energies. Glycine rich phosphate-binding loop (GPL) was refined using loop modelling module as implemented in MODELLER. Tyrosines at position 374 and 567, serines at positions 503,645, 654, 658 and 664 and threonine at position 507 were mutated to their phosphate group derivatives by using Chemistry at HARvard Molecular Mechanics (CHARMM) provided TP2, SP2 and THP2 patches, respectively, by MODELLER (Patel et al., 2004).

Crystal structure of kinase domain of BTK was obtained from PDB deposited under ID: 1K2P (crystal structure of Bruton's tyrosine kinase domain resolved at 2.1Å) (Mao et al., 2001). Structure was phosphorylated at sites Tyr551, Tyr617, Ser623 by using the same procedure as adopted in case of phosphorylating the residues in model of pPKCδ. Structure was protonated in Molecular Operating Environment (MOE) software (Chemical computing group's MOE software, version 2013) using default parameters and utilized for further analysis (Inc., 2013).

Visual molecular dynamics (VMD) and Not Another Molecular Dynamics program (NAMD) were used to prepare the structures before and after performing PPIs (Phillips et al., 2005; Humphrey et al., 1996). CHARM22 force field was used to perform minimization, equilibration and heating steps (MacKerell et al., 1998). Parameters and force fields for modified amino acids were used as provided by CHARMM. In each case of preparation of a structure, box of TIP3P water molecules was used as solvent. System was neutralized by adding the physiological concentration of Na+ and Cl− ions. Each system was subjected to minimization in stepwise manner. First a 3000 steps of minimization were performed only for water molecules and hydrogens atoms, fixing the rest of the system, so that water molecules could easily enter the grooves of structures. After the minimization of water and hydrogens of the system, 1000 steps of minimization were performed to the side chains of residues to reduce local strains. Seven thousand steps were used to minimize the backbone restraints followed by 10,000 steps of minimization on the overall system. In minimization stage, the number of steps were pre-calibrated for a point where the potential energy of each system became constant. After minimization stage each structure was heated from 0K to 310K (≈ body temperature) followed by equilibration at 310K for 300ps.

PPIs of pBTK and pPKCδ with MAL were studied using GURU level interface provided at High Ambiguity Driven biomolecular DOCKing (HADDOCK) web-server (haddock.science.uu.nl) (De Vries et al., 2010). HADDOCK web-server is driven on the approach of HADDOCK that makes use of biochemical and/or biophysical interaction data (Dominguez et al., 2003). It also offers protein–protein ab initio dockings based on random patch definition and centre of mass restraints. The docking protocol support the solvated docking, automatic definition of semi-flexible regions and modified amino acids. Scoring is based on the desolvation energy term and other statistics including common contacts among cluster of complexes and RMSD values of interfaces of each structure in a complex etc.

Possible residues of interfaces in each structure were predicted using the CPORT (Consensus Prediction Of interface Residues in Transient complexes) facility (de Vries and Bonvin, 2011). CPORT combine six interface prediction algorithms including PINUP (Liang et al., 2006), PIER (Kufareva et al., 2007), WHISCY (de Vries et al., 2006), ProMate (Neuvirth et al., 2004), cons-PPISP (Chen and Zhou, 2005) and SPPIDER (Porollo and Meller, 2007) collectively into one framework. It has been implicated that CPORT provides reliable predictions for the residues which can be integrated into the HADDOCK program.

Two regions of MAL were used in the study of PPIs with kinases, which were recursively docked in those regions. Among them one region presents the CPORT predicted interface residues around the Tyr86 of MAL whereas another region presents the interface residues around Tyr106 of MAL. Confining the PPI of MAL with kinases was supported by already known phosphorylation sites, which can be used as interfaces for interaction with kinases.

The modelling of ATP in complexes of pBTK and pPKCδ with MAL were performed to outline the distance of phosphorylatable atoms in Tyr86 and Tyr106 from γ-phosphate of ATP. Present version of HADDOCK webserver lack the capacity to calculate the PPIs in presence of any ligand or other biological small molecules. So modelling of ATP in the structures of pBTK and pPKCδ was performed after PPIs.

Complexes of pBTK and pPKCδ with MAL were aligned to structures of Abl tyrosine Kinase complexed with Adenosine diphosphate (ADP), (PDB ID: 2G2I; a Src-like inactive conformation in the abl tyrosine kinase domain) (Levinson et al., 2006) and structure of atypical PKC, i.e. PKC iota (PKCι) complexed with ATP, (PDB ID: 3A8W; Crystal structure of PKC iota kinase domain) (Takimura et al., 2010), respectively, via automatic structural alignment in MOE. The molecule of ADP in Abl tyrosine kinase was updated to ATP by introducing a group of phosphate at β-phosphate followed by the energy minimization with Merck Molecular Force Field (MMFF94) force field (Halgren, 1996) implemented in MOE before modelling of ATP in pBTK-MAL. Crystal structures of Abl tyrosine kinase and PKCι used for modelling of ATP in pBTK and pPKCδ were homologous to respective kinases.

At first step, GPL of kinases and the surrounding residues within an area of 9Å of ATP in each complex were energy minimized to decrease the steric clashes and harmonic restraints. In this case, the remainder structure and ATP were kept fixed. Finally, the molecule of ATP was energy minimized by keeping the remainder structure fixed. The energy minimizations of protein structures and its parts were carried out using CHARMM22 force field whereas minimization of ATP was performed using MMFF94. Other programs including Jalview (Clamp et al., 2004), Pymol (Schrödinger, 2010), PDBSUM (Laskowski, 2001), Swiss-PDB Viewer (Kaplan and Littlejohn, 2001), UCSF Chimera (Pettersen et al., 2004), PISA server (www.ebi.ac.uk/msd-srv/prot_int/pistart.html) (Krissinel and Henrick, 2007) were used for sequence and structural analysis. Delphi (Li et al., 2012) was used for calculating the electrostatic charges on the surfaces of proteins. Residual interactions were determined using default set of parameters available in MOE.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The secondary structure of MAL has been shown in Fig. 1
                        . 3D structure of TIR domain of MAL (PDB ID: 3UB2) is composed of five parallel β-sheets including βA-βE and four α-helices (αA and αC–αE) (naming conventions of helices and sheets are used as in ref (Lin et al., 2012)). Phosphorylatable residues, Tyr86 and Tyr106 are part of the strand βA and helix αA, respectively. Both of these secondary structures are interconnected with a long loop known as AB loop. In recently submitted crystal structure of MAL (PDB ID: 3UB2), AB loop was absent possibly due to the inherent elasticity (Lin et al., 2012). We performed the comparative modelling of AB loop using crystal structure of MAL (PDB ID: 3UB2) as template for the characterization of different domains and residues of MAL involved in PPIs with pBTK and pPKCδ.

One hundred loop models of the MAL were generated using MODELLER. Modelling of AB loop was performed in such a way that carbon skeleton, orientation of side chains and disulphide linkages (Cys89-Cys134 and Cys142-Cys174) of models should remain intact in original position as seen in the crystal structure of MAL (PDB ID: 3UB2) except for AB loop. Graph of MODELLER reported discrete optimized protein energy (DOPE) against molecular PDF (molpdf) energies is shown in Fig. 2
                        A, whereas graph of potential energies of the complete structure against those of AB loop has been shown in Fig. 2B. RMSD based clustering of the models resulted in 12 clusters among which 10 models had optimum RMSD values and MODELLER reported energy scores. ERRAT quality factors for all of the 10 models were in a range of ≈70–90 in comparison to the quality factor of 94 for template structure (PDB ID: 3UB2). After energy minimization, models with ERRAT score >80 were assessed for the potential energies of complete structure and of AB loop. Potential energies of selected models in comparison to the template structure (PDB ID: 3UB2) has been shown in Fig. 2C.

The MD refinement as implemented in MODELLER produced two major conformational spaces for the intra-molecular interaction of AB loop with remainder structure. Superimposed structures of models can be seen in Fig. 3
                        . In one of the conformational mode (Fig. 3A: models 1 and 2), the AB loop was slanted towards αE helix and participated in the residual interaction with helix αE (Figure S1). Hydrogen and hydrophobic interactions stabilized the orientation of AB loop with αE helix and thus the Tyr86 and Tyr106 were solvent accessible and took part in interaction with kinases (discussed below). Moreover, electrostatic surface analysis revealed that Tyr86 and Tyr106 were exposed as ridges and projected as putative sites for interaction with ATP (explained below). Whereas in another conformational mode (Fig. 3B: models 3–10), AB loop was oriented in opposite direction to the 1st mode of its conformation and sequestered away from αE helix. Intra-molecular interactions of AB loop with other residues were comparatively fewer in number in models 3–10, which might resulted in the increased flexibility of AB loop. Moreover, analysis of solvent exposed surfaces of these models presented that Tyr86 was buried under the AB loop and caused non-functional complexes with kinases during pre-experimental exercises.

Supplementary Fig. S1 can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2014.04.001.


                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Supplementary Fig. S1 Conformations of AB loop and residual interactions with neighbour atoms in loop models 1 and 2 of MAL. (A) Interaction of atoms present in AB loop with neighbour atoms in loop model 1 of MAL. Respective residual interactions has been shown in upper right side cartoon. (B) Interaction of atoms present in AB loop with neighbour atoms in loop model 2 of MAL. Respective residual interactions has been shown in lower right side cartoon. Hydrogen bonds are denoted by (HB) while hydrophobic interactions are denoted by (HYD). Atom names are devised as presented by MOE. Parts of αE helix are dark while AB loop is in light shade. Residues are labelled and shown as sticks whereas interaction among corresponding residues are shown in thin lines. Distance in Å has been shown in grey colour for each respective interaction.
                              
                              
                           
                        
                     

Analysis of models with respect to energies revealed that lowest energies models were model 1 and 2 which belong to 1st conformational mode and could be compared to crystal structure of MAL, in terms of energies and ERRAT score. As our concern was with the PPI of MAL by involving Tyr86 and Tyr106 with kinases, so we proposed to use the model 1 with solvent exposed Tyr86 and Tyr106.

Comparative modelling of catalytic domain of PKCδ (residues 349–603) in phosphorylated form (pPKCδ) was performed to evaluate its interaction with MAL. Crystal structures of PKCθ (PDB IDs: 1XJD and 2JED) were used as templates to create models. The template structures were submitted in catalytically active form but in the presence of ATP-competitive inhibitors (Staurosporine and Nvp-Xaa228). These inhibitors induced changes especially in the region of GPL. So the selected models of pPKCδ were further subjected to GPL refinement for the adjustment of ATP in complexes (See methods). In this section, we present insights into the selection of pPKCδ model and its comparison with template structures.

Using MODELLER, 100 models of catalytic domain of PKCδ were generated. MODELLER reported energies for all of the models have been shown in Fig. 4
                        A. These models were clustered into groups using NMRCLUST and models were selected from each cluster. Based on the scores provided by ERRAT, Qmean and MODELLER, 10 models were selected for further analysis. ERRAT scores for all of the 10 models were in a range of ≈70–80 whereas the Qmean score was in a range of ≈0.5–0.6, so the best models in terms of lower energy values and higher ERRAT score were selected for preparation. After preparation, models were re-evaluated for the scores of ERRAT, Qmean and their potential energies. Final selection of the model was based on the highest ERRAT score which was increased up to 95, Qmean score which was increased up to 0.738 (Figure S2) and potential energy which was comparatively lower than those of other models (Fig. 4B).

Supplementary Fig. S2 can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2014.04.001.


                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Supplementary Fig. S2 Quality of final selected model pPKCδ. Statistics provided by Qmean (A) and ERRAT (B) for final selected model of pPKCδ.
                              
                              
                           
                        
                     

Multiple sequence alignment (Fig. 5
                        A) and superposition of comparative structures of pPKCδ with its template shown comparable secondary structures of N (residues 349–431) and C-terminal (residues 435–603) domains (Fig. 5B). N-terminal of pPKCδ was composed of 2 α-helices (αB and αC) and 5 β-sheets (β1–β5) whereas comparatively larger C-terminal lobe comprised of 8 α-helices (αD–αK) and 3 strands of β-sheets (β6–β8). Both of the terminals were connected with residues of hinge linker (432–435). Some of the important domains including GPL, helix-αC, activation loop (residues 522–544), hydrophobic groove at N-terminal, turn motif (residues 662–685), hydrophobic motif (HM) FXXFS at C-terminal were analysed for the comparison among pPKCδ and its template.

Most of the intra-molecular residual interactions in pPKCδ were comparable to the corresponding interactions in its templates except those of GPL. The GPL connects β1 and β2 strands of the protein (residues 356–361) and make a ridge above ATP binding cavity. In crystal structures of PKCθ, GPL was slanted towards its ligands and was stabilized by the interaction of Phe360 with Lys378 (residues are numbered according to pPKCδ). This interaction produced clashes with the γ-phosphate moiety of ATP during modelling of ATP in kinases (see Section 2). So loop refinement of GPL in pPKCδ was performed to eliminate the interaction of Phe360 with Lys378. Loop modelling implicated that GPL could adopt extensive collection of orientations ranging from open to closed conformations with respect to the ATP binding cavity. For correct positioning of ATP inside the complexes, different conformations of GPL were used and verified with modelling of ATP in the cavity. The selected loop model for further analysis was used in which no steric hindrances were seen among residues of GPL and ATP.

Catalytic key residues including Lys378, Asp473, and Asp491 preserved the same molecular interactions as seen in its template structures. The central helix-αC and the activation loop share critical roles in catalytic activity of kinases. Proper alignment of helix αC and extended conformation of activation loop bearing the essential phosphorylated Thr507 (pThr507) validated the model as active enzyme. Oxygen of the pThr507 made conserved interactions with neighbouring residues except with Ala505. Moreover, the cationic cluster formation by pThr507, with Arg472 and Lys496 was intact in the model of pPKCδ and projected the correct orientation of catalytic base Asp473, as seen in its templates. Inter-domain residual interaction among Glu497 of activation loop with Arg399 and Glu392 of helix-αC formed a similar double salt bridges as seen in the template structures. The C-terminal hydrophobic motif contains pSer664 on the same position as in the template, which might performed comparable functions during the docking of pPKCδ. The orientation of HM preserved as seen in template. Turn motif (631–654) in pPKCδ was observed extending across the ATP binding site and found comparable to its conformation as in template structures.

Protonated structure of pBTK was docked with selected loop model of MAL using default settings at GURU interface of HADDOCK web-server. CPORT predictions for active and passive residues of pBTK and MAL within a region of Tyr86 are shown in Figures S3 and S4A, respectively. HADDOCK resulted into 166 water-refined complexes, clustered into 9 groups. Statistics provided by HADDOCK for the top 9 clusters have been shown in Figure S5. HADDOCK score for the best possible complex of pBTK within a region of Tyr86 of MAL (termed as pBTK–Tyr86:MAL) was −13.4±2.7, which represented the highest probable complex among other predictions. Cluster size, RMSD from the overall lowest-energy structure, Van der Waals energy, electrostatic energy, desolvation energy, restraints violation energy, buried surface area and Z-score of top 9 clusters are shown in Fig. 6
                        . The top cluster was refined for orientation of molecules against each other to improve the HADDOCK score. Statistics for the complexes formed after refinement has been shown in Figure S6. Cartoon of refined complex of pBTK–Tyr86:MAL has been shown in Fig. 7
                        A which was used for further analysis. Analysis of deformation of structures in terms of bond lengths, angles, dihedrals, atomic clashes and contact energies of pBTK and MAL implicated that structures maintained their reliability and quality after PPIs through HADDOCK.

Supplementary Figs. S3-S6 can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2014.04.001.


                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Supplementary Fig. S3 CPORT prediction for possible binding sites of pBTK. (A) Ribbon diagrams of pBTK showing the area around GPL (left) and αC helix (right). (B) Sequence of pBTK. Residues in ribbon diagrams and sequence are coloured black for active, dark grey for passive and light grey for inactive residues as predicted by CPORT.
                              
                              
                                 
                                    Supplementary Fig. S4 CPORT prediction for possible binding sites of MAL. (A) Ribbon diagrams of MAL showing the area around Tyr86 (left) and Tyr106 (right) (B) Sequence of MAL. Residues in ribbon diagrams and sequence are coloured black for active, dark grey for passive and light grey for inactive residues as predicted by CPORT.
                              
                              
                                 
                                    Supplementary Fig. S5 Statistics provided by HADDOCK for pBTK–Tyr86:MAL. Comparison of different scores provided after standard analysis performed by HADDOCK for pBTK–Tyr86:MAL. (A–G) Scatter plots among HADDOCK score (measured in arbitrary units(a.u.)), interface-ligand (i-l) RMSD score (measured in Å), interface (i) RMSD score (Å), ligand (l) RMSD score (Å), Van der Waals energy (kcal/mol), electrostatic energy (kcal/mol), fraction of common contacts (FCC) (a.u.) and ambiguous interaction restraint energy (kcal/mol). Definitions for scores can be found in Méndez et al. (2003), Rodrigues et al. (2012) and De Vries et al. (2010). These scores were calculated for water-refined models with respect to the best HADDOCK model (cluster 2). The clusters were calculated based on the RMSDs between interfaces, automatically defined by HADDOCK. The averages and standard deviations of scores among clusters are indicated by coloured dots with associated error bars.
                              
                              
                                 
                                    Supplementary Fig. S6 Statistics provided by HADDOCK after refinement of cluster 2 of pBTK–Tyr86:MAL. Comparison of different scores provided after standard analysis performed by HADDOCK on the refinement of cluster 2 of pBTK–Tyr86:MAL (see Figure S5). (A–G) Scatter plots among HADDOCK score (measured in arbitrary units (a.u.)), interface-ligand (i-l) RMSD score (measured in Å), interface (i) RMSD score (Å), ligand (l) RMSD score (Å), Van der Waals energy (kcal/mol), electrostatic energy (kcal/mol), fraction of common contacts (FCC) (a.u.) and ambiguous interaction restraint energy (kcal/mol). Definitions for scores can be found in Méndez et al. (2003), Rodrigues et al. (2012), De Vries et al. (2010). These scores were calculated for Water-refined models with respect to the best HADDOCK predicted complex (with the lowest HADDOCK score). The averages and standard deviations of scores among clusters are indicated by coloured dots with associated error bars.
                              
                              
                              
                              
                              
                           
                        
                     

Analysis of intermolecular interactions among pBTK and MAL in selected complex of pBTK–Tyr86:MAL presented that complex was a result of 21 non-covalent bonding interactions. Among which 9 hydrogen bond, 5 ionic and 7 hydrophobic interactions were observed among different residues of pBTK and MAL.

The selected complex of pBTK–MAL represented notable conformations of pBTK against MAL in which γ-phosphate of ATP modelled in pBTK (ATP:pBTK) (see Section 2) was observed within a distance of 3.1Å from the phosphorylatable atom of Tyr86:MAL (Fig. 7B). Moreover, the atoms of GPL were involved in making contacts with strand-βB:MAL in vicinity of Tyr86 of MAL (Tyr86:MAL). Interaction of Gln412:GPL of pBTK with the Tyr86:MAL might stabilized its position and helped in the flexible transition of γ-phosphate of ATP:pBTK towards its phosphorylatable atom. AB loop of MAL was stabilized by the interaction of strand-β3:pBTK involving Lys433 with Gly126:MAL. Helix-αA of MAL was stabilized with pBTK by involving salt bridges between Glu94:MAL with Arg487 and Lys595 of pBTK along with Leu97:MAL with Leu483:pBTK. Loop among βB and βC strands in MAL performed further interactions with pBTK to stabilize the complex. In this interaction, Gln135 and Glu132 of MAL made a salt bridge with the catalytic residue Arg525:pBTK. Another salt bridge was observed between Ser138 and Ser139 of MAL with Lys558:pBTK. Moreover, Leu133, Ala136 and Leu137 of MAL invovled in interaction with Leu483, Asn603 and Trp563 of pBTK, respectively, to stabilize the complex. Helix-αC of MAL was also found involved in the interaction with pBTK at the loop between helix αE and αF. In this region, Asp154:MAL was making salt bridges with Lys595:pBTK. Additionally, the interaction of Pro155:MAL with Arg600:pBTK and Trp156:MAL with Met596:BTK stabilized the helix-αC of MAL with loop between helix αE and αF of pBTK.

In this approach, the CPORT predicted interface residues of MAL within a region of Tyr106 (Figure S4B) and for pBTK (Figure S3), were used for analysing the PPI of pBTK with MAL. HADDOCK produced 191 complexes clustered into 4 groups. Statistics for the top 4 clusters have been shown in Figure S7. HADDOCK score for the best possible complex of pBTK within a region of Tyr106 of MAL (termed as pBTK–Tyr106:MAL) was −65.2±5.8. Buried surface area, Z-score, cluster size, RMSD from the overall lowest-energy structure, Van der Waals, electrostatic, desolvation and restraints violation energies for all clusters are shown in Fig. 8
                        . The top cluster was refined for orientation of molecules against each other to improve the overall scores of selected complex (Figure S8). Cartoon of refined complex of pBTK–Tyr106:MAL has been shown in Fig. 9
                        A which was used for further analysis. Analysis of deformation of structures in terms of bond lengths, angles, dihedrals, atomic clashes and contact energies of pBTK and MAL implicated that structures maintained their reliability and quality after PPIs through HADDOCK.

Supplementary Figs. S7 and S8 can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2014.04.001.


                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Supplementary Fig. S7 Statistics provided by HADDOCK for pBTK–Tyr106:MAL. Comparison of different scores provided after standard analysis performed by HADDOCK for pBTK–Tyr106:MAL. (A–G) Scatter plots among HADDOCK score (measured in arbitrary units (a.u.)), interface-ligand (i-l) RMSD score (measured in Å), interface (i) RMSD score (Å), ligand (l) RMSD score (Å), Van der Waals energy (kcal/mol), electrostatic energy (kcal/mol), fraction of common contacts (FCC) (a.u.) and ambiguous interaction restraint energy (kcal/mol). Definitions for scores can be found in Méndez et al. (2003), Rodrigues et al. (2012) and De Vries et al. (2010). These scores were calculated for water-refined models with respect to the best HADDOCK model (cluster 2). The clusters were calculated based on the RMSDs between interfaces, automatically defined by HADDOCK. The averages and standard deviations of scores among clusters are indicated by coloured dots with associated error bars.
                              
                              
                                 
                                    Supplementary Fig. S8 Statistics provided by HADDOCK after refinement of cluster 2 of pBTK–Tyr106:MAL. Comparison of different scores provided after standard analysis performed by HADDOCK on the refinement of cluster 2 of pBTK–Tyr106:MAL (see Figure S7). (A–G) Scatter plots among HADDOCK score (measured in arbitrary units (a.u.)), interface-ligand (i-l) RMSD score (measured in Å), interface (i) RMSD score (Å), ligand (l) RMSD score (Å), Van der Waals energy (kcal/mol), electrostatic energy (kcal/mol), fraction of common contacts (FCC) (a.u.) and ambiguous interaction restraint energy (kcal/mol). Definitions for scores can be found in Méndez et al. (2003), Rodrigues et al. (2012) and De Vries et al. (2010). These scores were calculated for Water-refined models with respect to the best HADDOCK predicted complex (with the lowest HADDOCK score). The averages and standard deviations of scores among clusters are indicated by coloured dots with associated error bars.
                              
                              
                              
                           
                        
                     

Intermolecular interactions in selected complex of pBTK–Tyr106:MAL presented 29 non-covalent bonding interactions. Among which 21 hydrogen bond, 4 ionic and 4 hydrophobic interactions were observed among different residues of pBTK and MAL.

The selected complex of pBTK–Tyr106:MAL presented prominent conformations of pBTK against MAL in which γ-phosphate of ATP modelled in pBTK (ATP:pBTK) was observed within a distance of 3.5Å from the phosphorylatable hydroxyl of Tyr106:MAL (Fig. 9B). Lys558 of pBTK was making interactions with Tyr106, Leu107, Gly109 and Ser110 of MAL to stabilize the Tyr106 in place. In contrast Tyr86 was making interaction with the β2 strand of pBTK. The major domains of MAL including αA, βB and αE helices was interacting with GPL, portion between β3 and αA, loop between αE and αF and activation loop of pBTK. Within the region of αA helix:MAL, Val98 and Ala99 was observed in making interaction with activation loop of pBTK, which might restricted the activation loop in place. Gln101 was interacting with Gln412, Arg520 and Arg544 of pBTK. Moreover, Asp102 of MAL made salt bridges with Arg520:pBTK to further stabilize the αA helix:MAL against pBTK. Region of βB helix of MAL mostly interacted with Lys433 of pBTK. Region of αE helix:MAL involving Asp203 and Arg207 was found in interaction with Glu599-Asn603 of pBTK, which form a loop between αE and αF.

Docking of pPKCδ within the region of Tyr86 of MAL (termed as pPKCδ–Tyr86:MAL) were performed using the default settings at GURU level interface of HADDOCK web-server. CPORT predicted active and passive residues of pPKCδ is shown in Figure S9 which were used in PPI against the region of Tyr86 of MAL (Figure S4A). HADDOCK resulted 176 water-refined complexes, clustered into 10 groups. HADDOCK statistics for the top 10 clusters are shown in Figure S10. HADDOCK score for complex of pPKCδ and MAL was −96.4±3.0 representing the highest probable complex in all of the probabilities. Cluster size, RMSD from the overall lowest-energy structure, Van der Waals energy, electrostatic energy, desolvation energy, restraints violation energy, buried surface area and Z-score of the complex has been shown in Fig. 10
                        . The cluster with relatively low HADDOCK score was selected for further refinement to improve the statistics of energy scores Figure S11. Refined complex of pPKCδ with MAL has been shown in Fig. 11
                         which was used for further analysis. Analysis of deformation of structures in terms of bond lengths, angles, dihedrals, atomic clashes and contact energies of pBTK and MAL implicated that structures maintained their reliability and quality after PPIs through HADDOCK.

Supplementary Figs. S9-S11 can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2014.04.001.


                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Supplementary Fig. S9 CPORT prediction for possible binding residues of pPKCδ. (A) Ribbon diagrams of pPKCδ showing the area around GPL (left) and αC helix (right) (B) Sequence of pPKCδ. Residues in ribbon diagrams and sequence are coloured black for active, dark grey for passive and light grey for inactive residues as predicted by CPORT.
                              
                              
                                 
                                    Supplementary Fig. S10 Statistics provided by HADDOCK for pPKCδ–Tyr86:MAL. Comparison of different scores provided after standard analysis performed by HADDOCK for pPKCδ–Tyr86:MAL. (A–G) Scatter plots among HADDOCK score (measured in arbitrary units (a.u.)), interface-ligand (i-l) RMSD score (measured in Å), interface (i) RMSD score (Å), ligand (l) RMSD score (Å), Van der Waals energy (kcal/mol), electrostatic energy (kcal/mol), fraction of common contacts (FCC) (a.u.) and ambiguous interaction restraint energy (kcal/mol). Definitions for scores can be found in Méndez et al. (2003), Rodrigues et al. (2012) and De Vries et al. (2010). These scores were calculated for water-refined models with respect to the best HADDOCK model (cluster 2). The clusters were calculated based on the RMSDs between interfaces, automatically defined by HADDOCK. The averages and standard deviations of scores among clusters are indicated by coloured dots with associated error bars.
                              
                              
                                 
                                    Supplementary Fig. S11 Statistics provided by HADDOCK after refinement of cluster 2 of pPKCδ–Tyr86:MAL. Comparison of different scores provided after standard analysis performed by HADDOCK on the refinement of cluster 2 of pPKCδ–Tyr86:MAL (see Figure S10). (A–G) Scatter plots among HADDOCK score (measured in arbitrary units (a.u.)), interface-ligand (i-l) RMSD score (measured in Å), interface (i) RMSD score (Å), ligand (l) RMSD score (Å), Van der Waals energy (kcal/mol), electrostatic energy (kcal/mol), fraction of common contacts (FCC) (a.u.) and ambiguous interaction restraint energy (kcal/mol). Definitions for scores can be found in Méndez et al. (2003), Rodrigues et al. (2012) and De Vries et al. (2010). These scores were calculated for Water-refined models with respect to the best HADDOCK predicted complex (with the lowest HADDOCK score). The averages and standard deviations of scores among clusters are indicated by coloured dots with associated error bars.
                              
                              
                              
                              
                           
                        
                     

Analysis of selected complex of pPKCδ–Tyr86:MAL implicated that although 21 non-covalent interactions were present in the selected complex of pPKCδ–Tyr86:MAL but the γ-phosphate of ATP:pPKCδ was at a distance of 25.6Å around phosphorylatable atom of Tyr86:MAL. Major interactions of αC-βD region of MAL were found with the GPL and activation loop of pPKCδ.

Default settings at GURU level of docking interface at HADDOCK web-server were used for the docking of protonated structure of pPKCδ within the region of Tyr106 of MAL (termed as pPKCδ–Tyr106:MAL). CPORT predictions for active and passive residues of pPKCδ are shown in Figure S9, which were used in PPI against the region of Tyr106 of MAL (Figure S4B). HADDOCK resulted into 185 water-refined complexes, clustered into 8 groups. Statistics provided by HADDOCK for the top 4 clusters are shown in Figure S12. HADDOCK score of complex of pPKCδ–Tyr106:MAL was −72.4±4.0 representing the highest probable complex among other probabilities. Cluster size, RMSD from the overall lowest-energy structure, Van der Waals energy, electrostatic energy, desolvation energy, restraints violation energy, buried surface area and Z-score of the complex has been shown in Fig. 12
                        . The top cluster had relatively low HADDOCK score and was selected for further analysis. Refinement of the top cluster was performed to improve the energy and HADDOCK scores. Statistics for the complexes formed after refinement have been shown in Figure S13. Refined complex of pPKCδ with MAL has been shown in Fig. 13
                        A, which was used for further analysis. Analysis of deformation of structures in terms of bond lengths, angles, dihedrals, atomic clashes and contact energies of pBTK and MAL implicated that structures maintained their reliability and quality after PPIs through HADDOCK.

Supplementary Figs. S12 and S13 can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2014.04.001.


                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Supplementary Fig. S12 Statistics provided by HADDOCK for pPKCδ–Tyr106:MAL. Comparison of different scores provided after standard analysis performed by HADDOCK for pPKCδ–Tyr106:MAL. (A–G) Scatter plots among HADDOCK score (measured in arbitrary units (a.u.)), interface-ligand (i-l) RMSD score (measured in Å), interface (i) RMSD score (Å), ligand (l) RMSD score (Å), Van der Waals energy (kcal/mol), electrostatic energy (kcal/mol), fraction of common contacts (FCC) (a.u.) and ambiguous interaction restraint energy (kcal/mol). Definitions for scores can be found in Méndez et al. (2003), Rodrigues et al. (2012) and De Vries et al. (2010). These scores were calculated for water-refined models with respect to the best HADDOCK model (cluster 2). The clusters were calculated based on the RMSDs between interfaces, automatically defined by HADDOCK. The averages and standard deviations of scores among clusters are indicated by coloured dots with associated error bars.
                              
                              
                                 
                                    Supplementary Fig. S13 Statistics provided by HADDOCK after refinement of cluster 2 of pPKCδ–Tyr106:MAL. Comparison of different scores provided after standard analysis performed by HADDOCK on the refinement of cluster 2 of pPKCδ–Tyr106:MAL (see Figure S12). (A–G) Scatter plots among HADDOCK score (measured in arbitrary units (a.u.)), interface-ligand (i-l) RMSD score (measured in Å), interface (i) RMSD score (Å), ligand (l) RMSD score (Å), Van der Waals energy (kcal/mol), electrostatic energy (kcal/mol), fraction of common contacts (FCC) (a.u.) and ambiguous interaction restraint energy (kcal/mol). Definitions for scores can be found in Méndez et al. (2003), Rodrigues et al. (2012) and De Vries et al. (2010). These scores were calculated for Water-refined models with respect to the best HADDOCK predicted complex (with the lowest HADDOCK score). The averages and standard deviations of scores among clusters are indicated by coloured dots with associated error bars.
                              
                              
                              
                           
                        
                     

Analysis of intra-molecular interactions have shown that out of 33 non-covalent interactions, 20 hydrogen bonds, 10 ionic and 3 hydrophobic interactions were existed. The complex had significant conformation of pPKCδ against MAL in which γ-phosphate of ATP:pPKCδ was observed within a region of 3.9Å around phosphorylatable atom of Tyr106:MAL (Fig. 13B). Most of the interactions among MAL and pPKCδ involved helix-αA and αE of MAL with pPKCδ. Within helix-αA of MAL, Val98 was making interactions with Val384, Asp648 and Leu651 of pPKCδ. Additionally, Leu97 and Val98 of MAL interacted with Asp648:Turn motif of pPKCδ, which might restricted the flexibility of turn motif:pPKCδ and reduced the chances of its collapse into the interfaces of two proteins. Asp102:MAL involved in making salt bridges with Lys357 and 362 of pPKCδ, which might tethered the GPL:pPKCδ in place. In region of AB loop:MAL, Arg115 interacted with Asp635 and Glu637 of pPKCδ whereas Ser180, Gly181:region of loop after strand-βD and Arg200:helix E of MAL interacted with Asp388 of pPKCδ to fasten the complex of pPKCδ–MAL from two opposite sides of each protein. Helix-αE was protrude into the groove between N and C domains of pPKCδ below the ATP binding site and projected the Tyr106 near γ-phosphate of ATP. Helix-αE was stabilized in conformation by forming 5 salt bridges with pPKCδ involving Asp203, Arg207, Gln208 and Arg215 of MAL with Lys475, Asp477:Thr511: Asp513, Glu553 and Asp551 of pPKCδ.

Different approaches were used to predict and validate the PPIs, but it was observed that charge distribution and hydrophobic characteristics of protein interfaces proved better in explaining PPIs of MAL with pBTK and pPKCδ. In this section, we elaborate the physicochemical characteristics of the surfaces of MAL, pBTK and pPKCδ with special emphasis on their binding regions. The purpose of presenting this section is to elaborate the differences in interaction sites, which may compel the MAL to bind in the specific regions with pBTK and pPKCδ for its phosphorylation. Electrostatic charge distribution was calculated on the surfaces of MAL, pBTK and pPKCδ by solving the Poisson-Boltzmann equation using Delphi (Li et al., 2012) whereas hydrophobicity of surfaces were studied using Kyte–Doolittle algorithm (Kyte and Doolittle, 1982).

Analysis of charge complementarity at binding interfaces were found interesting which support PPI of MAL with pBTK at the site of Tyr86:MAL. Binding interfaces of MAL and pBTK had strong charge complementarity, in which MAL was found with strong negative charge around the area of Tyr86 and pBTK with strong positive charge at its binding interface (Fig. 14
                        F). AB Loop of MAL was found interacting with the N-terminal region of GPL in pBTK because of strong electrostatic forces among Arg115:MAL and Glu 407:BTK. Region of GPL in pBTK was found positive which interacts with the negatively charged residues of strand βA and βB of MAL and resulted in the correct orientation of Tyr86:MAL against ATP:pBTK. Moreover, the region of helix-αA:MAL was mostly composed of negatively charged residues and its interaction with positively charged residues including Leu483, Arg487 and Lys595 of pBTK stabilized the complex. Glu132 and Gln135:MAL were found in making salt bridges with catalytic residue Arg525 of pBTK. This interaction was also accompanied by charge complementarity in this region. Additionally, helix-αC:MAL was involved in interaction within the region of helices αE and αF:pBTK, which also supported the electrostatic complementation in this region to further stabilize the complex. Interaction of pPKCδ around the region of Tyr86:MAL was non-functional most probably due to the strong adhesive charge similarities on binding interfaces (Fig. 14G). This might be the reason due to which functional complex of pPKCδ–Tyr86:MAL could not be formed.

Region of Tyr106 presented an interesting case of charge heterogeneity for MAL against pBTK and pPKCδ. pBTK interacted with the negative region around Tyr106 in such a conformation that γ-phosphate could be in position to phosphorylate the hydroxyl group of Tyr106:MAL (Fig. 14H). N-lobe of pBTK was involved in interaction with the negative charged surface of MAL whereas C-lobe of pBTK was found in the vicinity of positively charged region of Tyr106, however Asp203:MAL stabilized the C-lobe in this region. Moreover, the activation loop of pBTK was also found in the vicinity of negatively charged region of MAL. In contrast, the binding interface of MAL with pPKCδ in complex pPKCδ–Tyr106:MAL reflected changes from those observed in case of pBTK–Tyr106:MAL. In complex of pPKCδ–Tyr106:MAL, the binding interface of MAL was positively charged whereas pPKCδ had negative charges on its binding interface (Fig. 14I). N-lobe of pPKCδ was found in the vicinity of negatively charged region of MAL whereas C-lobe interacted with the positively charged region. But all of the non-covalent interactions in pPKCδ–Tyr106:MAL were supported by the charge complementarity. For example, Asp102 in helix αA of MAL shown interaction with the Lys357 and Lys362, which were charge compatible regions. Moreover, the positively charged residues of MAL in a region of helix αE including Arg207, Gln208 and Arg215 were also involved in electrostatic interaction with compatible charged residues of pPKCδ for stabilizing the complex.

Hydrophobicity of protein interfaces has been shown in Fig. 15
                         for complexes of pBTK–Tyr86:MAL, pPKCδ–Tyr86:MAL, pBTK–Tyr106:MAL and pPKCδ–Tyr106:MAL. Complex of pBTK–Tyr86:MAL share more hydrophobic contacts including Phe117:MAL with Phe404:pBTK, Val104, Leu107:MAL with Val415: pBTK, Leu97,Leu133:MAL with Leu483:pBTK, Val98:MAL with Met489:pBTK and Trp156:MAL with Met596:pBTK. In contrast, only three hydrophobic interactions were found in complex of pPKCδ–Tyr86:MAL including Trp156:MAL with Val384 of pBTK and Leu137:MAL with Ile387 and Leu651 of pPKCδ. Whereas other hydrophobic regions in both of the complexes were observed at the distance of greater than 7Å.

In case of pBTK–Tyr106:MAL, three hydrophobic interactions were found including Leu133:MAL with Phe413:pBTK, Val130:MAL with Val415:pBTK and Val98:MAL with Val555:pBTK. Similarly in complex of pPKCδ–Tyr106:MAL, Val98 of MAL interacted with Val384 and Leu651 of pPKCδ and Leu114:MAL interacted with Met436 of pPKCδ. Whereas other hydrophobic regions in both complexes were observed at the distance of greater than 7Å. Results implicated that the interaction of pBTK with MAL from side of Tyr86 involves non-polar residues mediated hydrophobic interactions whereas interaction of pBTK and pPKCδ with MAL from the side of Tyr106 might involved mostly the polar residues.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The TIR domain of MAL, recruits MyD88 and other proteins to induce TLR2 and TLR4 dependent differential innate immune responses (Gray et al., 2006; Yamamoto et al., 2002; Horng et al., 2002). Previous studies have reported the possible roles of MAL in the induction of NFκB and MAPK signalling pathways resulting in hyperinflammatory responses. Mutation at positions Tyr86 and Tyr106 residues within the TIR domain of MAL are associated with loss of its function and believed to be a good target to treat hyperinflammatory disorders. Previous study of our group was an attempt to discuss the role of phosphorylation at positions Tyr86 and Tyr106 in retaining interactions with SOCS-1 and MyD88 (Niazi et al., 2011). This study characterized the PPIs of MAL with pBTK and pPKCδ to identify the structural characteristics necessary to induce phosphorylation at Tyr86 and Tyr106. In the current study, molecular modelling and in-silico PPI techniques were used in conjunction with previous experimental findings, to give an insight into the specificity of pBTK and pPKCδ for phosphorylation of Tyr86 and Tyr106 of MAL.

Loops present in TIR domains of TLRs and TIR adaptor proteins provide specificity in TLR mediated signalling and immune outcomes (Gangloff et al., 2005). Conformation of loops are specific, and conserved within, each protein subfamily (Snyder et al., 2013). Homology modelling of AB loop in the crystal structure of TIR domain of MAL have provided implications for its known flexibility nature and corresponding effect on the binding pattern with kinases. Two major conformational spaces of AB loop reflected the specific instance of its nature during interaction with the kinases. The activation of MAL seem to proceed, only when AB loop interacts with αE helix in MAL, which represents one extreme for flexible AB loop, whereas its interaction with the area of Tyr86 can be considered as another. Interaction of AB loop with phosphorylated Tyr86 is proved to be important for downstream signalling after interaction with MyD88 and is also necessary for its degradation through SOCS-1 (Niazi et al., 2011). Both of these type of conformations are also seen in BB loops of other TIR domains. For example, in case of monomeric TLR2, homologous BB loop sequestered away from the rest of the domain whereas the closure of loop against TIR domain of TLR2 is observed necessary for dimerization of TLR2 (Tao et al., 2002).

Accuracy of homology protein model is associated with the percentage sequence identity of query and template sequences (Daga et al., 2010). Homology models with high accuracy have about 1Å root mean square (RMS) error for the backbone atoms and can be correlated with a structure resolved with medium resolution nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). Such an accuracy in homology models can be achieved if the sequence of model is 50% identical to its template (Baker and Sali, 2001). Homology modelling of biological molecules is proved to be faster, reliable and progressively accurate as comparable to other experimental approaches (Kryshtafovych et al., 2014). Sequence of pPKCδ is 76% identical with 87% positives without any gaps to crystal structures of PKCθ (PDB IDs: 1XJD and 2JED) which presents that homology model of pPKCδ used in the analysis of PPI with MAL produced significant and intuitive results. To support the quality and reliability of final selection of homology model of pPKCδ, several parameters including ERRAT, Ramachandran, Qmean, PROSA and PROCHECK were used to verify the models geometry during each round of pre-experimental exercises for correction of backbone, side chains orientation, rotamers of residues and to reduce the clashes among atoms. Final selected homology model of pPKCδ had bond angles, lengths, dihedrals and interaction energies within allowed limits in absence of any atomic clashes. Moreover 95% ERRAT score, 0.738 Qmean score with −0.43 Z-score and relative lower potential energy were some of the other properties which support our confidence to use the final selected homology model of pPKCδ in further analysis of PPI with MAL.

At molecular level, PPIs have essential roles to maintain activities of cell and life. Important information such as structure flexibility, binding area and residual interactions are crucial for our understanding about the back end mechanisms involved in diseases and designing new therapeutics for them. Complexity in experimental techniques often produce limitations in the determination of structures of protein–protein complexes. However, computational modelling techniques of PPIs can be used to fill those gaps. Current study is an attempt to predict the binding interfaces involved in PPI of MAL with pBTK and pPKCδ. Presence of crystal structures of MAL and BTK along with the generation of reliable model of pPKCδ permit the analysis of numerous observations regarding the interaction regions, shape complementarity, non-covalent interactions and physicochemical analysis. Moreover, knowledge of the phosphoryl transfer mechanisms within kinases to phosphorylate the Tyr86 or Tyr106 in MAL facilitated us to reduce the size of conformational spaces of MAL against pBTK and pPKCδ (Kenyon et al., 2012). This approach is proved to be helpful as demonstrated conclusively by assessments of blind protein–protein interaction prediction experiments in different rounds of critical assessment of predicted interactions (CAPRI) (Janin et al., 2003).

Interaction of pBTK and MAL for the phosphorylation of Tyr86 demonstrated the specificity in conformations of each molecule against each other. This conformational adjustment results in the closer proximity of γ-phosphate of ATP to Tyr86 of MAL. The hydrophobic character which was involved in PPIs between pBTK and MAL was found about one-third of the interfaces. Hydrophobic interactions were found surrounded by polar interactions. Analysis of surface of MAL through PISA suggested that interface surface have promising hydrophobicity character and can be interaction-specific with pBTK. All other possible complexes obtained through HADDOCK produced a difference of 9-35Å of difference between γ-phosphate of ATP and phosphorylatable atoms (hydroxyl group) in Tyr86:MAL which seem to be impossible for the phosphoryl transfer (Kenyon et al., 2012). The interfaces of pBTK and MAL in selected complex have many interactions between them along with their electrostatic charge complementarity. Previous studies identified Pro125His, Tyr86Ala, Tyr106Ala, and Tyr159Ala of MAL as putative mutations which failed to induce downstream signalling (Piao et al., 2008). In contrast, mutagenesis of Tyr187, Tyr195, and Tyr196 were implicated with little or no effect. Our study support all of the above implications, however Pro125:MAL has not been observed as a putative site involved in the interaction with pBTK or pPKCδ which implicates that this site may be actively involved in the interaction with other TIR domains necessary to induce a downstream signal.

Interaction studies of pPKCδ with MAL implicates that pPKCδ might be competitively involved in the phosphorylation of Tyr106. Selected complex had a closer proximity of γ-phosphate of ATP to Tyr106 of MAL in a distance of 3.9Å. From a 3D structural viewpoint it appears to be in a good position to bind to pPKCδ for phosphorylation, however this case was not seen for Tyr86 which was also exposed and solvent accessible on the surface of MAL. The hydrophobic character which was involved in pPKCδ-Tyr106:MAL was found about one-eighth of the interfaces and comparatively less than that seen in case of pBTK-Tyr86:MAL. However, the conformational adjustment of pPKCδ against MAL at region of Tyr106 had been found transient.This is because PISA reflected that the interface of MAL had less hydrophobic character and therefore it was likely to be an artefact of crystal packing. Similarly the complex of pBTK-Tyr106:MAL shown the comparative results for interfaces. The crystal packing actually appear upon crystallization of proteins and forces of interaction involved between these complexes are considered too weak to form a stable complex at cellular concentrations (Carugo and Argos, 1997). From our point of view, the crystal packing values for MAL were actually showing the transient PPI with pPKCδ and pBTK at region of Tyr106, which might be necessary for the phosphorylation of MAL in a manner of transition reaction (Nooren and Thornton, 2003). Moreover, the binding surface area (BSA) of complexes pPKCδ and pBTK with MAL at region of Tyr106 support the possibility of such complexes as proposed by the data of Chakrabarti and Janin (Chakrabarti and Janin, 2002) calculated on a subset of the complexes of Conte et al. (1999).


                     Horton and Lewis (1992) constituted a linear relationship between the BSA and binding free energies of a set of complexes, comprised mostly enzyme–inhibitor complexes. They predicted very large binding free energies for all of the complexes with BSA >2000Å2. All of the complexes studied here have comparative BSA and can be related with them. However, it is still demanding that what is the relation between BSA and binding free energies in case of kinase and its substrate for phosphoryl transfer.

An important element for the predictions and evaluations of PPI binding interfaces is the analysis of electrostatic properties of surfaces (Maleki et al., 2013; Aziz et al., 2011). Electrostatics are one of the non-covalent interactions which compel to attract compatible charged residues. The charge distribution at the binding surfaces of pBTK (positively charged) and pPKCδ (negatively charged) varied from each other. Area surrounding the Tyr86 in MAL (negatively charged) implicated a major reason for which pBTK is supposed to be a key kinase which can phosphorylate Tyr86 after attaching this region. However, the region of Tyr106:MAL have charge heterogeneity and present the charge complementarity both for pBTK and pPKCδ. However, the region selection by both kinases reflects their ability to phosphorylate Tyr106.

Several variants of MAL have been documented which affected the population in terms of their response to pathogens, diseases and inflammation including Asp96Asn, Ala100Thr, Glu108Ala, Arg115Ala, Phe117Ala, Arg121Ala, Glu132Lys, Arg143Gln, Arg143Trp, Leu165Ala, Ser180Leu, Arg184Thr, Glu190Asp and Val197Ile (Nagpal et al., 2009; An et al., 2011; George et al., 2010; Dissanayeke et al., 2009; Valkov et al., 2011). Among these, Asp96Asn, Glu132Lys, Arg143Gln and Glu190Asp have been reported to cause a loss of function in MAL where Glu108Ala and Phe117Ala are associated with moderately decreased binding of MAL–TIR to MyD88–TIR. These studies mostly target the interaction of TIR domain of MAL with other TIR domains including those of MyD88 and TLR4. To the best of our knowledge, our study has proposed the role of these residues in binding with kinases for the first time. Among these Asp96, Ala100, Glu108 belong to a region of αA helix of TIR domain of MAL and observed in kinase–MAL complexes. Several residues from this domain had been observed which could made contacts with pBTK and pPKCδ including, Glu94, Leu97and Val98 and Asp102 of MAL. Moreover, Arg115, Phe117A, Arg121 belong to AB loop of MAL among which Arg115 and Phe117 were observed for their interaction with pBTK and pPKCδ. Glu132 belongs to βB strand of MAL and involved in forming salt bridges with pBTK but not with pPKCδ. In contrast, Ser180 was found involved in making contacts with pPKCδ, but not with pBTK. So these residues might be cooperatively involved in interaction with TIR domains of TLR4 and MyD88 and pBTK and/or pPKCδ. Mutations or therapeutic targeting of these positions can attenuate the phosphorylation of Tyr86 and Tyr106 which potentiate the loss of activation with subsequent loss of attachment with TLR4 and MyD88. As far as other mutations are concerned including Arg143, Arg143, Leu165, Arg184, Glu190 and Val197, no possible role was found in affecting the interaction of MAL with pBTK and/or pPKCδ in this study.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

As summary, the current study proposes structural and functional studies of phosphorylation of MAL by pBTK and pPKCδ, which are explicitly involved in the post translational modification of Tyr86 and Tyr106, respectively. Additional analysis of structural complexes of pBTK and pPKCδ with MAL can provide exclusive evidences about the categorical association of MAL with interacting kinases. However, the data presented here deliver basic informations about residual interaction among MAL and kinases for understanding the phosphorylation of TIR domain of MAL and is a part of important step towards the discovery of new strategies, which can affect the TLR2 and TLR4 mediated pathological signalling. In future, we would like to study point mutations of interface residues of MAL, pBTK and pPKCδ to improve our understandings, experimentally.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

