@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Intelligent mobile support for therapy adherence and behavior change

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We designed a model-based behavior change coaching system for chronic patients.


                        
                        
                           
                           The system integrates a mobile phone, website and an electronic pillbox.


                        
                        
                           
                           The system targets three domains: medication intake, healthy diet and physical exercise.


                        
                        
                           
                           The model-based reasoning algorithm of the system provides intelligent support.


                        
                        
                           
                           Preliminary validation of the cognitive model is performed along with a system use evaluation.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Intelligent mobile support

Coaching systems

Behavior change

Therapy adherence

eHealth

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Mobile applications have proven to be promising tools for supporting people in adhering to their health goals. Although coaching and reminder apps abound, few of them are based on established theories of behavior change. In the present work, a behavior change support system is presented that uses a computational model based on multiple psychological theories of behavior change. The system determines the user’s reason for non-adherence using a mobile phone app and an online lifestyle diary. The user automatically receives generated messages with persuasive, tailored content. The system was designed to support chronic patients with type 2 diabetes, HIV, and cardiovascular disease, but can be applied to many health and lifestyle domains. The main focus of this work is the development of the model and the underlying reasoning method. Furthermore, the implementation of the system and some preliminary results of its functioning will be discussed.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

According to the World Health Organization, in 2015 there will be 1.5 billion overweight adults worldwide, and about one third of them will be obese.
                        2
                        
                           http://www.who.int/chp/chronic_disease_report/part2_ch1/en/index16.html, last visited on June 21, 2013.
                     
                     
                        2
                      Obesity significantly increases the risks for developing chronic diseases such as cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and various types of cancer.
                        3
                        
                           http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs311/en/index.html, last visited on June 21, 2013.
                     
                     
                        3
                      These chronic diseases are the leading causes of disability and death. Accordingly, in today’s society, adhering to a healthy lifestyle is considered of the utmost importance.

Research has shown that a healthy lifestyle can contribute to (i) the prevention of the development of chronic illness, (ii) the prevention of serious complications that follow from this development, and (iii) the improvement of the quality of life of people who have developed a chronic illness. It is therefore that therapy for chronic patients often consists of healthy lifestyle regulations, including a healthy diet and a regular exercise regime, aside from medication intake. For many people, however, adhering to a healthy lifestyle requires behavioral changes. Even whilst knowing the benefits of a healthy lifestyle, people find it hard to find (and keep) the optimal balance between work, social life and a healthy diet or medicine schedule. Physical discomforts and side effects of medicine intake are additional barriers for committing to healthy behavior. In short, people have many reasons why they do not do what’s good for them. As a consequence, the number of people that are obese or have a chronic disease has increased considerably over the past years, and the prevalence and costs of interventions addressing the chronic disease burden is expected to rise.

It has been shown that patient engagement and empowerment can improve patient therapy adherence and consequently the patient’s health condition [32]. This engagement and empowerment is often referred to as self-management: the individual’s ability to monitor one’s condition (symptoms, treatment) and to affect the cognitive, behavioral and emotional responses necessary to maintain a satisfactory quality of life (for a more comprehensive definition, see Barlow et al. [7]).
                        4
                        The benefits of self-management can also apply to healthy people trying to reduce the risks for chronic disease by adhering to a healthy lifestyle.
                     
                     
                        4
                      But how can people increase and optimize their self-management? As self-management consists of many challenging components, this question is not easily answered. For example, good self-management involves coping with the psychosocial problems generated by chronic disease, having sufficient knowledge of the condition and its treatment, and applying the necessary skills to maintain adequate psychosocial functioning [11]. Additionally, therapy adherence is strongly intertwined with self-management, as it implements the expert’s advice on how to keep the illness and its effects under control. This means that the patient has to change the way he or she would normally behave, using self-control to maximize long-term best interests by inhibiting immediate desires or competing behaviors [24,6,37].

In short, effective self-management is challenging and involves many aspects of human personality and behavior. The use of computers to support people has proven to be an effective approach to increase self-management [48,28]. Systems that support self-management are able to provide personalized interventions at low costs [16], constantly, and at home [44]. Furthermore, interventions that are closely tailored to the individual’s convictions and motivations have shown to be more likely to be observed and remembered [46].

Although intelligent support systems have become increasingly popular for the use of behavior interventions in recent years, those systems are rarely based on models of behavior change [43]. In order to design an effective support system, it is necessary to understand the underlying mechanisms of behavior change and how these mechanisms can be influenced to establish the desired behavior. As [34] state in their 2008 article: “Ideally, researchers designing interventions would choose a small number of the theoretical frameworks based on empirical evidence of their predictive and intervention value, i.e., there should be evidence that the theory can predict the behaviour and that interventions which change these determinants achieve change in behavior” [34]. When targeting sustainable behavior change, it is not enough to target behavioral outcomes alone. Underlying motivations, attitudes and opinions need to be changed in order to make the changes last. In the literature however, little work exists that provides a model based on theoretical frameworks (one notable exception is the iChange model [49], which describes the factors that influence behavior change, but fails to explicate how these factors interact).

The aim of this work is to bridge that gap with a computational model based on theoretical frameworks of behavior change. The model was first presented in [27]. In this work we will elaborate on the design of the model, which was developed by integrating several established psychological theories on behavior change. Also, the implementation and evaluation of the model in an e-coaching system are discussed. This intelligent support system for self-management attempts to detect the cause of unhealthy behavior, and provides tailored coaching. What makes this approach particularly challenging, is that the system is designed to target three domains: food intake, physical activity and medication intake. The system observes behavior directly and indirectly: observations of medication intake are obtained with an electronic pillbox and subjective observations on food intake and physical activity are based on information provided by the user via a mobile application and a website. Based on this information, the system supports users with tailored information and persuasive motivational messages on how to improve their behavior. In order to create a system with the capacity to target three different domains of behavior change, it was designed as a general framework that can include specific modules with domain-specific information. This allows the system to be applicable to a broad range of domains of behavior change.

The paper is structured as follows. First, an overview of approaches for intelligent support systems is provided in Section 2. In Section 3 a model is presented that formalizes the interaction between the different determinants of behavior change. The theoretical framework that provides the foundation of the model is also discussed. An important part of the validation of the system is the validation of the model that is used to reason about the user’s stage of behavior change. These validation studies are described in Section 4. Section 5 demonstrates how the model is integrated in an intelligent system that provides support for individuals with a chronic health condition. In Section 6 the preliminary evaluation of the coaching system based on a pilot study with chronic patients is described. Section 7 concludes with some points for discussion and implications for further research.

As noted in Lehto [29], many terms have emerged over the past years to describe technology-based interventions for mental and physical health purposes. There is no consensus about the terms yet, but one that closely fits our aims is Behavior Change Support Systems (BCSSs), a term introduced by Oinas-Kukkonen [39]. A behavior change support system is defined as “an information system that is designed to form, alter or reinforce attitudes, behaviors or an act of complying without using deception, coercion or inducements” [39]. Although many studies demonstrate the promise of such support systems, it seems that more scrutinized evaluations of computerized interventions are necessary to fully determine their potential as tools for facilitating health behavior change [38]. This is because building a successful behavior change support system is challenging. It needs to address aspects such as accessibility, adaptability and interactiveness. Many contemporary approaches use mobile phones to interact with the user, as phones have several distinct characteristics that make them useful for support systems: they are easily available to the users, they are at the users’ fingertips, and they support both user and system initiated interactions. Also, information provided by the mobile phone can easily be personalised and designed to persuade or manipulate [19]. Because of these capabilities, the mobile phone is an ideal platform for using persuasive techniques to induce behavior change.

Based on relevant literature in mobile interventions (see for an overview Klasnja and Pratt [26]), a distinction can be made between different types of mobile health interventions. The simplest form is using the mobile phone for sending reminders and keeping track of progress, e.g., reminding patients to take their medication or logging their nutritional intake. These interventions do not depend on any model of health behavior and are the same for all users. For example, CARDS — Computerized Automated Reminder Diabetes System [21] — is a system that sends diabetic patients text messages and emails with reminders about blood monitoring, without further medical advice. In this category many mobile phone and web-based applications exist that help patients keep track of data such as calorie intake, blood monitoring and exercise by means of an online mobile dairy.
                        5
                        See for example apps such as Lose It! (http://www.loseit.com/) and GlucoseBuddy (http://www.glucosebuddy.com/).
                     
                     
                        5
                     
                  

However, because tailored messaging interventions are proven to be more effective than those that use generic messages [18], more complex approaches have been developed that include tailored feedback based on user data gathered by sensors (such as an accelerometer or GPS) or user input (such as survey questions or a diary). Many of these systems include human coaches to directly create and coordinate the interventions. For example, a health care professional is asked to write the feedback messages or a human care giver tracks the progress and effects of the messages (e.g., Moskowitz et al. [36], Philips [40]).

Persuasive systems that do not involve human coaching at runtime (ideally, healthcare professionals are always part of the design process), are increasing in popularity. These systems can be especially useful for illness self-management, as the monitoring and support that come with the regulation of chronic illness involve large costs. The fact that a human coach or caregiver is not directly involved can also lower the threshold for users to sign up for support. These support systems can help patients to manage their disease, for example by improving their therapy adherence, in the comfort of their own home and without the involvement of expensive health care professionals. For example, in Bauer et al. [9] a predefined algorithm selects a feedback message from a large pool of pre-formulated texts which is tailored to the user’s individual pattern of change or treatment.

Systems that use automated mechanisms to create and send (tailored) text messages can directly or indirectly influence user behavior determinants central to many behavioral theories (e.g., cues to action, self-efficacy, social support). Moreover, data suggests that intervention programs can achieve stronger impacts when the content of these messages is theory-based [12]. It is therefore important to design these messages such that (i) the tone of the message is in line with persuasive theories, and (ii) the message incorporates knowledge from behavioral theories. However, as referred to in the introduction, many works on mobile interventions for adherence and disease management do not use or do not specify any health behavior theories underlying their interventions [43].

Our approach differs from above mentioned approaches in several respects. First, it does not only target the user’s behavior, but also the underlying mechanisms causing that behavior. The core of the proposed behavior change support system is a computational model based on multiple psychological theories describing determinants for behavior change. The system does not rely on a human coach, but instead automatically provides tailored feedback that is not just focused on the user’s behavior, but also on the underlying individual cause of non-adherence. Patients will be monitored and will receive feedback on their progress. Automatically generated messages targeting their personal barriers (i.e., their causes for non-adherence) attempt to induce behavior change, using validated persuasion techniques such as the use of authority, repetition and consistency measures [25]. Secondly, in addition to being a tool for patient self-management, it is also a tool for researchers to test their model of behavior change and the effectiveness of the design of their persuasive intervention. The system is part of a framework that is designed in such a way that the messages and the model can be adjusted to different domains of behavior change research. It can be applied to patients with different diseases and therapies. Thirdly, the system integrates many technical components, such as a telephone message service, an online diary, questionnaires, a smart pillbox and an information portal to provide support on three lifestyle domains: medicine, diet and exercise. This innovative and interdisciplinary approach captures many of the challenges of designing behavior change support systems.

As put forward in Section 2, for health interventions to be effective they need to incorporate existing theories of behavior change and persuasive design. The model of behavior change COMBI designed in this work is based on several theories from psychological literature that describe determinants for behavior change. A conceptual representation of the model can be found in Fig. 1
                     . Section 3.1 will describe the theories that the model incorporates and will elaborate on their key constructs. The cursive constructs are the ones that can be found in the proposed model. In Section 3.2 the structure of the model will be explored in more detail. The formalization of the model and how it can be used to simulate behavior change will be addressed in Section 3.3.

There are many theories that describe different mechanisms of behavior change in psychological and medical literature. This subsection will give an overview of the most influential theories in this area. The theories described below have substantial empirical support and are most frequently used in behavior change interventions [2,20], and as such are considered to be valid to be applied in behavior change interventions. A more comprehensive description of the model’s constructs and the related theories can be found in [27].


                        [43] Riley et al. argue that it is unclear whether traditional health behavior models are capable of guiding the dynamic process of iterative and adaptive interventions for behavior change, given their predominately linear and static nature [43, p. 54]. As the name implies, behavior change concerns a process of development from executing one type of behavior to adopting another. The Transtheoretical Model (TM) 
                        [41] focuses on behavior change as a dynamic process rather than an event. This characteristic makes TM very suitable to use it in interventions of behavior change, and it is why it was chosen as the basis for the COMBI model. The TM was successfully applied in many programs aiming at the elimination of addictive behavior, and the improvement of mental health, exercise frequency, and dietary change [2,42]. It assumes that behavior change is a five-stage process with the stages of precontemplation, contemplation, preparation, action, and maintenance. This theory implies that the kinds of interventions needed to move from one stage to another differ per stage, as each stage represents specific stages of readiness for change. Depending on the awareness, motivation and commitment of an individual, he or she progresses through the stages. In the precontemplation stage individuals have no intention to change their behavior and will likely be unaware of their problems. In the contemplation stage individuals are aware that a problem exists and are seriously thinking of changing their behavior in the next six months, but do not have any concrete plans of change. Individuals are in a preparation stage when they intend to take action in the next month and have a concrete action plan. During the action stage individuals overcome their obstacles and actively change their behavior. The action stage may last from one day to six months after having made the first overt change. Those who have engaged in a new behavior for more than six months are classified as being in the maintenance stage. Although a person advances through the stages in a sequential order, relapse to a previous stage is possible.

Bandura’s Social Cognitive Theory (SCT) 
                        [4] has been frequently used to predict different health behaviors and behavioral intentions [2]. According to this theory, behavior is executed if one perceives (i) control over the outcome, (ii) few external barriers and (iii) confidence in one’s own ability. Bandura introduces a new construct that relates to the expectancies concerning the outcome: self-efficacy, defined as confidence in one’s own ability to carry out a particular behavior. The construct of self-efficacy has shown to be a good predictor of behavior, related to coping with stress and recovery from illness [2].


                        The Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB) 
                        [1] has been widely applied in many behavior interventions [20]. This theory is a revised version of the Theory of Reasoned Action (TRA) that was proposed by Fishbein and Ajzen [17]. The Theory of Reasoned Action is based on the assumption that intention is an immediate determinant of behavior, and that it in turn is predicted by attitude — which is a function of the beliefs held about the specific behavior, as well as the evaluation of the likely outcomes — and (subjective) social normative factors. This approach is thus based on expectancy–value interactions. In the Theory of Planned Behavior, which is a more recent version of the theory, one more component was added: perceived behavioral control, which has a motivational effect on intentions. There is substantial overlap between the construct of self-efficacy in Bandura’s Social Cognitive Theory and the construct of behavioral control in the theory of Fishbein and Ajzen [17].

The TRA does not include social norms as a factor that influences attitude formation directly. According to the TRA, social norms are defined as a factor that influences intention along with already formed attitude. The Attitude Formation (AF) theory [47] also defines attitude as an important aspect of behavior, influenced by the beliefs about an object (in this case, behavior), emotional connotations associated with the object, and social norms concerning this object in this case.


                        Self-Regulation Theories (SRT) regard individuals as active problem solvers whose behavior reflects an attempt to close the gap between their current status and their goals, or a standard which serves as a reference value for one’s behavior. In his later work Bandura positioned the construct of self-efficacy in the Self-Regulation Theory framework as well [5]. Levental’s self-regulation model of illness identifies three stages of variables regulating the adaptive behavior: cognitive representation, action plan, coping and appraisal stage [30]. An important aspect of this approach is the possible influence of emotions and mood on behavior.

In the Relapse Prevention Model (RPM) 
                        [33] 
                        coping also plays an important role. It describes the influence of environmental factors along with the cognitive determinants, such as self-efficacy and coping, and emphasizes high risk situations (such as a switch of work schedule, being on holiday or living near a snack bar) and the ability of coping with them. The theory provides an explanation of relapse from the acquired behavior stage to the stage of the previously performed behavior in the terms of the Transtheoretical Model of Prochaska.


                        The Health Belief Model (HBM) 
                        [23] includes six determinants of behavior related to perception: susceptibility, severity, benefits, barriers, motivation and cues for action. According to this theory, a combination of perceived susceptibility and perceived severity determine perceived threat, and the combination of perceived benefits with perceived barriers lead to an evaluation of the course of action taken.

It is evident that there is a lot of overlap between the existing theories of behavior change described in the previous subsection, and many of the theories use similar constructs with sometimes different names. The COMBI model—which stands for Computerized Behavior Intervention—is an attempt to integrate these theories into a formal representation that will comprise multiple mechanisms of behavior change and their interaction. Combining models needs to be handled with care because of interaction effects. However, there have been some promising attempts in this direction [2,20,45]. Model integration allows for more complete and comprehensive explanation of complex human behavior.

We integrate models that complement each other with respect to their focus on behavior determinants, taking the overlapping elements as the core of the model. For instance, if one theory explains the attitude formation and the other describes the impact of attitudes on motivation and behavior, then an integration of these two theories will not misrepresent the general picture because these theories are complementary in the sense that one theory refines a concept used in the other. This integration of the most influential theories of behavior change described in Section 3.1 resulted in one complex, but fairly complete model. The model is depicted in Fig. 1. As can be seen from Fig. 1, the model differentiates between the internal and external determinants of behavior. External factors (susceptibility, severity, pros/cons, social norms, barriers, skills and high risk situation) are depicted beyond the dotted line. The internal constructs of an individual consist of cues, threat, attitude, self-efficacy, coping strategies and mood.

The stages of change from the TM are represented as five circles with the initial letters of the names of the stages at the bottom of Fig. 1. The contemplation and preparation stages (‘C’ and ‘P’, respectively) are embedded in the ‘intention’ block and action and maintenance stages (‘A’ and ‘M’, respectively) are embedded in the ‘behavior’ block. The internal factors that determine the stage of change of an individual consist of 3 layers, showing the causal hierarchy between them. The action stage has also a feedback loop to self-efficacy, in accordance with the SRT.

The bottom layer consists of three constructs, awareness, motivation and commitment, which directly influence the stage of change of an individual. The constructs in the intermediate layer influence the stage of change indirectly, through connections with the other constructs, just like how the constructs of the top layer influence the constructs of the intermediate layer. The intermediate layer consists of six internal constructs and one external (high risk situation). The determinants in the model have a causal hierarchy between them and the layers are constructed based on their relations with other constructs. An overview of all behavior determinants and the related theories can be found in Table 1
                        .

The COMBI model can be used to analyze how the behavioral determinants influence each other and how they can be manipulated to influence behavior. In order to implement the model and reason with it, it is necessary to formalize it. A computational representation of the model can be used to perform simulations in order to check whether the model is able to reproduce known patient behavior. Furthermore, such a model can be used to make hypotheses about the cause of non-adherent behavior. Another advantage of formal models is that they can be used to predict future behavior of the patients. Once the probable causes are identified, predictions about the effects of certain interventions can be made.

The COMBI model has been implemented in the numerical simulation environment Matlab. Fig. 1 can be viewed as a graph, which can be used to find hypotheses for non-adherent behavior via bottom-up reasoning. The arrows in Fig. 1 denote causal dependencies found in the theoretical frameworks that form the basis of the model. The exceptions to this are the arrows between the stages of change: they represent transitions from one stage to another. In the formalization this change of stage occurs when the value of a stage exceeds a certain threshold. For example, if the value of awareness, motivation or commitment is greater than 0.5, a transition to the next relevant stage occurs; if the value drops to a value lower than 0.5, the person relapses to the previous stage. An elaboration on how these thresholds can be determined can be found in Section 5. Dependencies between the constructs are expressed by weighted sums, where the weights are determined by the connection strengths of the causal relations between the constructs. For example:
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          Rule 1: Calculation attitude value
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          If pros/cons have value 
                                          V
                                          1
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          and emotions have value 
                                          V
                                          2
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          and social norms have value 
                                          V
                                          3
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          and connection strength between pros/cons and attitude has value 
                                          w
                                          1
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          and connection strength between emotions and attitude has value 
                                          w
                                          2
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          and connection strength between social norms and attitude has value 
                                          w
                                          3
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          Then attitude will have value 
                                          w
                                          1
                                          ∗
                                          V
                                          1
                                          
                                          +
                                          
                                          w
                                          2
                                          ∗
                                          V
                                          2
                                          
                                          +
                                          
                                          w
                                          3
                                          ∗
                                          V
                                          3
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     

All values in the model are calculated similarly. In the initial analysis it is assumed that all determinants contribute equally to the construct in the graph that they influence, i.e., to the construct on the receiving end of the arrow. Thus connection weight 
                           
                              ω
                           
                         from construct a to b is initially given as 
                           
                              
                                 
                                    ω
                                 
                                 
                                    a
                                    ,
                                    b
                                 
                              
                              =
                              
                                 
                                    1
                                 
                                 
                                    #
                                    incoming
                                    _
                                    connections
                                    
                                    b
                                 
                              
                           
                        . The formal model can be personalized by adjusting the connection strengths. For example, the behavior of some people is much more affected by mood or the lack of social support than that of others. Furthermore, there is no one-to-one mapping between what takes place in a real world and what one perceives. By increasing or decreasing the connection strengths between the constructs, these personal variations can be accounted for. The relevant connections can be updated when a discrepancy is discovered between observed patient behavior and the predicted behavior from the model.


                        Fig. 2
                         shows a simulation of the behavioral determinants of a person — let’s call him Alan — whose process of behavior change changes from stage P to A, i.e., from merely planning to really executing the desired behavior. The constructs mentioned in the titles of the figures are the ones that are derived from the values of the other constructs. The values of the other constructs are used as input. For example, it is assumed that the system can obtain information about the values of susceptibility and severity of the patient. These values serve as input, in this case a value of 4 for susceptibility and 6 for severity (on a scale of 0 to 10). The value of threat is determined similarly to rule 1. Also, an assumption has been made that at t
                        =30, due to an intervention, Alan’s perception of his susceptibility to the consequences of his chronic disease increases. The top right figure shows how the change in perceived threat (Alan’s realization that he can be negatively affected by the consequences of his old behavior) influences the awareness in turn. It is assumed that the cues change over time. The increased threat causes a heightened state of motivation for Alan, yet it is the increase in his mood that pushes his commitment to a value higher than 0.5, which caused the change of stage from P to A.

Section 5 describes in more detail how the model and the simulations can be used to reason about effective types of intervention. First, Section 4 discusses a pilot validation study of the model.

The eMate project follows a user-centered design approach, and some formative testing has been done to examine the validity of the COMBI model. Two validation studies were conducted, the first with 40 healthy participants, the second with 17 chronic patients. The main findings and the results of the studies are described in this section.

@&#METHOD@&#

A total of 40 healthy subjects participated in the study by filling out an anonymous online questionnaire, which consisted of 42 questions and targeted only adherence to physical exercise. The questionnaire was distributed per email, mostly among staff members of the VU University Amsterdam, but also some other people were included. Participants were assured of the anonymous and voluntary character of the survey. No incentives for participation were offered. The study involved 20 males and 20 females. Age ranged between 21 and 64 (Mean=33, SD=11). The questionnaire took approximately 15min to complete.

All of the measures were in Dutch. The questionnaire measured physical activity behavior and its possible determinants. The physical activity domain was chosen to be the subject of the study over medicine intake and healthy food intake behaviors for two reasons. First, healthy subjects are easier to recruit, and medicine intake is not relevant for everyone. Second, physical exercising measurements available to us had a broad scope and referred to different types of physical exercising, e.g. leisure, home and sport activities.

In total, 14 constructs of the COMBI model were assessed, along with the stage of physical activity behavior (precontemplation, contemplation, preparation, action and maintenance) and physical activity. Three externally validated questionnaires were included in the general questionnaire to obtain values for the constructs in the model: UPCC, PANAS, and SQUASH (see Table 3 for a description and the measured constructs).

The remaining constructs were measured with the help of one or two questions addressing the determinant of interest. The questions were either formulated as multiple choice recorded on 3, 5 or 6 point Likert-scales, or open. The hypothesis was that there would be positive correlations between all determinants that are connected by causal relations, except between barriers and self-efficacy, which connection was supposed to be negative.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Several sets of bivariate Pearson product-moment correlations were performed between the constructs that are closely connected in the model graph. The results of the analysis can be found in Table 2
                           . Seven out of the twelve correlations were found to be significant. The strongest significant correlations were found between susceptibility and threat (r
                           =.55, P
                           <0.01), threat and physical activity (r
                           =.50, P
                           <0.01), attitude and physical activity (r
                           =.41, P
                           <0.01), and self-efficacy and physical activity (r
                           =.51, P
                           <0.01). Significant correlations were also found between social norms and attitude (r
                           =.39, P
                           <0.05), mood and physical activity (r
                           =.37, P
                           <0.05) and between cues and physical activity (r
                           =−.38, P
                           <0.05). Two of the significant correlations were not according to the expected trends that follow from the causal relations in the model: the negative correlations between threat and days of physical activity, and between cues and days of physical activity. The other correlations between the constructs of the model were non-significant, though in line with the expected trends. For instance, according to the model, the direction of correlations between pros/cons and attitude should be positive and between barriers and self-efficacy should be negative. The results obtained in the study confirm these hypotheses. The one exception was a weak non-significant negative correlation between severity and threat which we expected it to be positive. Additionally, we performed bivariate correlation analysis between the reported stage of change and days of physical activity. This correlation was significant (r
                           =.41, P
                           <0.05).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The purpose of the study was to test the causal relationships between the constructs in the COMBI model of behavior change. The results demonstrated strong significant correlations between susceptibility and threat, and between the number of days of physical activity and threat, attitude, self-efficacy, mood and cues. The implication of this finding is that the constructs at the 2nd level (that directly influence awareness, motivation and commitment) should be given a high priority, as they seem crucial to the process of behavior change. For example, if the value of attitude is low and the value of emotions contributing to attitude is low, an intervention directly targeting attitude should have a higher priority. Furthermore, the strong positive correlation between stage of change and days of physical activity indicates that the questions addressing stage of change is a good measure of physical activity behavior.

It is important to note that the participants of the present study were healthy subjects while in the designed model for chronic patients the construct ‘cues’ includes pain and inconvenience resulting from disease, which may result in a different influence and operationalisation compared to the physical cues experienced by healthy subjects. The inclusion of healthy patients can be considered one of the limitations of the present study. Although the model may be applied to healthy subjects, it was developed specifically for chronic patients. Therefore, some minor adjustments may be needed in order to apply it to healthy subjects. Another limitation of the study is that the sample was not representative of the whole population as the questionnaire was spread foremost among the representatives of the highly educated group of university staff. Furthermore, the majority of the constructs were measured with the help of one or two questions, which is arguably not sufficient to grasp the real ‘value’ of a construct for each participant.

In conclusion, this study offers some empirical support for the COMBI behavior change model. The results generally, but not completely, support the way the COMBI model was constructed based on psychological literature.

This study was conducted in support of the validation study discussed in Section 4.1 and was conducted with chronic patients. The data for the present analysis was obtained from the volunteers participating in the pilot study designed for the evaluation of the eMate coaching system that incorporates the COMBI model. Due to the fact that none of the participants opted for coaching on medication, the data were restricted to physical exercise and food intake domains.

@&#METHOD@&#

A total of 17 chronic patients participated in the study by filling out an anonymous questionnaire online. The questionnaire consisted of 92 questions and targeted therapy adherence with respect to two domains: physical exercise and healthy diet. The questionnaire was administered per email and was part of the pilot study for testing the coaching system as a whole (see Section 5). It was a modified version of the one applied in the previous study. No incentives for participation were offered. The study involved 14 males and 3 females. Age ranged between 28 and 80 (Mean=51.8, SD=13.8). There were 10 patients with cardiovascular disease and 7 patients with diabetes type 2. The Body Mass Index of the participants ranged between 19 and 37. Of the 17 participants 7 were overweight and 3 obese. The entire questionnaire took approximately 30min to complete.

All of the measures were in Dutch. The questionnaire measured physical activity and healthy diet behaviors and their possible determinants. The 16 determinants of behavior as described by the COMBI model were assessed for two domains, as well as the stage of behavior change per domain (precontemplation, contemplation, preparation, action and maintenance). Besides the UPCC, SQUASH and PANAS scales used in the original questionnaire, two additional externally validated questionnaires were incorporated: PASE and FFQ (see Table 3
                           ). The other determinants were measured in the same way as in Study 1.

The hypothesis was that we would find positive correlations between all determinants that are connected by causal relations, except for the connection between barriers and self-efficacy (which was expected to be negative).

@&#RESULTS@&#

Several sets of bivariate Pearson product-moment correlations were performed between the determinants that are positioned close to each other in the model. Additional analysis focused on the relations between the participant’s behavior score per domain (obtained from PASE and FFQ questionnaires), stage of change, and Body Mass Index (BMI). For the related constructs in the model and the additional analysis Pearson product-moment correlations were performed. The results per domain are presented below.


                           Physical Activity Significant positive correlations were found between skills and self-efficacy (r
                           =.49, P
                           <0.01), physical activity and threat (r
                           =.65, P
                           <0.01), and physical activity and cues (r
                           =.6, P
                           <0.05). The only negative correlation was found between coping and physical activity, but it was non-significant. As far as the correlations between the PASE score, stage of change and BMI of the participants are concerned, only the correlation between BMI and stage of change of physical activity was found significant (r
                           =−.49, P
                           <0.05).


                           Healthy Food Intake Significant positive correlations were found between emotions and attitude (r
                           =.63, P
                           <0.01), and between number of days of fruit and vegetables intake and (a) attitude (r
                           =.65, P
                           <0.01), (b) self-efficacy (r
                           =.67, P
                           <0.01), (c) positive mood (r
                           =.51, P
                           <0.05), and (d) cues (r
                           =.52, P
                           <0.05). Significant correlations were also found between BMI and stage of change for healthy food intake (r
                           =−.54, P
                           <0.05), and between fruit and vegetables intake and stage of change (r
                           =.70, P
                           <0.05).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The sample size of 17 patients is not sufficient to draw definite conclusions about the validity of the COMBI model for chronic patients, but it demonstrates that the general trends in the relations between the model constructs are correct. However, unexpected trends, though very weak and non-significant, were found between barriers and self-efficacy and between physical activity and coping for physical activity domain. After more detailed examination it became clear that the barriers variable was positively skewed and had small variance. Because the majority of the subjects reported only one or two barriers, this fact may have had consequences for the results. The same holds for the coping variable, which was also found to be not normally distributed and is positively skewed.

For the healthy diet domain, only one unexpected trend was observed. It concerns the relation between negative mood and days of fruit and vegetables intake. This correlation was found positive, though non-significant. Another consistent finding is the correlation between BMI and the stage of behavior change that was found significant both for physical activity and healthy food intake domains. This finding is in line with the general observation reported in the literature that BMI is one of the important indicators of physical activity and diet behaviors and thus should be included in the analysis of behavior change. The absence of a significant correlation between the PASE score and BMI is also found in a the validation study of the PASE questionnaire [51]. Washburn et al. found that the PASE score did not have any significant relationship with body fat percentage, though the PASE score was significantly correlated with the general physical fitness of the subjects [52].

The COMBI model is incorporated in an intelligent coaching system, called eMate. The eMate system aims to support patients with Diabetes Mellitus type 2, HIV or cardiovascular disease in adhering to their therapy, which can consists of lifestyle advice and/or precise instructions for medication intake. eMate is designed as a ‘cooperative assistant’: an assistant with a coaching character that is able to explain and educate, and expects high participation of the user. Research shows that cooperative assistants might be more effective than ‘direct assistants’, i.e., assistants with an instructing character with brief reports and low expectations on participation [22]. The eMate system operates as a coach, using both a mobile phone and a website to interact with the user. A mobile phone application supporting both the Android and iPhone platform has been developed that is able to send questions and messages to the user. The interface of the system is designed to suit the needs of usage for older users (a large group among diabetes type II and cardiovascular patients). The interface was designed using insights from usability testing research that elderly users are often easily distracted, have difficulty reading small fonts and closely spaced text, and may have difficulty remembering previously presented information [8]. The design of the app was therefore kept simple but clear, using for instance large fonts and minimizing the need for scrolling. The system performs the following tasks, which are described in the corresponding subsections:
                        
                           1.
                           determining the stage of change of a user;


                              monitoring the behavior of the user to determine the level of adherence;


                              reasoning about the changes required for improvement;

trying to change the user’s perception of specific psychological aspects;


                              updating the beliefs about the user.

When someone starts using the system, he or she has to fill out a questionnaire about his or her behavior and beliefs in the domains of medication intake, healthy food intake and physical activity. The questionnaire is based on validated instruments, as listed in Table 3. The answers are used to calculate the stage of change of behavior in each of the domains. For each of the constructs, the survey answers that correspond to this construct are converted (using the survey keys) to a single value. These values are stored in the system and taken as starting point for the personalized coaching.

In order to provide personalized coaching, it is required to monitor the behavior of the user. The system does this in different ways for the three domains on which it provides coaching. The medication intake behavior of the user is measured directly with the help of an electronic pillbox.
                           6
                           
                              http://www.evalan.com/projects/medication.
                        
                        
                           6
                         This pillbox registers when it is opened and immediately sends a message via built-in GSM technology to the eMate server, which registers the timestamp of the intake in its database. While the opening of a pill box is no proof of medication being taken, it is a good measure for the level of adherence [13,15].

The food intake behavior is monitored via a graphical question on the mobile phone (Fig. 3
                        c). The interface presents 6 icons that the user can click to answer to what extent they behaved in a healthy way with respect to eating/drinking products from the following categories (left-to-right, top-to-bottom): drinking fluids, eating meat or fish, eating vegetables, eating starchy products, eating fruit and eating snacks.
                           7
                           The eMate website contains information about what is considered ‘healthy behavior’ with respect to food intake, exercise and medicine intake.
                        
                        
                           7
                         Initially, the systems sends the question on a daily basis in the evening hours, but after one week the frequency is adapted to the ‘moving average’ of the answers: users that behaved healthy in the past week receive the message only once in three days, moderately healthy eaters receive the message once in the two days, and unhealthy eaters receive the question daily. This has been done after initial user-feedback that this question was asked too often. Since the feedback is more relevant for users that behave sub-optimal on this aspect, it was decided to reduce the frequency for people that behave well. The website offers the users the possibility to fill out or change their answers about the food intake for the current day or the two days before.


                        Physical activity is monitored via a combination of a web-based calendar and mobile phone questions. The calendar allows the user to register the number of minutes of physical activities in a weekly schedule for three different categories: (1) walking, (2) cycling, and (3) doing sports. Walking and cycling are (in the Netherlands) activities that usually take place on regular basis, e.g., for commuting between home and work. For each entry in the calendar, the user is able to specify whether or not the activity requires confirmation afterwards. If so, users receive a telephone message with the question if he/she actually performed the activity the day after the scheduled physical activity (see Fig. 3a). When the user did not register any activities on a specific day, the user is asked to recollect how many minutes of activity were performed. The level of adherence is calculated by comparing the average number of minutes of physical activities with the health goals.

The aim of the eMate system is to help the user to behave fully compliant with the prescribed therapy. If monitoring reveals that adherence to the therapy on a specific domain (food, medication, activity) is not optimal, the system will use the COMBI model to reason about the underlying causes for non-adherence. Although the structure of the model has some similarities to a Bayesian model, the model is used in a different way. It is constructed as a causal model: no probabilities are calculated, instead the causal relations between constructs are used to reason about the values of the constructs. The system will determine what prevents the user from moving to the next stage of change in that domain by investigating whether the constructs that influence the consecutive stage (that is, the determinants that are related to this stage by an incoming arrow) are a bottleneck. A bottleneck is defined as the construct in the graph that prevents a patient from progressing from one stage of change to another. For example, if a patient is in the preparation phase, the system will investigate the constructs that are related to the action phase. More specifically, it will investigate the constructs that are in the paths connected to the action phase. A path consists of a sequence of edges which connect a sequence of constructs. The constructs at the level directly above the stages are called the problem areas. For example, in Fig. 1 it can be seen that if someone was in stage P, his/her problem area would be commitment. One path connected to this problem area consists of attitude and pros/cons.

The system poses one or two questions via the mobile phone for each of these potential bottlenecks, or hypotheses. Fig. 3b shows such a question for investigating the patient’s perception on the severity of his/her illness. If the answer shows that this construct might indeed be problematic, the subsequent constructs in the path are investigated. A semi-formal notation of this process is described by Algorithm 1.
                           Algorithm 1
                           Find the hypothesized bottlenecks for behavior change in a domain 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                C
                                                ←the set of all constructs in the model graph
                                          
                                          
                                             
                                                S
                                                ←the ordered set of all stages of change:
                                                   
                                                      {
                                                      PC
                                                      <
                                                      C
                                                      <
                                                      P
                                                      <
                                                      A
                                                      <
                                                      M
                                                      }
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            s
                                                         
                                                         
                                                            i
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                                ←the current stage of change 
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            s
                                                         
                                                         
                                                            i
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                 of the user, 
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            s
                                                         
                                                         
                                                            i
                                                         
                                                      
                                                      ∈
                                                      S
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            s
                                                         
                                                         
                                                            j
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                                ←the stage that directly succeeds 
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            s
                                                         
                                                         
                                                            i
                                                         
                                                      
                                                      ,
                                                      
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            s
                                                         
                                                         
                                                            j
                                                         
                                                      
                                                      ∈
                                                      S
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            τ
                                                         
                                                         
                                                            i
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                                ←the threshold for construct i
                                             
                                          
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            l
                                                         
                                                         
                                                            i
                                                         
                                                      
                                                      ←
                                                   
                                                 the lifetime for a value of construct i
                                          
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   
                                                      bottleneck
                                                   
                                                
                                                ←list of bottlenecks, initially empty
                                          
                                          
                                             
                                                for all 
                                                
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            c
                                                         
                                                         
                                                            k
                                                         
                                                      
                                                      ∈
                                                      C
                                                   
                                                 
                                                do 
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                   
                                                      ▷
                                                   
                                                 cycle through all constructs linked to the stage
                                          
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                if 
                                                
                                                   
                                                      connected
                                                      (
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            c
                                                         
                                                         
                                                            k
                                                         
                                                      
                                                      ,
                                                      
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            s
                                                         
                                                         
                                                            j
                                                         
                                                      
                                                      )
                                                   
                                                 AND 
                                                   
                                                      age
                                                      (
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            c
                                                         
                                                         
                                                            k
                                                         
                                                      
                                                      )
                                                      <
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            l
                                                         
                                                         
                                                            k
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                 
                                                then
                                             
                                          
                                          
                                             
                                                Investigate(
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            c
                                                         
                                                         
                                                            k
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                )
                                          
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                end if
                                             
                                          
                                          
                                             
                                                end for
                                             
                                          
                                          
                                             
                                                function Investigateconstruct 
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            c
                                                         
                                                         
                                                            i
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                          
                                             
                                                update 
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            c
                                                         
                                                         
                                                            i
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                 
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                   
                                                      ▷
                                                   
                                                 ask user questions about this construct
                                          
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                if 
                                                
                                                   
                                                      value
                                                      (
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            c
                                                         
                                                         
                                                            i
                                                         
                                                      
                                                      )
                                                      <
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            τ
                                                         
                                                         
                                                            i
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                 
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                   
                                                      ▷
                                                   
                                                 up-to-date value is indeed below threshold
                                          
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                
                                                   
                                                      bottleneck
                                                      ←
                                                      bottleneck
                                                      +
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            c
                                                         
                                                         
                                                            i
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                for all 
                                                
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            c
                                                         
                                                         
                                                            j
                                                            ≠
                                                            i
                                                         
                                                      
                                                      ∈
                                                      C
                                                   
                                                 
                                                do
                                             
                                          
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                
                                                if 
                                                
                                                   
                                                      connected
                                                      (
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            c
                                                         
                                                         
                                                            j
                                                         
                                                      
                                                      ,
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            c
                                                         
                                                         
                                                            i
                                                         
                                                      
                                                      )
                                                   
                                                 AND 
                                                   
                                                      age
                                                      (
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            c
                                                         
                                                         
                                                            j
                                                         
                                                      
                                                      )
                                                      <
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            l
                                                         
                                                         
                                                            j
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                 
                                                then 
                                                
                                                
                                                
                                                   
                                                      ▷
                                                   
                                                 recursively investigate constructs on this path
                                          
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                Investigate(
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         
                                                            c
                                                         
                                                         
                                                            j
                                                         
                                                      
                                                   
                                                )
                                          
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                
                                                end if
                                             
                                          
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                end for
                                             
                                          
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                end if
                                             
                                          
                                          
                                             
                                                end function
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           

This mechanism is an example of model-based diagnosis [14]. By using the approach that is sketched above on a causal model, the system ignores constructs that are not relevant for explaining the current behavior. This has a practical advantage for the user, because only those questions are asked that are necessary to determine the bottleneck that obstructs the healthy behavior. For the purpose of model-based reasoning, the simulation model has been translated into a rule-based representation that allows for backward reasoning over the psychological constructs in the model. To achieve this, the rules connect constructs in the model that have an ‘influence’-relation. That is, if there is an arrow from construct A to B in the model (see Fig. 1), a rule describes that a low value of construct B could be caused by a low value of A. Formally, this is done by giving all constructs an attribute “is_hypothesis”, which can be set to true or false. The rules specify that a construct is a hypothesis for the bottleneck if its value is below some threshold and the preceding construct on the path is also a hypothesis. The actual values for constructs that are set as hypothesis will have to be investigated via questions posed to the user. This is also specified as a rule. For example, the following two rules connect threat and severity and define that the value for severity should be investigated if it is a hypothesis with an out-of-date value:
                           
                              
                                 IF 
                                 threat has_value<0.5 & threat is_hypothesis == TRUE THEN 
                                 severity is_hypothesis =TRUE


                                 IF 
                                 severity is_hypothesis == TRUE & lifetime>TIME_TO_LIVE THEN 
                                 severity.investigate

Using the keys of the validated questionnaires the user’s answers to the questions are translated to values for the construct to which it belongs. These values are stored in a database along with a timestamp of their determination. This way, the system maintains an up-to-date representation of the mental state of the user. The reasoning is performed separately for all domains for which the patient has requested coaching. However, the values for mood, cues, skills, severity, susceptibility and threat are considered to be equal across the different domains, and their value is automatically propagated to the other domains via the rules.

The algorithm is implemented in a Java-based rules engine (Drools).
                           8
                           
                              http://www.jboss.org/drools/.
                        
                        
                           8
                         The system has 92 rules that specify the reasoning process, which is run on a hourly basis. This results in a set of bottlenecks: the determinants that probably have to change in order for the user to proceed to the next stage of change.

The eMate system provides continuous support to the user. This implies that it should regularly update its belief about the user. This is done in two different ways. First, when the measured behavior is different from the derived stage of change from the user’s answers to the questions (e.g., the user answered questions that indicate he/she behaved in a healthy way yet the monitoring reveals different), the stage of change is set to the more appropriate stage. Specifically, if the user is behaving in an unhealthy way, he is assumed to be in the PC, C or P phase, which is further narrowed down via questions. Similarly, when the user is behaving in a healthy way, he is assumed to be in the A or M phase. The second update mechanism works with a specified lifetime that all constructs have assigned to them. As some constructs are more dynamic than others, this values differs per construct. When the lifetime has expired, the system will not use the value from the database, but – when needed in the reasoning about hypotheses – will redetermine its value via questions to the user.

The aim of the eMate system is to support and advice the patient in a personalized manner. The intervention therefore targets the bottlenecks as determined by the reasoning process. That is, the user will receive motivational and informative messages related to the problematic constructs. This is done on a weekly basis, together with feedback based on the results of the monitoring. The user thus gets an update of the relation between his goals and his actual behavior, in addition to personalized persuasive messages. An example is provided in Fig. 3.

In case multiple factors should be targeted, the system prioritizes the messages in order to support the user most effectively. Once the bottlenecks are established, eMate prioritizes them according to their ‘urgency’ (i.e. how low the value of the construct is for the user) and their ‘changeability’ (to what extent the user is able to change this construct). For example, the perceived social norms are more difficult to change than knowledge of pros and cons of adopting a new behavior.

Due to the model-based reasoning, eMate is able to address the right problems at the right time. However, in order to persuade a user, the formulation of the queries and messages are important as well. All messages are designed in such a way that the user would not be annoyed or bored by lengthy information messages (this approach is typical for tailored health messages that are commonly used in web-based solutions [28]). Specifically, eMate sends messages that can be read in its entirety on the display of an average smartphone (3.3inch), thus minimizing the user’s need to scroll. Furthermore, eMate automatically composes the messages from three separate components: a status update for the user; a motivational message targeting a specific bottleneck (the person’s bottleneck according to the reasoning process); and a link to the relevant part of the website for more information. For each of the components, the system has three templates (i.e. one for medication/physical activity/food intake). The template allows for personalization because the name of the person can be filled in and it can be formulated in a formal way (targeting older people) or informal way (better suited for younger people). In total the system contains 264 message components. Each time a message is generated, the system randomly chooses between components that haven’t been used for this user (or that are sent the longest time ago if all have been sent). Because of this, the user will rarely receive the same message twice.
                           9
                           The system was designed for a use of approximately three months, which was judged long enough to establish a behavior change (at least to some degree) with respect to lifestyle.
                        
                        
                           9
                         Also, if the user mentioned specific barriers for adherence in the intake survey (such as lack of time to prepare healthy food or high expenses of the gym), the system picks a messages with content that matches that specific barrier, e.g., information about a website containing quick and healthy recipes. Furthermore, the motivational messages adhere to the principles of motivational interviewing, which have proven to be effective for purposes of coaching and therapy [35]. These principles focus on the social functioning of the user and on providing feedback by giving advice and direction. Expressing empathy, cheering and complimenting, and the support of self-efficacy and optimism, are some examples of the principles that are incorporated by the eMate system.

On the eMate website an overview is given of the extent to which the user has reached his/her goals in the past week, which is represented as a percentage and an iconic thumb. See Fig. 4
                        a for an example. The website also displays the user’s performance on the three different domains. For example, users can see how well they are doing with regard to their medicine intake, as shown by Fig. 4b, or which activities they have scheduled. Finally, both the unanswered questions and new messages are shown, and it is possible to look up older messages and questions.

This section describes a preliminary evaluation of the eMate system, using the data obtained in the second study as described in Section 4.2. The setup of this (feasibility) study is not suited for drawing conclusions about the uptake and effect of the system. Some participants encountered technical issues related to the specific version of their smart phone, which forced them to stop half-way, and changes in the system have been made during the intervention to solve urgent problems. Therefore the current evaluation focuses on the functioning of the reasoning system. An evaluative study of the effectiveness of the coaching (in terms of faster or more permanent behavior change) and user experience is being conducted.

As described in Section 4.2, the study includes data of 17 participants with a chronic illness. The participants were recruited from the general public via an website; a press release has been sent by the university to draw attention to this website. Some 40 people have created an eMate account in the first two months after the public release: about half of them downloaded and installed the app, and 17 of them also filled out the online questionnaire. Filling out the questionnaire was required in order to use eMate, but judging from the dropout of 3 people it was maybe considered a barrier for using the system. The preliminary evaluation is performed by comparing the conclusions of the reasoning process about the bottlenecks with the answers to the questions on physical exercising and food intake that the participants provided via the survey. As stated previously, none of the participants opted for coaching on medication and thus the electronic pillbox was not used in this study.

The essence of the eMate reasoning process is that it identifies the problem areas and bottlenecks with respect to the behavior of the user. Several observations can be made about the reasoning process.


                        Observation 1. 
                        eMate identified commitment as the problem area for behavior change for most people.
                     


                        Commitment was found to be the problem area for most people, namely in 65% of combined analyses of exercise and food intake. Motivation was identified as problem area in 29% of the cases, whereas awareness was deemed problematic in only 6%. Table 4
                         shows the bottlenecks in their path for each identified problem area.


                        Observation 2. 
                        eMate identified coping, social norms and cues most often as the bottlenecks for commitment, motivation, and awareness, respectively.
                     

For 64% of those who had low commitment values (i.e., a value<0.5 as calculated by eMate), the construct coping strategies was the hypothesized bottleneck found in the connected paths. In 40% of the cases where motivation was low, eMate identified social norms as the bottleneck. In case of low awareness, the main (and only) bottleneck was cues, i.e. the absence thereof (100%). In 74% of the cases, the identified bottleneck turned out to be the construct with the lowest value in all paths connected to the problem area. However, only for 41% was the identified bottleneck the construct with the lowest value in the entire graph. More specifically, although cues and coping are often the lowest constructs in the graph (44% and 50%, respectively), only coping was often identified as a bottleneck: in 59% of the cases (vs. in 7% of the cases for cues). 12 out of 17 people (71%) had the same underlying problem area for exercise and food intake.


                        Observation 3. 
                        According to self-reports on healthy behavior most people were in the maintenance phase, both with respect to regular physical exercise and healthy food intake.
                     

From their answers to the questions about their stages of change, it can be derived that 35% of all participants were in the maintenance stage with respect to regular physical exercise. Furthermore, 47% was in that same stage with respect to healthy food intake. This suggests that (i) people are (unrealistically) optimistic about their own adherence, and (ii) therapy adherence is for many people not domain-specific.

From these results several more general observations can be made. First, eMate’s hypotheses of the bottleneck often correspond with low (updated) values of the bottleneck construct. This means that the constructs that end up as targets of interventions are often evaluated by the participant as one of the most problematic determinants for behavior change.

Second, in the cases where the hypothesis turned out not to be the construct with the lowest value in the causal path connected to the problem area, eMate arguably finds a better candidate for intervention, as the search algorithm prunes out constructs that are not relevant. To illustrate this, let us take a closer look at the model of behavior change for Alan (see again Fig. 5
                        ). The figure shows for all constructs whether they, given the most recent information, were found to be below or above the threshold. eMate has deducted that Alan is in the contemplation stage and that motivation is his underlying problem area, as the value of this construct is too low for Alan to make the transition to the preparation stage. The connecting paths contain several constructs with low values: severity, emotions and attitude. In the case of Alan, eMate first hypothesizes that attitude is the bottleneck, as it is the only influencing node with a value that was below the threshold. This hypothesis will be investigated. In case the resulting value is above the threshold, eMate will start looking for bottlenecks in other connected paths. If attitude is indeed below the threshold, eMate will look at the originating nodes for a more detailed hypothesis. In the current scenario, the old value of emotions was below the threshold and therefore is the new hypothesis. Suppose that in case of Alan it turns out emotions is indeed below the threshold, but is higher than (the outdated value of) severity. Considering that Alan’s threat has no problematic value, his stage is not likely to improve with the help of interventions targeted at severity, even though its value could be lower than that of attitude or emotions.

Third, eMate does not always identify bottlenecks that are at the end of the paths. Again, this is because eMate prunes the graph such that it targets constructs that are most likely to establish a transition to the next behavior change stage. For example, Alan could have a very low value for cues, but since his main problem area is motivation, the path containing cues will not be explored. By targeting attitude, eMate maximizes the chance of increasing Alan’s motivation and helping him reach the next stage.

A second type of evaluation of the reasoning performed by eMate was done by using some of the answers to the survey as input for a simulation of the reasoning process, and comparing the outcome of this process with other survey answers. This process consisted of several steps. First, the answers of the 17 participants on questions related to the leaf nodes of the model (i.e. the constructs at the top level inside the dashed-box in Fig. 1) were used to calculate numerical values for these constructs, normalized to a scale between 0 and 10. Second, values for the constructs at the second level of the model (e.g., threat, attitude) were calculated. However, this calculation did not use the answers to the survey, but used an algebraic combination of the values of the constructs in the first row that are on its path. The values for third level constructs (e.g., awareness, commitment) were calculated in a similar way by combining the values of the constructs on their causal path. Eventually, the calculated values for the second and third level constructs were compared with the values derived from the survey. This resulted in an error for each construct (defined as the absolute difference between the calculated value and the derived value) for each user, and an average error per level.

This simulation was performed using four different algebraic combination functions to calculate the values of constructs from the values of constructs on the causal path:
                           
                              1.
                              the calculated value is a weighted average (with equal weights) of the values of constructs on the causal path;

the calculated value is the maximum of the values of constructs on the causal path;

the calculated value is the minimum of the values of constructs on the causal path;

the calculated value is a weighted average of the values of constructs on the causal path, where the weights of constructs on the causal path that have a strong impact are larger than of those with a weak impact.
                                    10
                                    Specifically, for each participant the survey construct values on the causal path 
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   A
                                                
                                                
                                                   1
                                                
                                             
                                             …
                                             
                                                
                                                   A
                                                
                                                
                                                   n
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                        were compared with the survey construct values under investigation B. The construct 
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   A
                                                
                                                
                                                   i
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                        with the value closest to the value of construct B received a large weight (
                                          
                                             1
                                             -
                                             0.1
                                             ∗
                                             n
                                          
                                       ), all other constructs received a weight of 
                                          
                                             0.1
                                          
                                       .
                                 
                                 
                                    10
                                 
                              


                        Table 5
                         presents the different average errors. A few observations about the errors can be made. First, one can see that usually the error at the second level is smaller than the error at the third level. This is as expected because third level calculations are based on the second level calculations which already include some errors. Second, one can see that method 3 (minimum value) results in the highest errors. This observation can be explained by seeing that method 3 is based on the assumption that a good score (= low value) for just one construct on the causal path is sufficient to result in a good score on the resulting construct. However, this assumption is usually not met, since the causal path seems to implicate that high values of other constructs on the path are conditional for a high construct value. Finally, it can be observed that method 2 (maximum value) results in the lowest error (<1.8 on a scale from 0 to 10). This is in line with the expectation that constructs on the causal path form necessary conditions that need to have a value above a certain threshold.

Overall, these simulations show that the model is able to relate values of leaf constructs to values of constructs at deeper levels. A reasoning process could use the structure of the model and the interpretation of ‘necessary conditions’ for the relation between a construct and the constructs on its causal path.

@&#LIMITATIONS@&#

The analyses described above demonstrate that the model can be used to reason about the user’s problem domain and the underpinning theories related to it. The system can accordingly maximize the likelihood that interventions are targeted where they are most needed. We are however well aware that both evaluations only provide initial evidence for the correctness of the reasoning process; the number of participants is not sufficient to extract any significant findings. For a conclusive evaluation, further experiments, as well as an elaborate user interaction analysis, are needed to review eMate’s functioning and effects.

@&#DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION@&#

This work presents the design, evaluation and use of an autonomous coaching system that supports behavior change for chronic patients. Chronic illness is becoming a worldwide threat to human health. In order to prevent the onset of chronic diseases and to minimize the serious complications that come along with them, an (pro) active approach is in order. The system is called eMate and uses a mobile phone application, a website, and an electronic pillbox to interact with the user and to determine his or her current stage of behavior change. COMBI, an integrated cognitive model for behavior change, forms the core of eMate and represents the dynamics of internal processes underlying behavior change. COMBI is an example of a causal modeling approach to develop complex, user-tailored interventions. eMate differs from existing approaches in that it targets the user’s motivation and interests, and tailors intervention messages on the basis of the underlying mechanisms of behavior change. Model validation studies demonstrate that the core of the embedded cognitive model COMBI corresponds to reality, and preliminary results show that the model can be used for intelligent reasoning and tailored interventions initiated by the system. In the future, the model could also be used to predict the effect of an intervention, in order to let the system choose the most effective one.

Although interface design was not the point of focus of this study, system design and user experience is extremely important for the successful use of computer support systems. In order to match the design of the eMate interface to the target audience, prototypes of both the app and the website have been discussed with professionals that have experience with the use and design of apps for both chronic patients and elderly people. There were repeated design rounds and formative testing was done while the system was in development. An experiment in which the eMate system is being evaluated with regard to its design and credibility is currently being performed, and a more in-depth study with a large group of participants is being set up. However, the current interface can be much enhanced and be made more attractive for usage. Future work should focus more on this aspect of system design and on its influence on how well users adopt the system.

Although eMate has been developed for chronic patients, it can be used by everyone who wants to change some aspect of his or her behavior since it is easily adjustable and straightforward to use. Calculating the construct values can be adapted for other domains by using surveys appropriate for that domain. The rules and tailored messages can be adjusted to include different conditions and requirements. The general mechanisms for behavior change are similar across a variety of domains, which enables eMate to support for example sunscreen use or sustainable energy consumption. Currently, a study is being conducted in which the eMate system is used to stimulate students to take the stairs more often (instead of opting for the elevator).

Moreover, eMate is not only a helpful coach for people to improve their health, but also a resourceful tool for researchers who want to test their theories of behavior change and persuasive interventions. Currently, in the field of eHealth the flexibility and adaptivity of models and frameworks to different domains is still very limited. This, however, is an area where important gains can be achieved. Developing these models and frameworks takes great time and effort, and designing them in a way that is not restricted to a single domain will highly improve their usability.

In the present work, the user’s social environment is only taken into account to a limited extent. It is obvious that systems that make use of more detailed knowledge of the relation between the social environment and behavior have a large potential. This can be facilitated by using information from online social networks. Also, including components such as GPS, physical movements sensors or stress and mood detectors will improve its functionality and increase the possibilities for tailored messages and context-specific interventions.

The main limitation of the present work is that it presents only preliminary results concerning the validation of the underlying model of behavior change and the evaluation of the system that incorporates this model. Follow-up studies are being conducted with groups of patients in an experimental setup that cover these limitations. Using the data from these experiments, the weights and thresholds used to reason with the model (as elaborated in Section 5) can be initialized in a more meaningful way. For example, in the current study personality has not been taken into account. In future work we would like to learn user profiles based on user data that contain information about which interventions proved most helpful for which personalities. Additionally, the effectiveness and user preference of how he/she is addressed by the system (i.e., the persuasive strategies) could be learned based on interactions with the user.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This work is supported by the Netherlands Organization for Health Research and Development (ZonMW) programme “chronic disease management”, Grant No. 300020005. Thanks are due to our partners in this project, as well as to Ingeborg Brouwer, Anne Heideveld, Bart Kamphorst, Annemiek Linn and Marjolein Visser for valuable comments.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

