@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#TRAK ontology: Defining standard care for the rehabilitation of knee conditions

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           TRAK ontology models domain-specific knowledge about the rehabilitation of knee conditions.


                        
                        
                           
                           TRAK provides terminology, definitions and graphical illustrations of knee treatments.


                        
                        
                           
                           TRAK supports shared understanding of standard care in knee rehabilitation.


                        
                        
                           
                           TRAK provides the framework that can be used to collect data for epidemiologic studies of knee conditions.


                        
                        
                           
                           TRAK can support randomized control with a control intervention that is well defined and reflects clinical practice.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Ontology

Taxonomy

Knee

Rehabilitation

Physiotherapy

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  In this paper we discuss the design and development of TRAK (Taxonomy for RehAbilitation of Knee conditions), an ontology that formally models information relevant for the rehabilitation of knee conditions. TRAK provides the framework that can be used to collect coded data in sufficient detail to support epidemiologic studies so that the most effective treatment components can be identified, new interventions developed and the quality of future randomized control trials improved to incorporate a control intervention that is well defined and reflects clinical practice. TRAK follows design principles recommended by the Open Biomedical Ontologies (OBO) Foundry. TRAK uses the Basic Formal Ontology (BFO) as the upper-level ontology and refers to other relevant ontologies such as Information Artifact Ontology (IAO), Ontology for General Medical Science (OGMS) and Phenotype And Trait Ontology (PATO). TRAK is orthogonal to other bio-ontologies and represents domain-specific knowledge about treatments and modalities used in rehabilitation of knee conditions. Definitions of typical exercises used as treatment modalities are supported with appropriate illustrations, which can be viewed in the OBO-Edit ontology editor. The vast majority of other classes in TRAK are cross-referenced to the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) to facilitate future integration with other terminological sources. TRAK is implemented in OBO, a format widely used by the OBO community. TRAK is available for download from http://www.cs.cf.ac.uk/trak. In addition, its public release can be accessed through BioPortal, where it can be browsed, searched and visualized.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Knee injuries are frequent and account for 40% of musculoskeletal injuries with 40–50% not fully recovering and becoming chronic [1–3]. Rehabilitation is recommended for knee conditions that range from acute soft tissues injuries to chronic knee pain, osteoarthritis and post surgical interventions [4–7]. Its aim is to help individuals maximize their functional performance in interaction with the environmental and personal factors. Successful rehabilitation has been defined as being patient-centered and empowering individuals to take back control of their lives following injury or illness [8]. A vast amount of research and systematic reviews have evaluated the clinical effectiveness of rehabilitation modalities for knee conditions. Despite this it is difficult to develop specific rehabilitation guidelines because of limitations in the methodology or design of such research, which has failed to demonstrate statistically significant difference between ‘standard’ care and the ‘experimental’ rehabilitation under investigation [9–13].

Models of care have been applied to the management of knee conditions to accommodate the complexities related to the spectrum of conditions and individual modifying factors related to the person, pathology, environment and psychosocial factors [14–16]. Recurring limitation of these models is failure to define rehabilitation content in sufficient detail, acknowledge the complexity of intervention and use standardized terminology to describe treatment [17]. In clinical practice multiple modalities will often be administered within a treatment session or over the course of rehabilitation, but the most beneficial part of this intervention to the patient remains unknown [17]. This means that ‘standard care’ needs to be defined so that the most effective treatment components can be identified, new interventions developed and the quality of future randomized control trials improved to incorporate a control intervention that is well defined and reflects clinical practice. A formal ontology of rehabilitation concepts and modalities based on current research evidence and expert clinical opinion is the first step towards this goal. Such an ontology, as a scientific model that support clear communication between users and stores information in a structured form, thus providing support for automated processing [18], can be incorporated into a documentation tool to support systematic data capture in the domain of knee rehabilitation. Finally, data mining methods can be applied against the collected data in order to quantify the relation between rehabilitation modalities and their outcomes so that ‘optimal care’ for knee conditions can be defined.

The immediate aim of this investigation was to define ‘standard care’ by assembling a taxonomy of treatment concepts and modalities that comprehensively describes the most prevalent approaches to rehabilitation of knee conditions used in current practice. The long term aim was to develop an ontology that can support systematic data capture of all information relevant for studying the effectiveness of different approaches to rehabilitation of knee conditions. In addition to information about treatments, this task requires other types of relevant information to be coded, including information about symptoms, tests, diagnoses, epidemiologic factors and anatomy.

In this paper we describe the development of TRAK (Taxonomy for RehAbilitation of Knee conditions), an ontology that formally models information relevant for epidemiologic studies of knee conditions.

@&#METHODS@&#

As explained in Section 1, there is an evident gap when it comes to formal models of care of knee conditions. The first step in filling this gap was to gather the relevant information and organize it into a taxonomy. A mixed methods approach was used to define and quantify rehabilitation content of TRAK. This was an inductive process carried out in four stages that combined scientific evidence with expert clinical opinion [19]. Initially, we systematically reviewed the existing literature to obtain an overview of the clinical effectiveness of treatment modalities used for knee conditions. These findings were combined with a UK-wide survey of physiotherapists with a specialist interest in knee conditions. The results were compiled into a comprehensive taxonomy of rehabilitation concepts.

Literature review was conducted to evaluate the clinical effectiveness of rehabilitation modalities for the management of knee conditions [20]. We used the World Health Organization’s International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF) [21], as a conceptual framework to classify clinical outcomes. We included only those studies with the outcomes related to participation, defined in ICF as involvement in everyday life situations. The PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses) statement [22], was used to design the review and report the findings. The extracted information provided an initial outline of rehabilitation concepts and modalities to be included in TRAK and informed the design of the questionnaire used in Stage 2. A range of relevant bibliographic databases, including PubMed [23], CINAHL [24], Amed [25], Embase [26] and Cochrane electronic databases [27], were searched from 1996 onwards using terms related to the knee (knee joint, knee surgery, knee injury, osteoarthritis, patellofemoral joint and arthroplasty) and physiotherapeutic modalities (exercise therapy, manual therapy, electrotherapy, cryotherapy and taping). The titles and abstracts of 4880 retrieved articles were screened using the inclusion and exclusion criteria followed by critical appraisal. We extracted information about the research design, intervention type, subjects, outcome measures and findings. The 43 selected articles studied the clinical effectiveness of the following rehabilitation concepts: physical exercise (31), multi-modality physiotherapy regimes (7), manual therapy (2), electrotherapy (2) and taping (1). Literature review revealed that there was a wide range of treatment modalities available for each rehabilitation concept, with differences in methods of application, patients groups evaluated and rehabilitation settings. The full findings of the systematically literature review are available in the original publication [20].

The purpose of the questionnaire was used to further extend the list of exercise concepts and rehabilitation modalities identified previously during the systematic literature review. A web-based questionnaire was designed to record the rehabilitation modalities used by physiotherapists with a specific focus on treatments for an anterior cruciate ligament rupture (nonsurgical management), patellofemoral joint pain or post total knee arthroplasty. These knee conditions were included to encompass joint and soft tissue pathology, acute and chronic conditions and post-surgical rehabilitation. This would ensure that the results were relevant for most knee conditions. Physiotherapists were asked in open-ended questions to state what rehabilitation modalities they used in practice. The modalities were elicited for the following concepts: exercise therapy, manual therapy, electrotherapy, ‘other’ treatment modalities, and advice and information. The questionnaire also contained a section about a professional role, experience and qualifications in order to evaluate each physiotherapist’s specialism.

To recruit the participants for the survey, we used three strategies to identify physiotherapists in the UK who had a specialist interest in knee rehabilitation:
                           
                              1.
                              A total of 300 physiotherapy departments across the UK were mailed using an National Health Service (NHS) hospital list compiled from the Dr. Foster web site [28].

The Extended Scope Practitioners professional network [29] was contacted and they e-mailed the questionnaire details to 63 physiotherapists with a special interest in knee rehabilitation.

An advertisement was placed on the Interactive Chartered Society of Physiotherapy (CSP) website [30].

We obtained 45 responses from a diverse sample of physiotherapists from across the UK. Table 1
                         provides the relevant demographics data of the physiotherapists that completed the questionnaire. The results demonstrate that physiotherapists do posses an element of specialization in knee conditions. The majority had advanced professional experience and spent over 25% of their working week managing knee patients.

The raw data collected provided a total of 165 exercise-related treatment modalities, 25 manual therapy modalities, 10 electrotherapy modalities, 17 other modalities and 42 advice and information topics. To deal with a large overlap and repetition of terms used, we conducted a thematic analysis for each rehabilitation concept. The most prevalent exercise-related modalities were initially grouped into five exercise-related categories: functional exercise, aerobic exercise, strengthening, flexibility and balance. This corresponded to exercise themes found in the literature review [20]. Further, when different terms were used to describe the same or very similar modalities, they were merged. For example, exercises described as motor control, neuromuscular control, postural control, joint control, muscle control, movement pattern technique, muscle activation training and movement pattern technique and correction were all combined into neuromuscular control/movement pattern quality. This issue highlights an urgent need for standardization of rehabilitation terms and formal definition of techniques for clinical practice and research.

Finally, the prevalence of use was estimated for each rehabilitation modality (see Table 2
                        ). The maximum number of positive responses for each modality was 135 (45 physiotherapists completed the questionnaire about the rehabilitation of three different conditions). Only those modalities that received more than 10% of positive responses were regarded as part of standard care for the rehabilitation of knee conditions.

The findings in Table 2 were used to develop a prototype of a documentation tool for rehabilitation of knee conditions, which included 58 treatment modalities listed under nine rehabilitation categories. To quantify rehabilitation modalities, a time scale with 5min increments was added for each modality. The prototype tool was piloted over a month period within the Physiotherapy Service of the Cardiff and Vale University Health Board (UHB). It was anticipated that the range of recorded orthopedic conditions and patients would be representative of the general UK population, because the UHB is one of the largest NHS organizations providing healthcare for a population of 445,000 individuals. Its Orthopedics Service delivers over 10,000 surgical procedures a year, which includes routine and specialist procedures and tertiary services. It is also recognized as a leader in training, research and patient care [31]. This means that the Physiotherapy Service provides rehabilitation for a full spectrum of musculoskeletal conditions for patients over a range of backgrounds. Six physiotherapists (2×band 6, 3×band 7 and 1×band 8a) across the UHB used the documentation tool to record their rehabilitation practice. A total of 55 treatment sessions were documented for a wide range of knee conditions: anterior cruciate ligament deficiency, anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction, arthroplasty, arthroscopy, extensor realignment, medial collateral ligament sprain, meniscal tear, chronic knee pain, osteoarthritis, patellofemoral joint pain, quadriceps/patella tendon repair, tibial spine avulsion and internal fixation.

The content validity was assessed by evaluating the total time physiotherapists spent on each treatment category over the pilot period and the frequency with which specific rehabilitation modalities were applied (see Table 3
                        ). The preliminary data indicated that physiotherapists spent most time providing advice and information followed by functional exercises and then strengthening. The only category not used by clinicians during the pilot period was electrotherapy. This does reflect the findings of Walsh and Hurley [32] and supports recommendations in the NICE guidelines [33] for the management of knee osteoarthritis (providing information, aerobic and strengthening exercise). In the future, deeper insight into the standard care should be obtained using video recordings of rehabilitation sessions [34].

To formally represent standard care for the rehabilitation of knee conditions, information about treatment concepts and their modalities acquired in previous stages was refined and converted into an ontology. In an attempt to standardize the terminology used to refer to treatment concepts and integrate it with other terminological sources, the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) was searched jointly by a physiotherapist (both practitioner and researcher) and an informatician to obtain concept identifiers, synonyms and definitions, where such information was available. The curated search results and knowledge elicited from the physiotherapist were used to refine the hierarchy of rehabilitation concepts and populate it with typical exercises that fall under the given categories. All exercises were defined by the physiotherapist and illustrative images produced to further support their unambiguous interpretation. This part of the ontology provides a formal model of exercises as part of standard care of knee conditions (see Table 4
                        ). However, to support the long term goal of consistently and unambiguously capturing other information relevant for the rehabilitation of knee conditions, we expanded it beyond the rehabilitation treatments. Three main types of additional information needed include the classification of knee conditions, healthcare activities used to diagnose and treat them and anatomical locations affected by knee conditions. The following subsections describe the development of these three major branches in the TRAK ontology. Note that the healthcare activities include the remaining part of standard care not covered by exercises (e.g. manual therapy).

In order to systematically classify knee conditions, we initially referred to the Orchard Sports Injury Classification System (OSICS) Version 10 [35], which can be used to support epidemiologic research [36]. We extracted a portion of OSICS-10 describing injuries in the knee region and incorporated it into the ontology as a taxonomic classification, which is modeled as an information content entity. All imported concepts were cross-referenced to OSICS-10 using its four-letter codes (e.g. intraarticular femoral fracture was cross-referenced to KFFI) to facilitate the re-use of OSICS-coded data and their integration with TRAK in future studies.

OSICS-10 is a classification system in which all classes encompass two types of information: (1) type of condition (injury or disease) and (2) anatomical entity affected by the condition. Our approach to formal modeling of knee conditions was to separate these two aspects and represent them by two distinct semantic types. We searched the UMLS for all types of injuries described in OSICS-10 (e.g. fracture, sprain, tear, etc.) and classified these concepts under injury, a class re-used from Ontology for General Medical Science (OGMS) [37]. Additional category disease, also defined in OGMS, was introduced as a sibling to injury to represent knee conditions that cannot be classified as injuries. Terms elicited from the physiotherapist were used to search the UMLS and populate this class with relevant concepts (e.g. arthritis, bursitis, popliteal cyst, etc.). We introduced another sibling class phenotypic abnormality, the top-level class from the Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) [38], to model anatomical and biomechanical abnormalities that either occur in the knee region (e.g. dysplastic patella) or have shown to be correlated with knee injuries (e.g. antalgic gait). Finally, some of the knee conditions may be treated operatively, from which secondary medical conditions may arise (e.g. hematoma, infection, etc.). We, therefore, introduced additional class postoperative complication to complement the three main classes describing a wide spectrum of knee conditions: injury, disease and phenotypic abnormality. These four types of knee-related conditions were classified under pathological condition, a class defined in BioTop [39], an upper domain ontology for biomedicine, as a subclass of continuant, an upper-level class we accepted from the Basic Formal Ontology (BFO) [40].

All four subclasses of pathological condition are related to associated symptoms. We introduced a single class symptom defined in OGMS as “A quality of a patient that is observed by the patient or a processual entity experienced by the patient, either of which is hypothesized by the patient to be a realization of a disease.” Therefore, symptom can be interpreted as undiagnozed disease or injury and as such they share general properties such as onset, chronicity, severity and progression. In addition, symptom is often the target of medical treatment, e.g. pain is relieved with analgesics, swelling is reduced by cold therapy, etc. Similarly, diagnostic procedures do not necessarily apply to diseases or injuries, but often to a symptom, e.g. swelling test, tenderness on palpation, pain elicitation, etc. Obviously, the symptom class can be described in terms of similar attributes (e.g. duration) and relationships to other classes (e.g. pharmacologic substance) that are applicable to other subclasses of pathological condition. Indeed, a symptom can be viewed as a pathological condition of the patient. The symptom class was initially populated with generic symptoms such as pain, locking and swelling. elicited from the physiotherapist and cross-referenced to the UMLS. The generic classes of symptoms were subsequently expanded with more specific concepts obtained from the UMLS by searching for the given terms (e.g. pain, locking, swelling, etc.) in combination with the word knee. The results were manually curated by the physiotherapist and informatician in order to organize them into a hierarchy. For example, we collected 52 concepts related to knee pain and organized them into a hierarchy of five levels, which allows detailed information about the type of pain experienced by a patient to be encoded using TRAK, e.g. knee pain elicited by flexion at specified angle.

While grouping the similar classes together under pathological condition can facilitate intuitive search on one hand, their main differences need to be stated explicitly in order to support unambiguous interpretation on the other hand. This was achieved by aligning them against OGMS and additionally classifying them as either disposition, disorder, material entity or quality.


                           Health care activity (see Table 5
                           ), the second major class related to knee conditions, incorporates the physical therapy modalities described previously (see Section 2.3), e.g. manual therapy. To enable encoding of other available treatment options, we also included the surgery class, which was populated with the relevant concepts from the UMLS identified using search terms elicited from the physiotherapist, e.g. arthroplasty, arthroscopy, osteotomy, etc. Similarly, we included the pharmacotherapy class, which covers oral administration, application of a topical agent and injection of therapeutic agent. Typical pharmacologic substances used in treatment of knee conditions such as acetaminophen, corticosteroid injections and glucosamine. were listed separately in the corresponding class. Finally, the health care activity was completed by adding the diagnostic procedure subclass, which was further subdivided into diagnostic imaging, performance test, physical examination and subjective examination. Physical examination is the largest subclass, which includes 43 knee tests mapped explicitly to the conditions they are used to diagnose, e.g. Hughston plica test diagnoses synovial plica of knee, anterior drawer test diagnoses chronic ACL insufficiency or acute ACL injury, etc. In accordance with a general trend of moving toward self-management of knee conditions, self-assessment was linked to a number of questionnaires, which can be used for this purpose, e.g. Knee Injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score (KOOS) [41], Tegner Activity Scale (TAS) [42], Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Osteoarthritis (WOMAC) score 
                           [43], etc. These questionnaires were identified through PubMed searches, as most of them could not be found in the UMLS.

Going back to the classification of knee conditions, all OSICS-10 concepts were mapped to the relevant subclasses of material anatomical entity, e.g. distal femoral fracture (coded in OSICS-10 as KFFX) is related by means of occurs_in to femur, a bone classified as material anatomical entity. In TRAK, the role of the material anatomical entity class goes beyond coding the locations of knee conditions. It is also used to link the relevant parts of anatomy engaged or targeted by specific exercises used as part of knee rehabilitation, which can be helpful when developing or assessing exercise programs. We imported the relevant knowledge about human anatomy from the Foundational Model of Anatomy (FMA) [44], an ontology whose initial development was supported by the UMLS with the aim of enhancing its anatomical content. FMA formally represents concepts and relationships that enable symbolic modeling of human anatomy in a form that is readable by both computers and humans. It is intended to act as a reference ontology that incorporates anatomical knowledge that can be reused and generalized as necessary for different knowledge-based applications in biomedical informatics. We re-used the relevant portions of FMA to model the parts of anatomy that are relevant to rehabilitation of knee conditions.

We focused on the general anatomical classes (e.g. bone, muscle, nerve, etc.) and populated them with the relevant concepts such as those related to the lower extremities (e.g. femur, quadriceps, femoral nerve, etc.). The inclusion criteria were based on the relevance for knee injuries and rehabilitation modalities. Naturally, the most detailed information was concerned with the knee itself, including its constitutional parts (e.g. knee ligament, knee tendon, patella, etc.), which were further subdivided into their own constitutional (e.g. anterior cruciate ligament) and regional (e.g. apex of patella) parts. This level of detail together with the classes that describe various medical conditions (see Section 2.4.1) enables precise description of knee conditions, which can support future collection of detailed epidemiologic data in a systematic manner. Apart from the knee itself, we included high-level descriptions of other related concepts relevant in physiotherapy of knee conditions. For example, we included descriptions of muscles (e.g. tibialis, hamstring, erector spinae, etc.) and joints (i.e. hip and ankle) that have a functional role in performing exercises as part of knee rehabilitation. These relations between anatomical concepts and exercises were explicitly coded in TRAK.

While re-using portions of FMA relevant for knee rehabilitation, we largely preserved the structure of FMA with a view of further expanding TRAK to support modeling physiotherapy in general. We departed from the general structure in the way we organized skeletal muscles. While FMA organizes them according to their anatomical location, it was more appropriate to organize them by their function relative to joints for the purposes of modeling a subdomain of physiotherapy. We, therefore, divided skeletal muscles into subclasses of muscles acting on knee, ankle and hip as well as muscles of trunk. We also simplified the way in which we organized peripheral nerves as the way in which they were modeled by means of segment of neural tree organ subclasses reflecting the tree structure of peripheral nerves using is_a relation was too complex for the purposes of TRAK. We simply, grouped together all relevant peripheral nerves (e.g. femoral nerve, saphenous nerve, etc.) and classified them as such, whilst still preserving the branch_of relationships between them.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

In this section, we present the key features of the TRAK ontology. It currently incorporates 1292 concepts linked by a total of 16 semantic relationships organized hierarchically using the is_a relation. Concepts were annotated with their (preferred) name, definition, synonyms, unique identifier and cross-references to other authoritative source of relevance to this application. Table 6
                      provides the summary of the TRAK ontology in terms of several statistical and quality-control metrics. In terms of size, TRAK (1292 concepts) is a medium-to-large ontology compared to some other biomedical ontologies. For example, the median average size of ontologies on BioPortal [45], a web portal that provides a uniform mechanism to access biomedical ontologies, is currently 616. However, in terms of coverage of such a complex domain, it is still expected to grow over time. Indeed, not many biomedical ontologies can be regarded complete [46]. Ontologies must adapt to our ever expanding knowledge and with respect to other relevant ontologies and organizational principles. Active changes in an ontology instill confidence in its users and contributors that the ontology can respond to community needs and has some degree of community support. It is therefore important to emphasize that the initial version of TRAK is expected to develop over time through community engagement and feedback gained through its future applications as outlined later in Section 3.9.

TRAK is encoded in OBO flat file format, version 1.2 [47]. OBO is a text file format used by OBO-Edit, an open-source, platform-independent application for viewing and editing ontologies [48]. OBO follows the tag-value format, where each tag-value pair consists of a tag name and the tag value. The eight pre-defined OBO tags used to represent TRAK are given in Table 7
                        . For those more familiar with the Web Ontology Language (OWL), a Semantic Web language supported by the World Wide Web consortium that allows ontologies to be expressed in various dialects [49], Table 7 provides the OWL equivalents of OBO tags [50]. If needed, TRAK ontology can be converted to OWL automatically [51]. The following subsections describe in more detail how OBO tags were used in TRAK.

The name tag was used to specify the preferred name of a concept in TRAK, e.g. the preferred name of posterior thigh muscle is hamstring. In general, we strived to preserve the preferred names from the cross-referenced sources, but in some cases we have opted for other names for simplicity reasons and to preserve the internal consistency in naming conventions.

The synonym tag was used to specify an alternative name of a concept in TRAK. It was used to indicate different spelling variants (e.g. tensor fascia lata vs. tensor fasciae latae), commonly used acronyms (e.g. anterior cruciate ligament vs. ACL) and all other types of synonyms (e.g. spine vs. vertebral column). All names, either preferred or alternative, were given in singular with the exception of repetitive exercises, which are typically referred to in plural (e.g. squats, lunges, steps, etc.). All synonyms were followed by a scope modifier to indicate whether the synonym is EXACT, NARROW or BROAD. Most synonyms in TRAK are exact synonyms with few exceptions such as role, which is used as a broad synonym for professional role.

The def tag was used to specify the meaning of a concept in TRAK, e.g. the definition of pain is “The sensation of discomfort, distress, or agony, resulting from the stimulation of specialized nerve endings.” Definitions are followed by references, which were used to specify their provenance. Most definitions were re-used from an authoritative source, e.g. UMLS. Where no suitable definition was readily available, it was elicited from a domain expert. For example, most exercise definitions were provided by a physiotherapist. Definitions were not provided where the meaning could be inferred from terms themselves or related terms. For example, terms describing specific abilities such as ability to perform general purpose physical activities are self-descriptive, thus can be interpreted correctly without a definition. Similarly, the meaning of terms (e.g. hamstring tendon) composed of terms already defined (hamstring and tendon) can be inferred from their respective definitions.

The xref tag was used to specify the reference identifier of the equivalent concept in an external source including other ontologies (e.g. joint is cross-referenced with FMA:7490), vocabularies (e.g. Borg scale is cross-referenced with UMLS_CUI:C0449399), databases (e.g. acetaminophen is cross-referenced with CHEBI:46195), etc. The cross-referenced concepts in external sources can be accessed by attaching the given identifier to the prefix specified in the corresponding namespace, e.g. idspace: OBI http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/OBI_ “Ontology for Biomedical Investigations”. There are 288 concepts with no reference identifier attached, the majority of which represent exercise-related concepts including specific exercises (e.g. wall squats) and sports (e.g. standard long distance running) and injury-related concepts including manual knee tests (e.g. Nakajima test) and specific movements correlated with sports injuries (e.g. crossover cut). Table 8
                         provides details about the distribution of reference identifiers across the resources. Most of the cross-references resources are ontologies, which can be accessed through BioPortal [45] by attaching the given identifier to the base URL: http://bioportal.bioontology.org/ontologies/. TRAK most notably re-uses 205 FMA classes, which account for 16% of TRAK. This decision was motivated by the need to reduce the complexity of FMA (a total of 83,281 classes) for knee specific applications, explicitly model relations to these classes (e.g. trigger point therapy is performed on skeletal muscle), and most importantly make TRAK self-contained and easily shared. TRAK indeed re-uses the knowledge available in existing biomedical ontologies wherever possible. However, the main effort in TRAK to model rehabilitation concepts of knee conditions does not overlap with any existing efforts in the community.

Illustrative images were provided for some types of concepts to further support their unambiguous interpretation. For example, specific exercises were illustrated by overlaid photographs of a model performing the exercises (see Fig. 1
                         for an example). Relevant parts of knee anatomy were illustrated using MRI scan images. An image is linked to the corresponding concept via its identifier. For example, the image for the concept forward lunges with TRAK identifier 0000406 is named TRAK_0000406.jpg. This mapping is used by the OBO-Edit ontology editor to present the linked image in the Term Image Display Panel. This capability was tested successfully with OBO-Edit version 2.1.1-beta7.

The is_a relationship was used to provide the main taxonomic structure. Fig. 2
                         depicts the upper-level hierarchy of TRAK based on BFO at the upmost level: the top-most class is entity, which is divided into continuant (endurant) and occurrent (perdurant). The next level concepts re-used from BFO are material entity, role and process. They were combined with relevant concepts from other ontologies: information content entity (from IAO), material anatomical entity (from FMA), quality (from PATO) and pathologic condition (from BioTop). At lower levels, concepts were mainly re-used from UMLS and OGMS to group concepts describing health-related activities (see activity) and health conditions (see pathologic condition).

The relationship tag was used to specify all other relations between concepts. All relationships were organized into a hierarchy following the hierarchical organization of relations in the UMLS Semantic Network. Table 9
                         provides hierarchy of 16 relationships used in TRAK together with the total number of the corresponding concept associations and their examples. Unlike low-level relations (e.g. occurs_in), top-level relations (e.g. conceptually_related_to) are not used to associate concepts explicitly. They serve a different practical purpose and that is solely to group relations of the same semantic type together. This makes it easier for human users to browse available relations. It also provides support for query expansion in text and data mining applications of TRAK (see Section 3.9).

The latest version of TRAK ontology in the OBO format is available for download from http://www.cs.cf.ac.uk/trak. In addition, its public release can be accessed through BioPortal, a web portal that provides a uniform mechanism to access biomedical ontologies and terminologies provided in different representation formats, including OBO and OWL [45]. The following URL provides direct access to TRAK on BioPortal: http://bioportal.bioontology.org/ontologies/3210, where it can be browsed, searched and visualized.

The immediate application of TRAK is the support for shared understanding of ‘standard care’ in knee rehabilitation. This can be used for unambiguous knowledge exchange between experts, both healthcare professionals and researchers, as well as support for structured training in the physiotherapy of knee conditions. Further, the highly non-standardized terminology makes it difficult to search the literature in a systematic way. TRAK can support information retrieval applications by providing vocabulary and taxonomy that can be used for query expansion in this sub-domain as well as semantic searching. Similarly, it can be used to mine text from other relevant sources such as medical notes (e.g. findings of MRI scans of the knee described by a radiologist).

Most importantly, TRAK provides structure that can be used to collect coded data in sufficient detail to support epidemiologic studies much in the way Read Codes, a coded thesaurus of clinical terms [58], are used to record observational data in the Clinical Practice Research Datalink (CPRD) – formerly known as the General Practice Research Database (GPRD) [59]. CPRD is a longitudinal, anonymized database of over 11 million patient records obtained from approximately 700 primary care practices in the UK that are chosen to be representative of the country both geographically and demographically. CPRD has become a gold standard for epidemiologic studies leading to important clinical findings described in nearly 900 publications.

Physiotherapy research stands to gain significant benefits from a similar data collection model. At the moment, such data is not available in the CPRD, since detailed data related to knee conditions will only be collected in physiotherapy departments that fall outside of the primary care. Moreover, most physiotherapy patients will be self-managing their conditions outside of physiotherapy departments. Finally, there have been few attempts (e.g. [35]) to systematically represent the knowledge in the physiotherapy domain that can be exploited in medical informatics applications. In this respect, physiotherapy is lagging behind other medical domains in which work is well underway to support medicine as an information science. For example, BioPortal [45] lists at least 15 ontologies of direct relevance for cancer research. TRAK will serve to bridge the terminological gap in physiotherapy of knee conditions and drive the development of data collection tools in both clinical and home setting. Work is already underway to develop user-friendly interface for collection of TRAK-coded data from patients by taking advantage of the Web 2.0 technologies and mobile devices to monitor the progress of knee rehabilitation outside of the traditional clinical boundaries. TRAK will enable systematic data capture of information relevant for studying the effectiveness of different approaches to rehabilitation of knee conditions paving the way for new advances in physiotherapy.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

In this study we defined standard care for the rehabilitation of knee conditions and incorporated its formal description into an ontology called TRAK. The investigation into the standard care was supported by evidence from a systematic literature review and expert opinions elicited with a questionnaire, which was used to compile the initial taxonomy of treatment concepts and their modalities. Clinician feedback, where each treatment was quantified with the time typically spent on it in clinical practice, was used to establish content validity. The UMLS was searched in order to standardize knee rehabilitation terminology and integrate TRAK with other relevant knowledge sources. By formally distinguishing a variety of treatment concepts and modalities, TRAK allows their individual quantification and analysis in predictive models that evaluate recovery. This addresses the limitations of previous randomized control trials (RCTs) where multiple treatment modalities have been applied simultaneously [60–62] so that the modality that is most beneficial to the patient is unknown. Alternative studies have focused on individual modalities, but did not reflect the complexity of clinical practice [63], which was highlighted in this study. TRAK can be used to improve the standard of future RCTs so that the most effective treatment components can be identified and new interventions developed that focus on these. Moreover, TRAK can support RCTs by allowing an experimental intervention to be compared to a control intervention that is well defined and reflects clinical practice. The machine readable format of TRAK can also support development of data collection tools, which, when embedded into the Web 2.0 environment, can be incorporated into a web-based intervention and allow studying of knee rehabilitation outside of the traditional clinical boundaries. This capability is essential in light of the findings of our investigation into the standard care, which indicated that physiotherapists use a range of treatment modalities but spend most of their treatment time on providing advice and information. This suggests that physiotherapists may be using a self-care treatment model [64], therefore RCTs need to be supported by data provided by patients themselves. TRAK provides formal framework with sufficient clinical relevance, which can be seamlessly integrated into user-friendly web and smartphone applications (e.g. self-monitoring tools for remote feedback on the rehabilitation progress), in order to support the necessary quality of such data.

Ethical approval for this study has been granted from the South East Wales Research Ethics Committee (ref: 10/WSE03/5) and School of Healthcare Studies Research Ethics Committee, Cardiff University.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The preparation of this manuscript was supported with funding from the Research Capacity Building Collaboration Wales. The Research Capacity Building Collaboration Wales funded the time of Kate Button to undertake this study as part of a postdoctoral fellowship. We thank Robert Letchford, Amy Lake and Dr. Paulien Roos for their assistance in image production.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

