@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Does the use of structured reporting improve usability? A comparative evaluation of the usability of two approaches for findings reporting in a large-scale telecardiology context

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Poor usability leads to a low adoption rate of telemedicine systems.


                        
                        
                           
                           Mode of input, free-text or structured report, influences usability.


                        
                        
                           
                           Usability and user satisfaction are higher for structured report interfaces in telecardiology.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Telemedicine

Telecardiology

System usability scale

Keystroke-level model

Heuristic usability evaluation

DICOM SR

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  One of the main reasons that leads to a low adoption rate of telemedicine systems is poor usability. An aspect that influences usability during the reporting of findings is the input mode, e.g., if a free-text (FT) or a structured report (SR) interface is employed. The objective of our study is to compare the usability of FT and ST telemedicine systems, specifically in terms of user satisfaction, efficiency and general usability. We comparatively evaluate the usability of these two input modes in a telecardiology system for issuing electrocardiography reports in the context of a statewide telemedicine system in Brazil with more than 350.000 performed tele-electrocardiography examinations. We adopted a multiple method research strategy, applying three different kinds of usability evaluations: user satisfaction was evaluated through interviews with seven medical professionals using the System Usability Scale (SUS) questionnaire and specific questions related to adequacy and user experience. Efficiency was evaluated by estimating execution time using the Keystroke-Level Model (KLM). General usability was assessed based on the conformity of the systems to a set of e-health specific usability heuristics. The results of this comparison provide a first indication that a structured report (SR) input mode for such a system is more satisfactory and efficient with a larger conformity to usability heuristics than free-text (FT) input. User satisfaction using the SUS questionnaire has been scored in average with 58.8 and 77.5 points for the FT and SR system, respectively, which means that the SR system was rated 18.65 points higher than the FT system. In terms of efficiency, the completion of a findings report using the SR mode is estimated to take 8.5s, 3.74 times faster than using the FT system (31.8s). The SR system also demonstrated less violations to usability heuristics (8 points) in comparison to 14 points observed in the FT system. These results provide a first indication that the usage of structured reporting as an input mode in telecardiology systems may enhance usability. This also seems to confirm the advantages of the usage of structured reporting, as already described in the literature for other areas such as teleradiology.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

telecardiology is one of the most traditional applications of telemedicine. It has been widely used for more than 15years and encompasses a wide range of application areas, being one of the fastest growing telemedicine fields [1]. A successful example of a telemedicine network offering telecardiology services is the STT/SC – Santa Catarina State Integrated Telemedicine and Telehealth System [2]. The STT/SC is an essentially asynchronous telemedicine system, also referred to as a store-and-forward (SF) system, which offers, among other modalities, telecardiology services through the provision of findings reports to EKG examinations. These are performed mostly at upstate primary healthcare facilities and sent to a central portal via a web interface. Telecardiology findings reports are provided by cardiologists accessing the portal using specially developed web and mobile applications. The findings are stored at the same portal, where the requesting physician and the patient can access the results. To date, more than 370,000 telecardiology examinations have been performed online, employing different versions of the system.

The first version of the system, shown in Fig. 1
                     , offered free text insertion (FT) for the provision of the findings reports.

Various disadvantages, however, were observed with this kind of interaction and its usability, which could have negative implications on the clinic context [3]. This includes a higher probability of user errors that could not only affect the patient but also lead to setbacks in the degree of acceptance of the service. Therefore, a new version was developed, in which the use of structured reporting (SR) has been employed for the provision of findings reports, as shown in Fig. 2
                     .

The existence of a telemedicine operation on the scale of STT, raises questions about the adequacy of its model, based on a single and specifically developed software platform and its impact on both, patients and health professionals. There exists evidence that the most frequently cited reasons for the low adoption rate of Electronic Health Records (EHRs) – security, privacy and systems integration – are surpassed by the issues of productivity and usability [4,5]. Besides, many authors have commented that the usability situation of most EHR systems is not satisfactory [6–8]. Usability problems are considered a factor that can lead to the implementation of a healthcare IT system to fail [5]. On the other side, the majority of medical device incident reports can primarily be attributed to user error, implying that greater attention to human factors and usability during development of a medical devices and software could improve this situation [9]. Thus, the enhancement of the usability of EHR-related software seems to be critical for the continuous diffusion and success of this technology [10].

In this context, an earlier investigation into user satisfaction with the STT’s service has already shown a very high degree of acceptance [11]. The adequacy of the software tools being offered, however, has not yet been systematically investigated. Therefore, the study described here represents a first step into this direction by analyzing usability. The quality usability is directly related to how users interact with software and with which levels of efficacy, efficiency and satisfaction a user is able to execute a particular task [12].

In this regard, the adoption of a new structured reporting (SR) input mode, particularly in a specialized and well established field of telemedicine, such as, telecardiology, leads to the question on how SR compares to FT reporting with respect to usability as perceived by the healthcare professionals. Is it easier and more comfortable to provide a findings report using structured reporting? Is it faster? It is also important to question, if the modification from FT to SR has improved the quality of the telecardiology system from the users’ point of view.

To effectively measure usability involves a combination of heuristics and observations of user interaction situations, along with expected patterns. The complexity of the clinical environment, however, is difficult to be reproduced in laboratory and ethics/privacy issues can prevent the execution of some kinds of usability evaluations [13]. The inclusion of usability specialists in healthcare IT development teams, on the other side, has not been common and end-users do not have the abilities or the training required to help in the usability design [14]. As a consequence, well-established and rigorous usability research strategies should be employed when performing usability research in the healthcare IT domain [15,16].

This paper focuses on comparing the usability of FT and ST systems for reporting findings on electrocardiograms from the viewpoint of a cardiologist, based exemplarily on the STT/SC. We specifically analyze if user satisfaction, efficiency and general usability vary depending on the different input modes. The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 focuses on the study context providing background information on the STT/SC. Section 3 presents and discusses related work. In Section 4, we detail the adopted research methodology and in Section 5 we present the results of our study. A conclusion is given in Section 6.

This work was performed in the context of a large-scale statewide public telemedicine system in the Brazilian state of Santa Catarina [17,2]. Located in southern Brazil, Santa Catarina, with a population in 2010 of 6,248,436, 295 municipalities and a population density of 65.29 inhabitants/km2, presents one of the densest and most evenly distributed populations in Brazil. Due to the centralization of medical staff and equipment in the coastal area and a few larger upstate cities, patients from upstate typically needed to travel long distances when seeking medical treatment. In May 2005, the state of Santa Catarina began operating the Santa Catarina State Integrated Telemedicine and Telehealth System (STT/SC, Sistema Integrado Catarinense de Telemedicina and Telessaúde), which operates for the Brazilian Unitary Public Healthcare System and uses an integrated software platform specifically developed for this purpose by the Federal University of Santa Catarina [17,2]. During its 9years of operation, the STT/SC has grown, now offering distance exam services in 291 municipalities and at 401 healthcare institutions, ranging from primary healthcare facilities up to tertiary hospitals, with approximately 75,000 consultations performed monthly and over three million examinations completed through the telemedicine system so far.

The STT/SC offers, among other services, a service for asynchronous telecardiology diagnosis. Asynchronous telemedicine is an important modality of telemedicine, which allows the remote diagnosis by medical professionals in asynchronous sessions (store-and-forward), in which data is gathered remotely (such as in teleradiology) and sent to a remote specialist for later analysis and interpretation. Results are made available for the patient or the referring physician. Asynchronous telemedicine is established in several medical disciplines such as teleradiology, telecardiology, teledermatology, among others [18]. To date, the STT/SC performs about 16,000 telecardiology examinations/month. These examinations have their findings reports provided by a medical staff of up to 14 cardiologists.

@&#RELATED WORK@&#

Usability is an important issue for telemedicine systems, as it is one of the most contributing factors to their success [4,5]. Systematically adopting usability engineering in the development of healthcare systems can minimize the number of user errors that may lead to wrong diagnosis and consequently harm patients [19].

In order to assess the state of the art in the field of usability of telecardiology systems, we performed a systematic literature review. This review explicitly focused on papers addressing usability related to data entry modes in various fields of telemedicine. We considered articles published in English in the period from 2006 to 2014 that discuss usability (specifically efficiency and user satisfaction) for the task of providing a remote findings report for an examination adopting FT or SR data entry. We excluded articles that discussed aspects unrelated to usability. We searched the IEEE, ACM, PubMed and Google Scholar bases using the search string “usability AND cardiology AND (structured OR free-text) AND report”.

Analyzing the search results, only five articles relevant to our research focus were encountered (Table 1
                     ). Other articles initially found only discussed the FT/SR data entry modes from the point of view of the data storage efficiency, quality of obtained information and ease of extraction of clinical information, and did not address usability questions. No articles addressing usability or user acceptance questions related to FT/SR data entry modes in the field of telecardiology were encountered. We only identified articles discussing FT/SR acceptance and usability questions in teleradiology.

The analysis of these teleradiology articles reveals a lack of consensus between authors concerning the efficiency and acceptance of SR input modes. Besides, the interfaces and input modes of the analyzed SR systems are not uniform, ranging from lists and selection boxes to input via menus [25]. These are very different input forms, which present different usability characteristics and vary widely in user-friendliness, providing different user experiences, which could justify the observed lack of consensus about the advantages and acceptance of SR. All articles have in common that a preexisting or newly developed SR system was taken and compared to the user experience with an also preexisting FT system. There is no evidence in the articles that the SR system used for comparison was systematically developed taking into consideration usability issues or the working culture already established with the previous FT system.

The general objective of this work is to compare the usability of both interaction modes (FT/SR) with respect to the functionality of reporting electrocardiograms on the STT/SC from the point of view of the executing physicians (medical professionals that provide findings reports at the STT/SC).

In accordance to the ISO 9241-11 standard, we understand usability as “the measure by which a product can be used by specific users in order to achieve specific objectives with effectiveness, efficiency and satisfaction in the specific use context” [12]. Based on this definition we specify the following research questions to be analyzed:
                        
                           1.
                           Does user satisfaction represented by the subjective usability perception of the users vary with respect to systems with different input modes?

Does the efficiency in terms of quantity of time required to complete the given task vary with respect to systems with different input modes?

Does the degree of general usability in terms of conformity to general usability heuristics vary with respect to systems with different input modes?

For this purpose, we compared a well-established FT system [17,2], which was developed in-house and which had shown good user acceptance [11] for over 5years of continuous usage with more than 200,000 FT reports, to a newly developed SR system. Differently from what could be observed in previous works [20–24], the development of this new SR system was systematically performed in close contact with the user community, taking into consideration usability issues, and executed as an upgrade of the already existing system. By the time the data collection described below was performed, this new SR system was well-established and in use for over a year, having more than 100,000 findings reports already been issued using the SR-mode.


                     Research strategy: with the objective to study different aspects of usability, we adopted a multiple method research strategy, for which data was collected in three different manners:
                        
                           1.
                           
                              Survey/interview: in order to evaluate the data entry modes of both versions of the system (FT/SR) in relation to user satisfaction, structured interviews with a group of users of the system were performed using a questionnaire. The questionnaire was divided into two parts. The first part was based on the System Usability Scale (SUS) [26]. The SUS is a widely used, Likert scale-based, questionnaire with 10 questions (see Fig. 3
                              ) on the subjective assessment of usability [27]. Diverse studies have demonstrated the reliability and validity of the SUS as an instrument to measure usability [28–30].

The second part of the questionnaire (also using a Likert-based scale) focused on the subjective assessment on the adequacy of the system for the task at hand (questions 2, 3 and 4) [31] and the user experience (pleasant to use) (question number 1) [32] (see Fig. 4
                     ). All seven cardiology professionals representing the current users of the STT/SC system were contacted by phone and email and invited to participate in the research. During the first contact the objectives of the research were explained to the subjects. All seven invited users answered the questionnaires. The data collection took place between November, 2011 and March, 2012.
                        
                           1.
                           
                              Model-based evaluation: in order to compare the efficiency of both interaction modes, a model-based evaluation has been performed using the Keystroke-Level Model (KLM) [33]. KLM estimates the execution time of a set of actions for a given design and scenario, called keystroke level action sequences, such as pressing a button or moving the mouse, based upon pre-defined interaction time data as given by the model. The KLM-based evaluation was performed by researchers at the GQS/INCoD, who were not involved in the development of any of the two systems being evaluated.


                              Heuristic evaluation: given that the usability of a system can be assessed by its adherence to a set of established usability heuristics, heuristic evaluations [34] were performed with the aim to analyze the usability of the interfaces and interaction modes of both reporting systems. These evaluations were performed by researchers of the GQS/INCoD, who were not involved in the development of any of the two systems being evaluated. In order to perform these evaluations, we employed a set of heuristics proposed for the evaluation of electronic health record systems [35]. Usability problems observed were analyzed with respect to the impact they may have on the use of the systems and their performance and based on this information a usability degree has been attributed to each of the systems.

The research was formally approved by the ethics committee of the Federal University of Santa Catarina (certificate number 1051).

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

We present the results of our research separately for each of the three aspects of usability analyzed.

All users selected for the survey were medical professionals between 49 and 66years with at least 16years of professional experience as cardiologists. In order to employ only users with a significant experience in both modes of data entry, we selected only users that:
                           
                              •
                              belonged to the regular cardiology staff working with the STT/SC and were familiar with the system;

had extensive working experience with both systems:
                                    
                                       –
                                       an average of three years with the FT entry mode and

at least one and a half year with the SR entry mode.

Considering that the SUS presents a scale ranging from 0 to 100 points [26], the usability of the FT system as subjectively assessed with a mean satisfaction index of 58.85 points (with a standard deviation of 25), while the usability of the SR system has been assessed with a mean satisfaction index of 77.5 points (and a standard deviation of 21), based on the data collected through the interviews with seven cardiologists. SUS scores per interviewee are shown in Fig. 3. This indicates that the form of interaction given by the SR system promotes a higher user satisfaction.

Besides the SUS questionnaire, the participants of the interview also answered a second questionnaire on adequacy and user experience. The questions and results of the application of this questionnaire for both versions of the system are shown in Fig. 4. An analysis of the data shows a higher degree of satisfaction with respect to the interface and confidence on the correct publication of the results for SR. The SR system obtained a lower score on the affirmation “I have the possibility of providing a more complete findings report”. This may be justified by the fact that the healthcare professionals cannot express freely their opinions, having always to opt for a descriptor. With respect to the affirmation “I find that there should be fewer steps to execute the task”, users showed a subjective perception in contradiction to results obtained by the application of the KLM, which indicates that the free text version requires much more interaction steps. An explanation may be that the user perceives the typing of a findings report in free text mode as one single interaction and not as a sequence of keystrokes, as computed in a model-based evaluation, while the selection of different descriptors in the structured version is perceived as different interaction steps by the user.

The analysis of the answers confirms a higher degree of user satisfaction with respect to the SR version. From the seven professionals interviewed, five state that they prefer the SR system, one said to be indifferent. One affirms to prefer the FT version, justifying his preference by stating that the structured version “takes the freedom from the user, because it does not offer a free text insertion option and some problems that can be found in the examinations do not have a corresponding descriptor”. The same criticism was also expressed by an user that indicated to prefer to use the structured reporting system.

In order to compare the SR and FT version in terms of efficiency, we analyzed the data obtained applying a model-based evaluation using the KLM.

Keystrokes counting was performed considering that the user was already logged in and finished when a report was completely published and returned to the initial reports (Table 3
                        
                        
                        ). The time necessary to review the examination was not taken into consideration. We assumed that the user is a regular typist, so accordingly with [33], the typing rate is estimated in 0.28s per keystroke.

In order to specify the number of keystrokes in the FT system, we identified a typical average text length of findings report. Therefore, we analyzed a sample with more than 69.000 FT reports of the STT/SC system observing that about 37% of these reports have 50 characters and 85% have 50 or more characters. Thus, we assume an average of 50 characters to be typed in the FT system.

Applying KLM, the time for registering a findings report in the FT system is estimated to take 31.8s compared to the SR system with an estimation of 8.5s. Tables 3a and 3b detail the analysis by listing all necessary steps to register a report using the operators as defined by [33]. For each operator the estimated amount of time to be performed is given by the KLM model, as shown in Table 2 
                        [33].

The significant difference in execution time estimation may be explained by three main characteristics of the FT system:
                           
                              •
                              
                                 search: before the user can type a report using the FT system, it is necessary to search a menu for the examination modality and to choose the examination in a list. These steps are estimated to consume up to 6.1s. This is different in the SR system: as soon as the user clicks on reports, a screen with the next undiagnosed examination of the physicians list is opened.


                                 need to visualize the examination and write the report on different screens: using the FT system, the user reviews the examination on one screen, but the report is written on other screen. These steps are estimated to consume up to 2.4s.


                                 data entry: this is the most relevant factor in the differences of the estimated execution time within both systems. The act of typing the report can lengthen the time necessary for task completion in at least 14s for 87% of the reports that possessed more than 50 characters.

In order to compare the degree of general usability of both systems, we compared the results of the heuristic evaluations, aiming at the inference of the degree of usability based upon the presence or lack usability heuristics violations. During the evaluations, points where attributed to each problem found, accordingly to a commonly accepted scale for health records [36]. As shown in Table 4
                        , fewer violations of usability heuristics have been identified with respect to the SR system than the FT system. This better alignment of the SR system to generally accepted usability heuristics, thus, indicates a better general usability.

As in any research of this kind, various factors may represent threats to the validity of the results. One issue is on how generalizable are the results, taking into consideration our study centered on one specific telemedicine system, the STT/SC, and that the research group performing the evaluation was also involved in the development of the system. In order to prevent problems with the validity of the conclusions reached, we defined the research systematically based on usability engineering theory, well-established measurement instruments and models and ISO standards.

Other factors, such as the maturation and refinement of the interface of the system may also have contributed to the differences in user satisfaction detected between the two systems, as shown in the comparison of the results of the heuristic evaluation. In order to reduce this kind of interference, the satisfaction questionnaire focused on the input mode rather than on the system’s interface itself.

Another factor that may present a threat to validity is the small number of interviews performed to subjectively assess usability. This is due to practical reasons, as we had to select cardiologists that showed a reasonable working experience with both entry modes. For this purpose, we selected experienced users that had worked on a regular basis for at least a year with each of the data entry modes and that had provided at least 1000 findings reports on the system. These constraints reduced our sample to 7 users, who were considered experienced users in both entry modes. And, although, this represents a small sample, it describes a homogeneous group in terms of user experience and whose opinions about the system are expected to reflect considerable working experience with both data entry modes of the system. Thus, it still may provide solid preliminary data from which others can build.

Furthermore, the adoption of a multi-method research strategy enabled the analysis of usability aspects under different perspectives and to confront results. In general, the results obtained seem to confirm each other, with exception of the divergence between the users’ answers in which two of them indicated that the SR entry mode should require a lower number of steps, in comparison to the estimated execution time to register a report based on KML, which clearly attributes less time to the SR entry mode. This may have happened due to a subjective interpretation of the question, in which users may have had different understandings about what are “steps” to complete a task. Such a discrepancy can often be observed in usability studies as it is accepted knowledge that users may not be good at reporting on what they do [37,38].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

We performed an original comparison with respect to usability of two different interaction modes, free text versus structured reporting, for the task of the description and publication of findings reports of electrocardiography examinations. The results of this work provide evidence that seems to confirm the benefits of the usage of structured reporting in telecardiology as observed already for other areas such as radiology [39]. The results we obtained indicate that also in the area of telecardiology the usage of structured reporting as an interaction mode enhances the system usability, mainly in terms of efficiency and satisfaction. Among the factors that contributed to this result are the fact that the SR system possesses clean screens, showing only information necessary to execute the task, and requires fewer steps by eliminating the need for typing the report.

The results of this study, even if performed with a relatively small user group, clearly point out the benefits of the structured reporting mode. In this context, the use of structured reporting can strengthen the advantages of the usage of telecardiology systems through the reduction of the work load of healthcare professionals and promoting a better acceptance of this kind of system. This research work also provides a starting point for further studies of structured reporting systems aimed at other questions such as if findings report texts rendered from structured reports are easier to read or if they have a more significant content.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

We would like to thank all experts who participated in the interviews and/or survey for their valuable input to our research. Special thanks go to the Santa Catarina State Health Office for providing the opportunity of performing research on the STT/SC. This work was supported by the CNPq (Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico – www.cnpq.br), an entity of the Brazilian government focused on scientific and technological development, and the Santa Catarina State Health Office.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

