@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Effects of time constraints on clinician–computer interaction: A study on information synthesis from EHR clinical notes

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Cognitive pathways of interns’ EHR note synthesis under timed and untimed conditions.


                        
                        
                           
                           Adjustments of interns’ information consumption based on awareness of time constraints.


                        
                        
                           
                           Non-significant difference in errors for timed and untimed EHR note synthesis.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Electronic Health Records

Time Constraints

Information Synthesis

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Background
                  Time is a measurable and critical resource that affects the quality of services provided in clinical practice. There is limited insight into the effects of time restrictions on clinicians’ cognitive processes with the electronic health record (EHR) in providing ambulatory care.
               
               
                  Objective
                  To understand the impact of time constraints on clinicians’ synthesis of text-based EHR clinical notes.
               
               
                  Methods
                  We used an established clinician cognitive framework based on a think-aloud protocol. We studied interns’ thought processes as they accomplished a set of four preformed ambulatory care clinical scenarios with and without time restrictions in a controlled setting.
               
               
                  Results
                  Interns most often synthesized details relevant to patients’ problems and treatment, regardless of whether or not the time available for task performance was restricted. In contrast to previous findings, subsequent information commonly synthesized by clinicians related most commonly to the chronology of clinical events for the unrestricted time observations and to investigative procedures for the time-restricted sessions. There was no significant difference in the mean number of omission errors and incorrect deductions when interns synthesized the EHR clinical notes with and without time restrictions (3.5±0.5 vs. 2.3±0.5, p
                     =0.14).
               
               
                  Conclusion
                  Our results suggest that the incidence of errors during clinicians’ synthesis of EHR clinical notes is not increased with modest time restrictions, possibly due to effective adjustments of information processing strategies learned from the usual time-constrained nature of patient visits. Further research is required to investigate the effects of similar or more extreme time variations on cognitive processes employed with different levels of expertise, specialty, and with different care settings.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

With the ongoing adoption and utilization of EHR systems within mainstream patient care and healthcare operations, work into understanding mechanisms and solutions to challenges with clinician–computer interactions have emerged as fundamental areas of clinical informatics research. Recent studies have illustrated the importance of evaluating clinician efficiency with HIT towards successful individual and organizational adoption of HIT solutions [1–4]. Accordingly, recognized cognitive scientists have laid significant emphases on understanding clinicians’ reasoning models and cognitive demands during decision-making to investigate clinician competency and effectively support clinical problem-solving [5–7]. Researchers have also studied clinician behavior while interacting with patients and EHR systems to inform the design of future systems to effectively support clinician workflow and reduce cognitive burden within their practice environment [2,8–12].

Although time pressures appear to compound clinicians’ cognitive load and multitasking activities while providing care in the typically stressful emergency department [12], there is limited insight on the effects time restrictions can have on clinicians’ cognitive processes while providing ambulatory care in using EHR systems. In follow-up to our previous study investigating cognitive processes involved in synthesizing electronic clinical documents [13], we investigated in this study the effects of time constraints on clinician cognitive processes in synthesizing EHR clinical text notes.

The continuous need for clinicians to review multiple EHR clinical documents during the typical out-patient visit increases the likelihood of overloading their working memory (WM) in the short duration available for complex cognitive activities related to patient care [14–16]. Verbalized perceptions and related behavior identified by use of qualitative methods can be linked directly to reasoning strategies, information processing and overall cognition of a clinician as observed while s/he performs certain clinical problem solving [17,18]. Insight on the relationship between time constraints and clinicians’ cognitive processes may shed more light on potential barriers to effective synthesis of EHR clinical documents at the point of care. Furthermore, knowledge of elements of clinician–computer interaction related to specific tasks and time constraints can assist in framing EHR system design strategies required to better support characteristic cognitive processes and behavior [19].

@&#BACKGROUND@&#

Several groups have demonstrated that integrating and addressing preventive care, patient-centered services, and acute care in the ambulatory environment can decrease costs while optimizing healthcare quality and improving patient outcomes [20,21]. However, time requirements for these essential services do not correspond with the average length of routine ambulatory consultation which, according to Konrad et al., were estimated at 6, 10 and 18min in Germany, England and the US respectively [22,23]. In Yarnall et al.’s study to determine the amount of time required for preventive services in primary care, excluding the time needed to review medical records and detect patient-specific needs, physicians required 7.4h per working day to adequately adhere to the US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) guidelines [24]. This is more time than physicians can afford, considering their tight schedules and all of the additional tasks and processes required for patient care, including creating the office visit note and ordering tests/medications. Time restrictions are therefore highly important and may have a significant impact upon the delivery of quality preventive and therapeutic services [23,25,26]. While one may hypothesize that the impact of time constraints is likely negative upon care, there is minimal rigorously obtained evidence to support this claim.

In a set of experiments to evaluate the effects of time constraints on patient satisfaction and clinical content during out-patient consultations, Morrell et al. discovered that physicians who saw patients for approximately 6min at 5min-intervals could not fully comprehend the clinical situation and had limited time for efficient documentation. Moreover, patients were generally dissatisfied with these shorter consultations [27]. Similarly, Tarn et al.’s observational study of ambulatory care visits revealed that physician communication to patients about new prescriptions was often incomplete and efforts to improve communication should focus on both the quality of physician-patient discussions and various content trade-offs during time-restricted office visits [28]. More insight into the impact of time limits on clinical processes is necessary to formulate best recommended strategies to support the cognitive processes of clinicians in their use of EHR systems.

As depicted in Fig. 1
                           , there are a number of factors that can potentially influence clinician cognitive processes while using EHR systems within ambulatory care settings. According to a review of HIT return on investment by Menachemi and Brooks, EHR system adoption and implementation within healthcare settings has lead to numerous benefits including improved patient safety for medication ordering and prescribing, improved coordination of care, and increased access to relevant health data [29]. Despite providing better availability of a rich array of patient information, EHR systems can amplify the cognitive burden experienced by clinicians while providing care [30]. Beasley et al. described information chaos (a phenomenon comprising information overload, underload, scatter, conflict and errors) as a negative effect of using EHR systems at the primary care level (Fig. 1). Information chaos may potentially increase the physicians’ mental workload, impair their understanding of task-related situations, and may hinder timely and accurate clinical decision-making [31].

Zhang et al. noted that clinician-related characteristics possibly mediating errors in patient care include attention switching, inadequate recall, reasoning errors and cognitive overload [32]. Cognitive overload is said to arise when overwhelming quantities of information are meant to be consumed while multitasking and addressing several interruptions [33,34]. Interruptions due to colleagues requesting a clinician’s attention or a malfunction in the EHR system are sometimes unavoidable and may reduce the clinician’s ability to efficiently handle the cognitive burden of patient care [31]. Investigators have also stated that cognitive overload when providing care can result in disruption of clinicians’ ‘control’ over the clinical situation; such loss of control increases the likelihood of errors in patient management [30,35].

Apart from the cognitive load generally imposed by clinical information processing [10], time pressures associated with patient visits may also tax a clinician’s cognitive capacity and require the clinician to adjust his/her information processing rate and strategy [36]. In situations of high workload and patient volume, time constraints may promote specific clinician behavior such as indiscriminate copying and pasting of patient information, thereby creating voluminous EHR notes with a large amount of redundant and extraneous information that may compromise the ability for clinicians to accurately synthesize patient information downstream [37]. Some studies also suggest that additional clinician time is required when documenting in EHR systems compared to time documenting in paper records [38,39]. Pizziferri et al., in contrast, found that physician time utilization remained unchanged with EHR system use. This study also found that understanding physician time management related to EHR use may be crucial to the acceptance of this technology [40].

In a previous study, we examined the cognitive processes of interns while synthesizing information from ambulatory clinical documents in a prototype EHR using a think-aloud (TA) protocol [8,13]. From that work we derived a cognitive pathway model of information synthesis in Fig. 2
                           . However we did not examine the impact that time constraints might have on these cognitive processes as a potential explanation for effects of time constraints cited above. In order to examine the previous cognitive pathway and related findings in the context of the typically time-constrained patient visit, this study applied a similar experimental design and qualitative analysis technique as clinicians performed a set of preformed clinical scenarios under timed and untimed conditions with ambulatory notes.

@&#METHODS@&#

We used a mixed methods approach to analyze the thought processes of clinicians as they accomplished routine clinical tasks with and without time restrictions to understand the impact of time constraints on clinicians’ review of text-based ambulatory EHR clinical notes. The TA protocol was used as the primary data collection method since it provides data on individuals’ thoughts during task performance in the form of verbal protocols [17,19,41,42]. Analysis of the study transcripts was informed by a three-step protocol analysis (noun phrase, assertional and script analyses – consecutive steps to identify themes representing patterns of information processing and cognitive processes) that was utilized in our previous study investigating the cognitive processes of interns as they synthesized EHR clinical notes. QSR NVIVO® 9 was used to analyze transcripts of the clinicians’ verbalizations obtained during the TA observations. To determine interrater reliability for the protocol analysis, another investigator (KAM) experienced in qualitative research analyzed a subset of 4 (11%) study transcripts. Potential discrepancies between the investigators’ coding procedures were addressed and examined for overlaps.

We selected a convenient sample of physicians at the University of Minnesota Medical Center to participate in the study. To minimize variability in clinical expertise, we restricted study participation to the medical intern level. Also, to allow for a considerable range of technical expertise in the study sample, we recruited interns familiar with two to four vendor-based EHR systems currently implemented in various healthcare centers nationwide. Their experience with these EHR systems was mostly during their medical training. However, the interns had no prior exposure to the simulated EHR user interface used in the study.

@&#EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN@&#

Patient records were sampled from a large cohort of patients diagnosed with diabetes and commonly associated comorbidities (e.g. hypertension and dyslipidemia) at the University of Minnesota affiliated Fairview Health Services. Based on the study objective, outpatient progress notes over a one-year period within each patient record were selected for the TA experiments, resulting in eight or nine office visit notes per record. There was no inpatient note included in these records.

In line with simulations utilized in TA protocols [17,43], we selected four patient records and corresponding clinical scenarios from a set of nine records used in the previous study. In an effort to minimize disparities between clinical tasks to be carried out and relevance of available clinical records, we selected specific record-scenario pairs that exhibited relatively high (1) completeness of the notes, (2) ability to perform a clinical task using the notes and (3) amount of new information as the number of notes increased. Pairs were scored on each of these characteristics by six experts on a 10 point scale (1-lowest, 10-highest). Mean and median scores for each pair were calculated across raters and characteristics. Pairs with either a mean or median score >6.0 were selected.

Each clinical scenario required the physician to admit a hypothetical patient, write a specialist referral or summarize a patient record by synthesizing narratives in EHR clinical notes. To eliminate potential bias due to recall of the selected records and clinical scenarios, no intern from the previous research was recruited for this study.

Interns participating in this study were instructed to verbalize their thought processes (‘think-aloud’) as they synthesized the selected patient records within a prototype EHR user interface and accomplished related clinical tasks under timed and untimed conditions in a simulated ambulatory care setting. Interns were presented with the clinical scenarios and associated tasks to complete using the EHR user interface. Each scenario comprised 8 or 9 out-patient clinical notes documented over a one year period. Interns were instructed to think aloud as they worked their way through clinical notes within the patient records. During a set of time-restricted observations, the countdown clock began when clinicians logged into the EHR user interface and ended either when the allocated time period elapsed or when the clinicians indicated they had completed the task, whichever came earlier. In the equivalent unrestricted observations, clinicians were instructed to take as much time as needed to review the patient records and complete the assigned clinical tasks. The end of an observation under this condition was the point at which clinicians signified that an associated clinical task was accomplished.

To determine an appropriate time restriction, we examined the time to task completion for each scenario based on the previous study; average duration of task accomplishment for each scenario was estimated at 13, 14, 15 and 20min. Asides reviewing the clinical notes related to a clinical scenario, the aforementioned durations also include the time it took interns to develop a clinical summary document (admission note, referral letter, etc.) following completion of the clinical task. To validate our preference for a time limit in the study experiments, we reviewed relevant literature [14,44,45] and gathered clinician experts’ perspectives on the typical duration of routine out-patient consultations. At the end of these processes, we decided on 12
                        
                        min duration as the time limit for the TA observations that would be compared to a similar set carried out without time restrictions. We concluded that this time period would be adequate to simulate realistic routine ambulatory care visits such that it provides ample time to accomplish necessary care processes for a ‘virtual’ patient excluding physical examination and patient counseling.

Based on results from the protocol analysis, we compared the cognitive pathway from the earlier study to two similar but distinct pathways exemplifying the synthesis of EHR clinical documents while clinicians provided ambulatory care under timed and untimed conditions. Using a statistical procedure appropriate for nested study samples (ANOVA for repeated measures), we analyzed the differences in average numbers of concepts and assertions representing the interns’ information processing. Relative to the ground truth developed for each scenario by two clinician researchers (OF and GBM), we computed the average number of errors during the interns’ synthesis of the EHR notes with and without the time restriction. For the ANOVA tests, we used an α-level of 0.05 and LSMeans to estimate the population-level effects of time constraints on interns’ synthesis of the notes.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Four female and four male interns aged between 25 and 31years were observed as they simultaneously thought aloud, synthesized information from patient records, and accomplished clinical tasks outlined in the corresponding clinical scenarios. Each intern initially performed one clinical scenario without being timed and then another under the 12-min time restriction. The time interval between completion of a clinical scenario and commencing the next one was minimal and involved the researcher (OF) setting up the audio recorder and briefly introducing the next task to the intern. The range of time to task completion during the untimed and timed observations was 9–32min and 8–12min respectively (Table 1
                     ). The TA protocol was designed such that each intern had only one exposure to a clinical scenario so as to emphasize information processing resulting from direct synthesis rather than recall. With each clinical scenario, interns were required to create new clinical note documentation (referrals, summaries or admission notes) based on information synthesized from the patient records and the scenario; these were evaluated and found to be analogous in overall organization and clinically relevant details. Inter-rater reliability between the two investigators who analyzed data generated during the TA protocol was excellent (mean agreement=98.5%, κ
                     =0.97).

Transcripts of the interns’ thought processes obtained during the TA protocol were reviewed to ensure familiarity and identification of themes representing their cognitive activities while accomplishing the clinical scenarios. We analyzed the protocol data in a consecutive three-step process as detailed below.

During the noun phrase analysis (NPA) [46], the first step in protocol analysis, noun phrases in the study transcripts were analyzed to identify concepts that reflected the intern’s reasoning and the specific information being processed while completing the clinical task.

The NPA was carried out iteratively until all concepts in the transcribed data were defined and coded. Interns’ verbalizations were coded under nine NPA concepts defined in the previous study to represent their cognitive activities and information retrieval as they performed routine clinical tasks with and without time restrictions. The concepts include Problem, Treatment, Symptom, Sign, Test, Time, Value, Action and Format (Table 2
                           ). These concepts constituted an ontology representing the interns’ information processing and synthesis of patient information relevant to the clinical scenarios [47]. We observed that the highest frequencies of information synthesized by interns related to concepts of Problem (such as past and current diagnoses, family and social history, and allergies) and Treatment when they review the clinical documents under both timed and untimed conditions. These predominant concepts were also the most frequent concepts that informed the design of a common cognitive pathway in the earlier study. Although references to the Symptom concept were as frequent as the Problem and Treatment concepts in the prior study, this study showed that the next most occurring concept indicating the interns’ information processing patterns was Time for the untimed TA observations, and Test for the timed equivalents (Table 3
                           ).

To examine the impact of time restrictions we examined the mean number of references coded under each concept for the timed and untimed clinical scenarios. During the untimed observations, interns synthesized relatively more information under the Problem concept (40.8±4.0) compared to when they were timed (23.5±4.0) (p
                           =0.05). Similarly, interns assessed the relevance of clinical text (Value) in the patient records much more for the clinical scenarios without time constraints (13.0±2.0 vs. 3.5±2.0, p
                           =0.05). The least square (LS) means of references under the Time (20.8±3.7 vs. 5.3±3.7, p
                           =0.06), Symptom (16.3±2.8 vs. 7.0±2.8, p
                           =0.10), and Format (3.0±0.8 vs. 1.0±0.8, p
                           =0.16) concepts exhibited a similar trend favoring the untimed condition but were not significant at the established α=0.05 level. Likewise, differences in the LS means of the other concepts (Treatment, Test, Sign and Action) under timed and untimed conditions were not statistically significant (Table 3).

Following the NPA, we analyzed the study transcripts to determine the nature and validity of relationships established between noun phrases verbalized during the TA observations (Table 4
                           ). Similar to findings in the earlier study, frequencies of the interns’ assertion revealed mostly Significative and Implicative relationships between NPA concepts under timed and untimed conditions. Average values for the all three categories (Significative, Implicative and Causal) were not statistically different (Table 5
                           ).

The final step in the protocol analysis was a script analysis (SA) which helped unravel the overall configuration of interns’ reasoning patterns and clinical judgment as they performed the clinical scenarios [48]. For the SA, all coded statements from the NPA and AA were examined more closely to understand the predominant cognitive strategies employed by the interns in accomplishing the clinical scenarios [17]. Similar to the operators noted in the previous study, we identified the interns’ cognitive activities represented by their thought processes as a combination of operators derived from the results of preceding steps (NPA and AA) – Review, Deduce, Decide, and Assume. In addition, we included another operator, Error, to categorize statements that reflected incorrect inferences and/or failure to retrieve available information during synthesis of the EHR notes (Table 6
                           ).

From results in Table 7
                           , the difference in the LS mean errors during the timed and untimed observations was not statistically significant (2.3±0.5 vs. 3.5±0.5, p
                           =0.14). Although, there were no significant differences in the LS means for the Review, Deduce, Assume and Decide operators between untimed and timed observations, references to these concepts were more prevalent during the untimed observations.

Based on the predominant themes from the protocol analysis, we constructed common cognitive pathways (similar to the previous study) to represent the synthesis of EHR clinical notes by interns with and without the introduction of time restrictions. As outlined in Fig. 3
                        , without the time restriction, the interns’ essentially focused on synthesizing time-related clinical details to determine time of illness onset and duration of existing problems (A), and the length of time for which interventions/treatment were administered (B). In contrast, during the timed observations, interns’ synthesized test results to determine the progress of patient problems (A) and attempted to establish links between test results and the effectiveness of interventions (B) (Fig. 3). Cognitive activities common to all three pathways are interns’ information processing to establish possible connections between problems and prescribed treatment, and their assessment of the degree to which treatment regimens have alleviated existing patient problems (C and D) (Figs. 2 and 3).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Time is a measurable resource that remains critical to the quality of services provided in clinical practice [49,50]. The current adoption of EHR systems in ambulatory care and demands to provide comprehensive and quality healthcare often require that clinicians review large amounts of EHR clinical text documents within typically time-constrained clinical encounters [4,14,31]. The cognitive challenges with consuming complex and often redundant electronic patient information has been the focus of research in cognitive science and human–computer interaction over the last few years [30,51–54]. However, in our opinion, there has been little emphasis on how time constraints in ambulatory care influence the cognitive processes of clinicians as they interact with text documents in EHR systems.

Based on our previous study investigating cognitive processes of clinicians associated with their consumption of EHR clinical notes, the focus of this work was to explore the possible impact of time constraints on interns’ cognitive processes when they accomplished clinical tasks during ambulatory care. Our results corroborated findings in the earlier study suggesting that interns most often synthesized details relevant to Problem and Treatment concepts, regardless of the time available for task performance. However, in contrast to the relatively large number of references to Symptom in the previous study, instances of the concepts of Time were the next most frequent during the untimed observations while the instances of the Test concept were similarly frequent during the timed observations.

Variations in information processing patterns observed in the three practice situations may be possibly linked to instructions on time availability provided to the interns prior to participating in the timed and untimed observations. The interns’ awareness of time restrictions, or the absence thereof, may have resulted in significant adjustments to their information processing strategies while synthesizing the EHR clinical notes – evidenced by their emphases on different categories of clinical details (Symptom, Time and Test) under the different practice situations. These findings offer potential considerations for future designs of EHR clinical note user interfaces as the influence of time constraints on clinicians’ cognitive strategies during patient care may need to be adequately addressed by current EHR systems. To promote better clinician satisfaction with these systems, developing solutions to optimize the display of particular details within EHR clinical narratives may be helpful. Furthermore, clinicians’ demand for information on patients’ problems and treatment observed under all the practice conditions may present a rationale for the implementation of tools within EHR systems to enable retrieval of these classes of information when clinicians are under time pressure. It is important to note that emphasizing the display of these classes of information within EHR clinical notes may influence clinicians’ decision-making differently, depending on the clinical tasks at hand and the time available. Further research will help explore the correlation between such factors and corresponding variations in clinician behavior and information synthesis.

Given that the average duration of the untimed observations was about twice that of the timed observations, we expected that interns would have relatively more references under the themes in the protocol analysis of data from the untimed experiments, since they could synthesize more clinical information in the additional time available. Although the frequencies of the concepts, assertions and operators under both conditions supported our logical reasoning, statistical analysis showed only significantly more references during the untimed sessions for Problem and Value concepts. Based on evidence that physicians usually attempt to ‘down-size’ the quantity of information they need to review or simplify their information processing technique when they take on complex clinical tasks under time restrictions [55], we expected that interns would be inclined to more ongoing and brisk assessments of the relevance of patient information within the EHR clinical notes when they were faced with time pressures. However, our findings contradict this notion as the interns evaluated the importance of textual data relative to the designated clinical scenarios much more when there was no time restriction. More research may be necessary to better understand the rationale behind clinicians’ evaluation of details within EHR clinical notes when time pressures eliminated.

The prevalence of assumptions (Assume) and deductions (Deduce) during the untimed observations may indicate that the interns’ tried to make scientific connections from the larger amount of synthesized patient information when there was more time available. However, the synthesis of less information during the timed observations did not translate to a significant difference in the average numbers of errors when they reviewed the EHR clinical notes to accomplish the clinical scenarios. This phenomenon may be due to the general tendency of clinicians, by virtue of their training and clinical experience, to become accustomed to effectively streamlining patient information processing in the context of limited time resources [56]. Therefore the ‘quality’ of the interns’ EHR clinical note synthesis may not necessarily fluctuate with the time restrictions employed in this study. However, future studies will be needed to validate this observation by repeatedly altering the time duration and possibly validate in another practice setting to determine the precise impact of wider time variations on clinicians’ cognitive processes while synthesizing EHR clinical notes.

Some characteristics of the study design may present limitations. Sampling of only medical interns for our group of physicians at a single center may not allow the generalization of study results beyond interns or to physicians at other health centers. These findings similarly may not translate to more experienced physicians and specialists, and other non-physician clinicians such as physician extenders within the healthcare system. Various constraints in the study (the time limit applied, selecting clinical notes of patients with diabetes mellitus and related comorbidities, the limited number of clinical scenarios and possible complexity of the clinical notes, and the study sample size) may also restrict the generalizability of the findings. Verbal protocols obtained while the interns synthesized electronic clinical text during the TA experiments were not controlled for quantity of speech and the possibility of additional cognitive processes directly related to ‘speaking one’s thoughts’ during task performance. Also, we did not control for the learning effects that may exist as interns moved from accomplishing one clinical scenario to commencing the next one. Furthermore, our study involved one category of clinical tasks (creating a clinical summary in the form of an admission note/referral/summary document) and was conducted in a simulated ambulatory setting; therefore more extensive validation of these results in a naturalistic setting in the context of other kinds of clinical tasks, interruptions and multitasking will be needed.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

Overall, study findings reveal that time restrictions on clinicians’ synthesis of EHR clinical notes resulted in the retrieval of smaller amounts of available patient information. Based on the cognitive models developed from the study data, there was a considerable shift of clinicians’ information processing strategies from retrieving details on the chronology of clinical events (Time) during untimed observations to reviewing laboratory results (Test) during the timed versions. Despite the relatively incomplete information synthesis under timed conditions, clinicians’ review of EHR clinical notes was not associated with either significantly more errors of omission or incorrect deductions as compared to the untimed conditions. We suggest that the likelihood of errors during synthesis of EHR clinical notes was not increased with time restrictions possibly due to physicians being accustomed to making effective adjustments in information processing strategies based on the usually time-constrained patient visit. Further research is required to investigate the impact of more flexible constraints (more clinical notes representing a range of diagnoses, larger study sample size and varying time limits, and systematic increase of the cognitive load associated with clinical tasks) and the effect of a timeline-based presentation of the clinical note contents on cognitive processes associated with electronic clinical note synthesis by different clinician types and to validate these findings in several different patient care environments.

The study was performed in compliance with the World Medical Association Declaration of Helsinki on Ethical Principles for Medical Research Involving Human Subjects. Prior to commencement of the study, all selected patient records were de-identified using the safe-harbor method. Approval for this study was obtained from the University of Minnesota Institutional Review Board (Study Number: 1012E93487).

This research was supported by the University of Minnesota Institute for Health Informatics Research Seed Grant (PIs – GBM, KAM).

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The authors would like to thank Fairview Health Services for their support and the University of Minnesota interns who participated in this research.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

