@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#ProNormz – An integrated approach for human proteins and protein kinases normalization

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We present ‘ProNormz’ as a freely available web-based tool for human protein normalization.


                        
                        
                           
                           Besides normalization ProNormz distinguishes human protein kinases from other proteins.


                        
                        
                           
                           ProNormz is the first system to distinguish human protein kinases from other proteins.


                        
                        
                           
                           The methodology can be useful to developers for extensible gene normalization implementation.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Human protein normalization

Protein kinase tagging

Gene name finding

Text mining

Biomedical informatics

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The task of recognizing and normalizing protein name mentions in biomedical literature is a challenging task and important for text mining applications such as protein–protein interactions, pathway reconstruction and many more. In this paper, we present ProNormz, an integrated approach for human proteins (HPs) tagging and normalization. In Homo sapiens, a greater number of biological processes are regulated by a large human gene family called protein kinases by post translational phosphorylation. Recognition and normalization of human protein kinases (HPKs) is considered to be important for the extraction of the underlying information on its regulatory mechanism from biomedical literature. ProNormz distinguishes HPKs from other HPs besides tagging and normalization. To our knowledge, ProNormz is the first normalization system available to distinguish HPKs from other HPs in addition to gene normalization task. ProNormz incorporates a specialized synonyms dictionary for human proteins and protein kinases, a set of 15 string matching rules and a disambiguation module to achieve the normalization. Experimental results on benchmark BioCreative II training and test datasets show that our integrated approach achieve a fairly good performance and outperforms more sophisticated semantic similarity and disambiguation systems presented in BioCreative II GN task. As a freely available web tool, ProNormz is useful to developers as extensible gene normalization implementation, to researchers as a standard for comparing their innovative techniques, and to biologists for normalization and categorization of HPs and HPKs mentions in biomedical literature. URL: http://www.biominingbu.org/pronormz.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The biomedical text mining researchers try to devise automated systems to extract relevant knowledge from biomedical literatures. The two preceding steps to complex biomedical text mining tasks are the automatic recognition of named entities such as genes/proteins names mention (GM) and their subsequent gene normalization (GN) to map to an entry in standard databases like EntrezGene or UniProt [1]. These pre-processing steps are highly desirable to understand the associations between the entities like interactions between proteins, genes associated with diseases, etc. GN task is syntactically easier when compared to GM as the identification of textual boundaries for each entity is not required. Yet, it is considered to be important in scientific communications to mark clear and unambiguous reference to genes/proteins [2]. GN is highly challenging due to the widespread of existing gene/protein entities and lack of rules or algorithms concerning nomenclature. Further many existing entities are known by more than one name and some of the newly discovered genes/proteins have been assigned with already existing names [3].

Various approaches available for GN include classification techniques [4,5], rule-based systems [6,7], string matching with dictionaries [8,9] and hybrid approaches [10]. Apart from the general approaches, different organisms might require different normalization strategies depending on the complexity of the nomenclature and the degree of ambiguity in the assigned synonyms [4]. Currently available systems like GeNo [10], GNAT [11], Moara [12] and Whatizit [13] are species specific and facilitate human GN as a subtask. The incompetence of such systems on human GN task is evident from their inability in identifying complex human gene/protein names (e.g. IkappaBalpha/beta). Normalization systems exclusively designed for human gene/protein mentions are very rare [14] and no system is available for human protein kinases (HPKs). The HPKs are the largest human gene family regulating multiple biological processes by posttranslational phosphorylation. These are essential for many cellular signaling networks coordinating various activities like metabolism, stress response, transcription, translation, DNA replication and cell cycle control, development of organs, neuronal signaling and apoptosis. Any malfunction of this regulatory machinery often leads to various diseases and disorders [15–17]. Specialized normalization on protein kinases might be more specific and robust to extract related information from biomedical literature. The importance of human GN is also evident from BioCreAtivE-II GN task [18] which explicitly emphasis on human genes/proteins.

We present here a tool, ProNormz for human GN task. ProNormz, an integrated approach incorporates a hybrid tagger NAGGNER [19] which is previously developed by us for tagging human genes/proteins, a specialized synonyms dictionary for human proteins and protein kinases, an enhanced set of 15 string matching rules and a disambiguation module to achieve the normalization. ProNormz is the first available approach to categorize HPKs from other HPs in addition to normalization task. We utilized the protein kinase information from two protein kinase databases KinBase [20] and Kinweb [21] to categorize the HPKs from other HPs. Additionally, ProNormz also has another named entity tagger BANNER [22] for GM task alone.

ProNormz is implemented as a freely available web-based tool. Fig. 1
                      shows the web interface and Fig. 2
                      shows the overall architecture. ProNormz consists of four major functional components for the recognition of human gene/protein mentions and mapping them to their corresponding EntrezGene unique identifier.
                        
                           (i)
                           NAGGNER – biomedical named entity tagger developed by us to identify possible mentions of gene/protein names.

A specialized synonyms dictionary for HPs and HPKs.

A set of string matching rules to compare the tagged entity with all entries in the dictionary.

A disambiguation method if tagged entity maps more than one gene in the dictionary.

We have developed the above mentioned GN tasks separately as Java and Perl/CGI modules. The details of these modules are discussed below.

Gene/protein name recognition is named entity recognition (NER) task and aims to locate gene/protein mentions (GM) in biomedical literature. The gene/protein name recognition is achieved by our earlier developed tagger NAGGNER available at (http://biominingbu.org:8080/NAGGNER/) [19] or another popular open source tagger BANNER available at (http://cbioc.eas.asu.edu/banner/) [22]. The Java API of NAGGNER/BANNER supports its integration to ProNormz for implementing the GM task.

The goal of ProNormz is to normalize human protein/genes and distinguish human protein kinases from other proteins/genes. For this task, the system incorporates two specialized synonyms dictionaries one for human proteins and other for human protein kinases. Later entries in both dictionaries were mapped to single dictionary.


                        Creation of synonym dictionary for human genes/proteins: The main purpose of gene/protein synonym dictionary is to provide the actual EntrezGene database identifiers to the gene/protein mentions in text. First, we downloaded all the human genes/proteins approved by Human Gene Nomenclature Committee (HGNC) using the keyword “(Homo sapiens [Organism]) AND HGNC” from EntrezGene [23]. For the HGNC approved genes/proteins the synonym name dictionary was developed using three resources (i) the synonym dictionary provided by the BioCreAtIvE-II [18] contest, which is composed of 32,975 entries, (ii) the human protein/gene name dictionary available at NCBI [23] covering 47,177 entries and (iii) the human protein synonyms available at UniProt [24] covering 14,893 entries. These dictionaries contain many gene entries which are not approved by HGNC and few discontinuous genes. Combining all the dictionaries, we created a gene/protein synonyms dictionary which contains only the HGNC approved genes/proteins with all possible synonyms available from all the three resources.


                        Creation of synonym dictionary for human genes/protein kinases: Next, we created human gene/protein kinase synonym dictionary to distinguish human protein kinases from other proteins. We downloaded all the human genes/protein kinases approved by HGNC using the keyword “(Homo sapiens [Organism]) AND Kinase AND HGNC”. Additionally, we downloaded HPK from two popular databases namely KinBase [20] which contains 516 HPKs and Kinweb [21] which contains 518 HPKs. Most of the entries were common to both the databases with few notable errors such as (i) genes not approved by HGNC, (ii) genes without official symbol, (iii) discontinued genes and (iv) gene ID replaced with a different gene ID. For the HGNC approved genes/protein kinases the synonym dictionary was constructed by combining entries in both datasets.


                        Final synonym dictionary for human genes/proteins and kinases: Consequently, we created a final synonyms dictionary by combining both dictionaries with matched entries in both dictionaries as ‘HUMAN PROTEIN KINASE’ and the remaining entries as ‘HUMAN PROTEIN’. For all HGNC approved human genes/proteins our final dictionary contains (i) official symbol, (ii) gene ID, (iii) all possible synonyms and (iv) disambiguation as HP and HPK. Table 1
                         shows a snippet of our final gene/protein synonym dictionary.

In biomedical literature, researchers continue to mention gene/protein names in many different ways (e.g. arginase 2, arginase2, arginase-2, arginase II, type II arginase, arginase type II, etc.). These orthographical or morphological term variations are the major obstacles hindering the effective use of a gene/protein dictionary. A vital step to map the gene/protein mentions with the corresponding entries in the dictionary is unattainable without uniformity in nomenclature. String matching is a critical step prior to normalization to attain this evenness and used by several existing state of the art systems [8,12,25].

We make use of 15 string matching rules, classified into two main categories as dictionary rules and entity rules. The dictionary rules were applied to dictionary terms as well tagged entities and includes morphological and syntactic variations, such as
                           
                              (1)
                              Normalization of case.

Replacement of hyphen with space.

Removal of all space.

Elimination of word delimiter features (i.e. semicolon, colon and comma).

Removal of contents inside parenthesis.

Replacement of Arabic numbers to Roman numerals.

Removal of stop words.

Removal of extra words.

Replacement of British spelling to American English.

The first eight rules were derived from the earlier work of Cohen et al. [26] and Fang et al. [14]. The ninth rule replacement of British to American English was first introduced by us as we found many human proteins (e.g. adaptor protein CMS/adapter protein CMS, tumour necrosis factor alpha/tumor necrosis factor alpha) exist in British English.

Next, we applied a set of entity rules to tagged entities in the text before matching the dictionary text. These rules were used if slash (“/”) exists on the tokens inside the tagged text (e.g. Brk/STAP-2, ERK1/2, PKCalpha/beta). None of the existing string matching system cover the special character ‘/’ which is commonly used to mention a group of genes/proteins. The only earlier attempt was simple separation of two different protein names by Hu et al. [27]. However, we came out with a new set of six rules to handle all possible ways of using ‘/’ within the protein mentions.
                           
                              (10)
                              Part of gene name.

Divider for protein synonyms.

Separator for two or more proteins.

Identifier for proteins sorted with an alphabet at the end.

Identifier for proteins sorted with a number at the end.

Barrier for proteins with Greek letters.

All the above 15 string matching rules used in ProNormz were shown in Table 2
                         with specific examples.

When a synonym in a gene/synonym dictionary is associated with more than one gene identifier, then recognition of appropriate gene in such cases is a challenging task and needs a disambiguation method. In ProNormz, we employed a simple disambiguation method introduced by Koike and Takagi [28]. First, we created a dictionary of ambiguous synonyms and their corresponding official gene IDs. Next, we consider all possible gene IDs for any ambiguous synonym by matching more than one official gene ID. Finally, we look for the occurrence of any of these gene IDs within the text and calculate their frequency. The possible gene ID for any synonym was the one repeated many times in the same literature.

Another unique feature of ProNormz is the classification of HPKs from HPs. Following the protein name mapping and normalization, our system performs an additional step to classify the normalized protein names as ‘HUMAN PROTEIN KINASE’ or ‘HUMAN PROTEIN’ using our final specialized synonym dictionary for human genes/proteins and kinases discussed earlier. An illustrated example of ProNormz gene normalization methodology was shown in Fig. 3
                        .

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS@&#

Information on ProNormz synonym dictionary includes official symbol, gene ID, all possible synonyms and gene category (HP/HPK) (Supplementary file 1). In total, the dictionary holds 33,063 gene entries in which 32,546 entries were classified as HPs and 517 entries as HPKs (Table 3
                        ). The total number of synonyms for all gene entries sums up to 201,496 and reports a maximum of 50 synonyms for human protein SAMD11 (Gene ID: 148398), and 25 synonyms for Human protein kinase MAPK14 (Gene ID: 1432). A statistical data on the various dictionaries of BioCreAtIvE-II provides two important calculations to furnish the accuracy of the dictionaries: (i) average synonyms per identifier and (ii) average identifiers per synonym [29]. Based on this calculation, our synonyms dictionary reports an average of 6.03 synonyms for HP and 10.24 synonyms for HPK per identifier. The average identifiers per synonym approximates to ∼1.00 for HP and HPK, in turn confirms the semantically disambiguate entries in the synonyms dictionary.

We used BioCreAtIvE-II training and test data sets for the evaluation of our system as these are the only two major datasets available for human GN. The training dataset comprise of 281 abstracts and the test dataset comprise of 262 abstracts. The gold standard files of the training and test sets of BioCreAtIvE-II required for validation are available and downloaded from BioCreAtIVE website (http://biocreative.sourceforge.net/biocreative_2_dataset.html).

As ProNormz distinguishes HPKs from other HPs, evaluating our system on HPK normalization is also equally important. For this task, we derived a third corpus specific to HPKs from the BioCreAtIvE-II training (281 abstracts) and test (262 abstracts) datasets [18] which has HPK entries. Extraction of HPK abstracts was accomplished by mapping the gene ID of 518 human protein kinase entries in our synonyms dictionary (see Supplementary data 1) with gene IDs of each abstract. All the abstracts with matching gene entries were retrieved. This results in 59 abstracts (29 from training and 30 from test) with HPK information. The above corpus is named as ProNormz-HPK-GN corpus and available for download at (http://biominingbu.org/pronormz/corpus/).

Precision, recall and F-score are used as evaluation metrics. TP denotes numbers of true positives, FP denotes the number of false positives and FN denotes the numbers of false negatives. The F-score is the harmonic mean of recall and precision. The measures are defined as follows:
                           
                              
                                 Recall
                                 =
                                 TP
                                 /
                                 (
                                 TP
                                 +
                                 FN
                                 )
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              
                                 Precision
                                 =
                                 TP
                                 /
                                 (
                                 TP
                                 +
                                 FP
                                 )
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              
                                 F
                                 -score
                                 =
                                 2
                                 ∗
                                 Recall
                                 ∗
                                 Precision
                                 /
                                 (
                                 Recall
                                 +
                                 Precision
                                 )
                              
                           
                        
                     

@&#EVALUATION@&#

ProNormz is different from other GN systems in two different ways. First, it is specific system to normalize human proteins and also distinguishes human protein kinases. Second, ProNormz has two in built named entity taggers, NAGGNER [19] and BANNER [22] for GM task. So, it can process and normalize text with pre-tagged protein/gene mentions (GM text) as well as raw text.

Three different evaluations were conducted with ProNormz to check its overall efficiency.
                              
                                 (i)
                                 GM text, which has 100% GM tagged manually to check the efficiency of ProNormz in GN task alone.

Automated GM (NAGGNER) + GN in raw text with GM tagged using own tagger NAGGNER.

Automated GM (BANNER) + GN in raw with GM pre-tagged with BANNER to compare GM efficiency of BANNER vs. NAGGNER.

All the three evaluations were done on three datasets (BioCreative II training, BioCreative II test and ProNormz-HPK-GN) and the results were presented on Table 4
                           .

Evaluation on manually tagged GM text showed very good performance and achieved an F-score of 80.27% on BioCreAtIvE-II training set, a F-score of 83.33% on test set and a F-score of 90.91% on ProNormz-HPK-GN corpus. On the other hand, evaluation with raw text with GM tagged by our own tagger NAGGNER results in a F-score of 64.11% on BioCreAtIvE-II training set, a F-score of 68.66% on test set and a F-score of 72.04% on ProNormz-HPK-GN corpus. Applying GM tagged by BANNER results a F-score of 65.62% on BioCreAtIvE-II training set, a F-score of 69.52% on test set and a F-score of 74.54% on ProNormz-HPK-GN corpus (Supplementary data 2).

We employed another state-of-the-art NER tagger BANNER [22] for GM task instead of NAGGNER for comparison. The results indicate that both NAGGNER and BANNER almost produce similar results with BANNER slightly outperforms NAGGNER (Table 4). However, NAGGNER is our own tagger and on continuous improvement. So, we included both taggers NAGGNER and BANNER for GM task in our system.

As ProNormz has its own tagger for GM task, it can handle both raw text as well as text with pre-tagged gene/protein names. So, we performed two types of evaluation on ProNormz:
                              
                                 (i)
                                 When gold-standard GM were provided.

When GM were tagged using our own tagger NAGGNER.

When gold-standard GM were provided, our method achieved a F-score of 83.33% on the BioCreative II GN test set; when GM were tagged using NAGGNER, our method achieved a F-score of 68.66%. The latter is commonly known as the GN problem in the literature, which assumes that no GM are provided as part of the input. However, the other systems evaluated on BioCreative II GN task such as GENO [10], GNAT [11] and Moara [12] reported the F-score of 86.4%, 85.4% and 66.26% respectively with gold standard GM mentions in BioCreative II GN test set. However, none of the above systems mentioned about their overall F-score, when GM were tagged using their own tagger. Only GNAT [11] mentioned that their system misses 9.4% of the genes names in initial GM task and about 20% get lost during assignment of species, filtering of false positives and disambiguation. To our knowledge, we are the first one to report tagging results separately when gold-standard GM were provided and raw text when GM were tagged using in built tagger.

Further, ProNormz is different from other GN systems and has many additional modules and advantages. ProNormz is the first normalization system available to distinguish HPKs from other HPs in addition to gene normalization task. The HPK normalization was evaluated on ProNormz’s own ProNormz-HPK-GN corpus which contains 59 abstracts and all has HPK entries and achived an F-score of 90.91%. Further, ProNormz is developed exclusively for human proteins and protein kinases normalization. This is the unique advantage of ProNormz as in Homo sapiens, many biological processes are regulated by protein kinases and recognition and normalization of protein kinases will help for the extraction of the underlying information on its regulatory mechanism.

Next, ProNormz is first system which uses large number of string matching rules for normalization task. It uses in total 15 string matching rules in sequence which are broadly classified as dictionary rules and entity rules. The string matching using the dictionary rules and entity rules is as follows. First the nine dictionary rules will be applied in sequence to all dictionary terms as well as tagged entities in biomedical text. Next, the six entity rules will be applied in sequence only to tagged entities in the biomedical text. Finally, the matching of the dictionary text with entity text will be carried out.


                           Table 5
                            shows the results of applying string matching rules on both BioCreative-II GN datasets. The dictionary rules contribute an increase in F-score of about 14% and adding entity rules increases the F-score to additional 0.5% in both datasets.

All the 15 rules were incorporated after systematic investigation and applicability of each rule in protein normalization process. For example, many available systems recommend the elimination of word delimiter ‘dot’ in Rule 4. However, we observed that such elimination leads to incorrect match in the dictionary (e.g. Kv1.8). Consequently, we used only three word delimiter features (i.e. semicolon, colon and comma). We restricted the elimination of certain stop words ‘A’ and ‘I’ in Rule 7 as in few proteins these alphabets appearing as part of protein name (e.g. Pepsin A, Synapsin I). Similarly, the conversion of Arabic number to Roman numeral in Rule 6 is highly critical when ‘0’ exists as elimination of zero might change the protein mention itself (e.g. CD002 and CD2 are two different proteins). Accordingly, we modified Rule 6 to consider the preceding zero as a character rather than a number.

ProNormz’s disambiguation method is simple and straight forward and based on the frequency of occurrence of gene synonyms with other related synonyms in the same literature and similar to the one introduced by Koike and Takagi [28]. ProNormz’s specialized synonyms dictionary comprised of 201,496 synonyms corresponding to 33,063 genes. Among these 184,565 synonyms were unique and related to single gene. The remaining synonyms 16,931 correspond to more than one gene. Typically 10–12% of the matches were ambiguous. However few synonyms were found to be common with more than one gene (Supplementary file 3). For example, ‘seven transmembrane helix receptor’ was a common synonym for 40 genes and ‘VH’ was a common synonym for 36 genes. Further 4146 synonyms have two corresponding genes (Table 6
                           ).


                           Table 7
                            shows the results of applying disambiguation method on BioCreative GN datasets. The present disambiguation method contributes marginal increase of 0.5% only in F-score. However, as discussed above 16,931 synonyms correspond to more than one gene, we are planning to incorporate a hybrid disambiguation approach similar to one used in GNAT [11], which may improve the disambiguation scores.

Possibility of errors can be from both tagging process (GM) and normalization procedure (GN). We assessed the performance of our normalization procedure with the manually tagged GM text to understand the errors arising only from GN task alone. Analysis of all errors, false positive (FP) and false negative (FN) occurred on the three datasets is shown on Table 8
                        . Our analysis on unidentified proteins revealed the following major challenges: (i) some proteins appear with additional words in the biomedical literature like ‘kinase’ ‘pathway’, ‘receptor’, ‘complex’, ‘fragments’, ‘family’ and ‘elements’. Removal of these extra words ended up with many FN errors which were normalized earlier. For example, identification of ‘leucine zipper-bearing kinase’ (PMID-19808064) is not possible without ‘kinase’ keyword. Similarly, removal of ‘receptor’ keyword in ‘ah receptor’ (GeneID-196) creates ambiguity with ‘AH’ (GeneID-200879) protein. (ii) Appearance of the same synonym (e.g. AMPK) for more than one protein (e.g. PRKAB1, PRKAA1) creates ambiguity in deciding the actual match.

Many biomedical researchers still mention the genes/proteins in diverse ways, regardless of the gene naming standard provided by HGNC. Many such entries fall into one of the following categories: (iii) Interchanging the order of words in biomedical literature (e.g. ‘H2AX histone’ as ‘histone H2AX’ (PMID-21823349)). (iv) Ambiguity arising from abbreviations (e.g. an oncogene ‘ROS’ appears as abbreviation for ‘reactive oxygen species’ (PMID-21823349). (v) Mismatch due to wrong spelling in protein names (e.g. ‘bone morphogenetic protein’ as ‘bone morphogenic protein’ (PMID-21470302)). Our attempt to normalize these complex entries ended up with many FN errors. Thus, naming the genes/proteins based on HGNC nomenclature in the biomedical literature can overcome the above mentioned errors.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

We present an integrated approach ProNormz that is intended for use in human GN. ProNormz incorporates our own named entity tagger NAGGNER and other popular tagger BANNER for protein/gene name tagging. Hence, it accepts both raw text as well as GM tagged text as user input. Further, ProNormz is the first approach to distinguish HPKs from other HPs with subsequent GN. As a free web-based tool, we anticipate that this system will be valuable to the biomedical text mining community (i) by providing a benchmark level of performance for comparison with other innovative techniques, (ii) by providing a platform upon which extensible biomedical normalization tasks specific to other organisms such as mouse, drosophila, and yeast can be easily build and (iii) useful for information extraction experiments related to protein and protein kinase interactions to construct the pathways and networks. This is certainly an interesting direction of future work.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The research has received funding from the Department of Information Technology (DIT), Government of India, Grant No. DIT/R&D/BIO/15(22)/2008. SS and KR acknowledge the fellowships received from the grant.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2013.10.003.


                     
                        
                           Supplementary data 1
                           
                              Specialized synonyms dictionary for HP and HPK.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Supplementary data 2
                           
                              Evaluation of ProNormz Normalization algorithm on training and test set of BioCreAtIvE-II GN and ProNormz_HPK_GN corpus.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Supplementary data 3
                           
                              Dictionary of ambiguous synonyms and their corresponding official gene IDs.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

