@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Gene–disease association with literature based enrichment

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Knowledge-based functional enrichment for gene prioritization of high throughput data.


                        
                        
                           
                           Automatic ontology generation from MEDLINE.


                        
                        
                           
                           Novel and fully automatic literature-based discovery.


                        
                        
                           
                           Literature ontologies perform better than expert-derived ones.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Gene–disease association

Literature based discovery

High-throughput data analysis

Gene set enrichment analysis

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Motivation
                  Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) annotates gene microarray data with functional information from the biomedical literature to improve gene–disease association prediction. We hypothesize that supplementing GSEA with comprehensive gene function catalogs built automatically using information extracted from the scientific literature will significantly enhance GSEA prediction quality.
               
               
                  Methods
                  Gold standard gene sets for breast cancer (BrCa) and colorectal cancer (CRC) were derived from the literature. Two gene function catalogs (CMeSH and CUMLS) were automatically generated. 1. By using Entrez Gene to associate all recorded human genes with PubMed article IDs. 2. Using the genes mentioned in each PubMed article and associating each with the article’s MeSH terms (in CMeSH) and extracted UMLS concepts (in CUMLS). Microarray data from the Gene Expression Omnibus for BrCa and CRC was then annotated using CMeSH and CUMLS and for comparison, also with several pre-existing catalogs (C2, C4 and C5 from the Molecular Signatures Database). Ranking was done using, a standard GSEA implementation (GSEA-p). Gene function predictions for enriched array data were evaluated against the gold standard by measuring area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC).
               
               
                  Results
                  Comparison of ranking using the literature enrichment catalogs, the pre-existing catalogs as well as five randomly generated catalogs show the literature derived enrichment catalogs are more effective. The AUC for BrCa using the unenriched gene expression dataset was 0.43, increasing to 0.89 after gene set enrichment with CUMLS. The AUC for CRC using the unenriched gene expression dataset was 0.54, increasing to 0.9 after enrichment with CMeSH. C2 increased AUC (BrCa 0.76, CRC 0.71) but C4 and C5 performed poorly (between 0.35 and 0.5). The randomly generated catalogs also performed poorly, equivalent to random guessing.
               
               
                  Discussion
                  Gene set enrichment significantly improved prediction of gene–disease association. Selection of enrichment catalog had a substantial effect on prediction accuracy. The literature based catalogs performed better than the MSigDB catalogs, possibly because they are more recent. Catalogs generated automatically from the literature can be kept up to date.
               
               
                  Conclusion
                  Prediction of gene–disease association is a fundamental task in biomedical research. GSEA provides a promising method when using literature-based enrichment catalogs.
               
               
                  Availability
                  The literature based catalogs generated and used in this study are available from http://www2.chi.unsw.edu.au/literature-enrichment.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Association of genes with genetic diseases is complicated by the large number of genes involved, interactions between them and the quality of methods with which we measure gene activity. Several computational gene ranking methods (also called gene prioritization) use statistical or knowledge-based approaches to try to find those genes most likely to be associated with a given disease [1].

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) are a statistical gene prioritization method [2]. Millions of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are measured in healthy and control populations and are compared using odds-ratio to find SNPs that are much more common in the disease cohort compared to the population [3]. GWAS has been criticized for having an enormous number of statistical tests which create a high likelihood of false positives [4].

Indeed an established conjecture in bioinformatics is that microarray data is too noisy to reliably predict gene–disease associations [4]. Normally, microarray data are ranked by signal strength in disease and control tissues. Studies that compare multiple studies of the same disease find very little correlation between results [5]. Possible explanations include individual variation and temporal gene activation cycles, and the protocol used in tissue preparation [6].

One approach to adding in more signal to microarray data is to annotate these data sets with additional information about biological function. Functional annotation (e.g. using the Gene Ontology (GO) [7]) may provide insight into which pathways may be aberrantly activated or deactivated across the genes in an array. The scientific literature has also been proposed to support the manual process of microarray data annotation [8].

Subramanian et al. [9] implemented a statistical method called Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) which uses a catalog of genes developed using biological knowledge accumulated in public databases, grouped by functional labels. The catalog enriches the microarray data, to help identify highly-activated or deactivated gene sets rather than individual genes. The performance of GSEA largely depends on the enrichment catalog used. Several catalogs are available from the molecular signatures database (MSigDB) [10]. These catalogs are derived using a combination of expert knowledge and automatic mining of manually collected databases such as the GO.

GSEA has been shown to produce higher inter-study agreement than single gene comparisons, and to have produced promising results [9]. GSEA was developed to overcome the traditional strategies for gene expression analysis which may fail to detect biological processes that are distributed across a network of genes.

The development of enrichment catalogs, however, requires domain expertise. Frequent updates are required to keep up with latest discoveries as they are published. Our hypothesis in this study is that using GSEA with enrichment catalogs automatically derived from the literature would be able to accurately predict novel gene–disease associations.

@&#METHODS@&#

We established a gold standard of genes known to be associated with breast cancer (BrCa) and colorectal cancer (CRC).

The BrCa gold standard was taken from the census of genes maintained by the Sanger Institute [11] (www.sanger.ac.uk/genetics/CGP/Census; accessed Oct., 1, 2011). The census is regularly maintained and genes are included when ample evidence emerges of their association with a particular cancer type. Genes associated with breast cancer have the word ‘breast’ in their Tumour Types (Somatic Mutations), Tumour Types (Germline Mutations) or Cancer Syndrome fields. This yielded 19 genes (Table 1
                        ).

The CRC gold standard was taken from a recent review of CRC biomarkers [12]. The review lists 30 biomarker genes and all were used in the gold standard (Table 1).

The Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO [13]) provided mRNA microarray expression datasets for each cancer. The BrCa primary rank was derived from GEO accession GSE9574 [14], and the CRC one from GEO accession GSE10950 [15]. Both datasets are case-controlled, gene expression data sets with normal tissue controls.

We generated two literature-based enrichment catalogs, called CMeSH and CUMLS (Fig. 1
                        ). Catalog generation starts with a list of 42,142homo sapiens gene entries in the Entrez Gene database (accessed August 31, 2011). From each gene entry, the associated PubMed identifiers (PMID) were retrieved using the eFetch utility [16]. MEDLINE entries for each PMID from the 2011 PubMed baseline (1/1/2011) were extracted. MeSH terms [17] from each MEDLINE entry were collected in the CMeSH catalog. UMLS [18] concepts from each entry were extracted using MetaMap [19,20] and collected in the CUMLS catalog. The result is that each extracted concept is associated with the genes linked to documents that contained that concept. PMIDs for which no MEDLINE entry was found or that whose parsing took more than 2h were excluded.

Three MSigDB [10] enrichment catalogs C2, C4 and C5 often used in cancer enrichment analysis, served to compare gene–disease association prediction accuracy.

Each catalog (see Table 2
                        ) has a different number of gene sets and number of genes in each set. In particular, the literature based catalogs have more gene sets and generally less genes in each set.

As an additional control, we have also created random catalogs (RMeSH, RUMLS, R2, R4 and R5). Each random catalog is paired with an enrichment catalog (i.e. RMeSH with CMeSH, RUMLS with CUMLS, R2 with C2, R4 with C4 and R5 with C5) and has the same number of gene sets and same distribution of genes in each gene set as its paired enrichment catalog. In random catalogs, genes are randomly assigned to gene sets.

GSEA-p is a freely available implementation of GSEA. GSEA-p first produces a list L0 of all the genes in the microarray data, ranked by the difference in their expression levels between the two groups. Genes that are up-regulated in the disease group are ranked above down-regulated ones, based upon the measured expression level in the microarray.

GSEA-p then assigns each gene set an Enrichment Score (ES) according to the expression levels of the genes assigned to it in the enrichment catalog. The ES is the weighted sum of the number of genes in the gene set that are up-regulated in L0. The weight depends on the position of the gene in L0 so that genes that are more expressed in the disease group are given a higher score, and those more represented in the control group are given a negative score.

The Normalized Enrichment Score is the scaled according to the size of the set such that a NES value of 0 indicates no difference in expression level, negative numbers indicate reduced expression levels and positive numbers indicate increased expression levels in the disease group compared to the control. Gene set ranking is done according to the absolute value of the NES (see Fig. 2
                        ). Each gene is assigned a score that is equivalent to the NES of its highest-ranked gene set.

@&#EVALUATION@&#

The evaluation is designed to quantify the quality of the rankings produced by GSEA using different enrichment catalogs. As the gold standards are inevitably incomplete given current knowledge of CRC- and BrCa-associated genes, the evaluation can only test whether known associations are ranked highly.

Performance was determined by measuring the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) achieved by each catalog on each cancer dataset and with a ranking (L0) derived directly from the microarray data. AUC is normally used to measure the performance of a classifier without using a pre-determined classification threshold. Here it is used to compare the ranked gene list against the gold standard. The AUC is calculated by varying a prediction threshold along the entire range of gene scores and counting the predictions that include gold standard genes. A high AUC (close to 1) indicates that gold standard genes are ranked close to the top of the list. A completely random gene rank should produce an AUC of 0.5.

The evaluation consisted of ranking genes from the same disease microarray experiment using each of the 5 enrichment and 5 random enrichment catalogs, and calculating the AUC for each experiment (Fig. 3
                        ). The experiments were repeated twice: once using the BrCa microarray and gold standard, and once using the CRC ones.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The receiver operating characteristics plots for all 20 enrichment experiments are shown in Fig. 4
                     .

AUC for each of the 10 enrichment experiments are compared to L0 (unenriched) gene ranks in Fig. 5
                     . L0, C4 and C5 produced rankings not substantially better or worse than random guessing. The literature based catalogs and C2 produced substantially better results with the literature based catalogs being clearly superior to C2.

Literature based enrichment catalogs significantly improved the prediction of disease-associated genes from the microarray data compared to the enrichment-free L0 rank. CMeSH increased the AUC from 0.43 to 0.87 on the BrCa dataset, and from 0.54 to 0.9 on the CRC dataset. CUMLS increased the AUC from 0.43 to 0.89 on the BrCa dataset, and from 0.54 to 0.89 on the CRC dataset. The manually collected C2 was able to produce better rankings on the BrCa dataset (AUC=0.76) as well as a significant improvement on the CRC dataset (AUC=0.71) but not as significant as the literature based datasets. The manually collected C4 and C5 catalogs produced modest improvements on the BrCa dataset (from 0.43 to 0.48 and 0.47 respectively) and worse predictions on the CRC dataset (from 0.54 to 0.35 and 0.5 respectively).

The Spearman rank correlation between the number of gene sets and the average AUC score from both diseases, is 1 (Fig. 6
                     ). The Pearson correlation is 0.62.

Results from repeating the experiments using the random catalogs are shown in Fig. 7
                     . All random enrichment catalogs, irrespective of number of gene sets, produced results similar to the expected AUC for random guessing (AUC=0.5) and did not offer a substantial improvement over L0.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The L0 ranks reported here reproduced previous results for unenriched datasets [9]. Three of the five enrichment catalogs have produced rankings that predicted gene–disease associations subestantially better than L0. However, we observed substantial differences among the rankings produced using the various enrichment catalogs. In particular, the automatically generated literature based catalogs performed better than the manually collected MSigDB catalogs.

We have shown that having a large number of gene sets is not by itself an explanation for the improved predictions. Similarly sized catalogs with random gene sets did not improve the predictions. We propose three reasons literature based catalogs may achieve higher AUC scores:
                        
                           1.
                           Number of gene sets – automatically-generated literature-based enrichment catalogs have a larger number of gene sets. Creating such a number of gene sets manually is onerous and unfeasible. The correlations between number of genes and AUC (Fig. 6) is a further indication that the number of gene sets may be important.

Inclusion Lag – the literature based catalogs have been generated using the 1/1/2011 MEDLINE index while Version 3 of MSigDB was released only three months prior in September 2010 [10]. However, the difference in knowledge reflected in them is larger partly because MSigDB catalogs are affected by a lag due to the time it takes to integrate discoveries into molecular ontologies. For example, the more recently discovered genes miR143 (functionally characterized in 2004 [21]) and miR145 (functionally characterized in 2007 [22]), are included in CUMLS and CMeSH but not in C2, C4 or C5 (Table 1).

Number of genes (gene coverage) – as suggested by Table 2, the number of genes included in the literature based catalogs is 36% greater than the genes in next largest catalog (C2). Catalogs that don’t include all the gold standard genes (Table 1) are a priori disadvantaged compared to ones that do.

The present study is confined to only two diseases (CRC and BrCa), although they do represent major disease groups. This is a limitation of the study as the disease-specific gold standard consisted of a relatively small pool of 49 known genes. Further work is needed to test this approach on other cancers, genetic disorders and in particular, on diseases with a smaller literature base.

Other concept extraction methods than those reported here may yet produce more suitable ontologies, and are worth exploring. An earlier ontology generated automatically from the literature is called PubGene [23]. PubGene uses gene and protein names as search queries for PubMed and associate terms extracted from the returned papers with the genes. Other bioinformatic named entity recognition algorithms (e.g. ABNER [24]) are designed to specifically extract gene names and product mentions from text. Further testing is needed to see if constraining the extraction to such terms improves overall performance of the system.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The association of genes with disease is a fundamental task in biomedical research. Microarrays represent a potentially important source of data for this task because of their relatively low cost. However, microarray data is noisy and associations predicted with it are not reliable.

We have used gene set enrichment analysis to enhance microarray data to support gene–disease association prediction. Our results show that literature-based enrichment catalogs rediscover gene–disease associations reliably. Therefore, our method may provide an economical and scalable approach to use in the gene–disease association bioinformatics pipeline.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

