@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Comparison of geographic methods to assess travel patterns of persons diagnosed with HIV in Philadelphia: How close is close enough?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We compared four methods of analyzing travel patterns.


                        
                        
                           
                           We utilized new analytic tools to measure transit ‘costs’.


                        
                        
                           
                           Significant differences were observed in both distance and cost measures.


                        
                        
                           
                           Travel costs varied significantly by geographic area.


                        
                        
                           
                           Transit network data add an important metric in urban areas.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

HIV

Geographic Information Systems (GISs)

Network analysis

Travel patterns

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Travel distance to medical care has been assessed using a variety of geographic methods. Network analyses are less common, but may generate more accurate estimates of travel costs. We compared straight-line distances and driving distance, as well as average drive time and travel time on a public transit network for 1789 persons diagnosed with HIV between 2010 and 2012 to identify differences overall, and by distinct geographic areas of Philadelphia. Paired t-tests were used to assess differences across methods, and analysis of variance was used to assess between-group differences. Driving distances were significantly longer than straight-line distances (p
                     <0.001) and transit times were significantly longer than driving times (p
                     <0.001). Persons living in the northeast section of the city traveled greater distances, and at greater cost of time and effort, than persons in all other areas of the city (p
                     <0.001). Persons living in the northwest section of the city traveled farther and longer than all other areas except the northeast (p
                     <0.0001). Network analyses that include public transit will likely produce a more realistic estimate of the travel costs, and may improve models to predict medical care outcomes.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Analyzing spatial components in epidemiologic phenomena is becoming routine, in part, due to the availability of Geographic Information System (GIS) software, and the increasingly critical need to target limited resources where they can be most effective [1–4]. Spatial analyses have been used to identify and monitor emerging foci of disease [5], as well as to observe and track travel patterns within various jurisdictional boundaries [6–10]. Pattern analyses have been used to compare subgroups within a larger cohort [11–14], and have proven capable of delineating geographically precise points of targeted intervention [1,11,15,16,9,17]. Proximity analyses have been used to identify underserved communities, and identified utilization trends that do not always conform to resource planning assumptions [11,18–21].

Travel distance to medical care, in particular, has been challenging to predict, and findings are often difficult to interpret [19,22–26]. Travel distance to medical care has been evaluated as a straight-line Euclidean value, typically from point A to point B, but also from one polygon centroid to another, using boundaries such as zip codes or census tracts [8,27,28]. Calculating and analyzing travel distances using network datasets are less common [19,25,22], and require resources and expertise not always available to local public health agencies. However, understanding how and where persons choose to access services is crucial for targeting limited resources where they will have the greatest impact. Distance to HIV medical care may also be a factor in several critical components of the HIV care continuum [29,30]; specifically linkage to care and retention in care.

Quantifying access to healthcare at the local level is complicated by logistic, as well as operational issues, and standardization of methodology is often obfuscated by local variations and available resources. Studies of travel patterns have shown that access to services cannot be entirely separated from travel costs [31], and models describing activity-based travel, rather than more simplistic ‘from-to’, analyses have determined that travel costs are more likely a function of accumulation [32], with persons choosing to access medical care in locations relative to other services. The process of accumulation may involve accessing multiple services that are located in the same general area, or accessing services that are near a location other than primary residence, such as place of employment or friends and family. Network analyses that ignore public transit may underestimate the actual burden of travel to medical care. Philadelphia, an urban center of more than 100 distinct neighborhoods and approximately 1.5 million people [33], bordered by more affluent counties to the north and west, and a major river border to the east, is burdened with one of the highest rates of poverty among all major cities in the United States [34]. The city is served by a sprawling public transit system, which reported a ridership of over 337 million trips in fiscal year 2013 [35]. Due to the complexity of the medical care system in Philadelphia, the size of the city, and the socioeconomic status of the majority of persons living with HIV/AIDS, no analysis of travel patterns would be complete without inclusion of public transit. Although some studies have concluded that straight-line distances are a close enough approximation of actual distance [24,28], the question remains whether or not distance measures alone capture a meaningful metric for the time and effort associated with travel in a complex transportation system. The analyses presented here compare distances and total travel costs (i.e. time required to travel between two points) for a cohort of persons accessing the health care system, and demonstrate the utility of including transit network analyses to more accurately assess travel costs in an urban environment.

Case data for analyses reported here were extracted from the City of Philadelphia’s Enhanced HIV/AIDS Reporting System (eHARS), a database containing information on all HIV cases reported to the Philadelphia Department of Public Health (PDPH) AIDS Activities Coordinating Office (AACO) Surveillance Unit. Philadelphia has mandatory name-based case reporting of all new HIV infections in the City. The eHARS database contains routine surveillance data collected through medical record abstraction including identifiers such as name, address, date of birth and address at diagnosis; as well as laboratory, pharmacy and health service utilization information. Death data from the Pennsylvania Bureau of Vital Statistics, Social Security Death Master Index, and the National Death Index are routinely matched to eHARS data to identify deceased persons and document cause of death when available. The eHARS data are routinely monitored to identify duplicate cases and undergo quality control and verification to ensure that abstracted data are correctly assigned to unique case records.

All HIV cases diagnosed between January 1, 2010 and December 31, 2012 were initially considered for this analysis. Because this study relies on accurate geographic location data, cases were excluded if they had invalid or insufficient address data. We used the address at diagnosis to assign spatial location. Invalid or insufficient address data included post office boxes, missing street address, or address segments not found by the address locator. Persons with prison addresses at time of diagnosis, and any other cases that were diagnosed in prison or jail, were also excluded because the address does not reflect a residential location and would not serve as a starting point for a planned trip to access care or services. Facilities diagnosing or providing care for persons with HIV were assigned a spatial location based on street address. The list of facilities was derived from the sample of persons in the cohort, and includes counseling and testing sites, city-funded public health centers, outpatient physician’s offices, as well as HIV clinics and hospitals. There were 185 distinct facilities identified for this analysis. Correction facilities and other custodial settings were not included as they are not considered a location of care or diagnosis based on patient choice.

Euclidean distances were calculated as the difference between point p (residence) and point q (HIV diagnosis facility) where:
                           
                              
                                 d
                                 (
                                 p
                                 ,
                                 q
                                 )
                                 =
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             (
                                             
                                                
                                                   p
                                                
                                                
                                                   1
                                                
                                             
                                             -
                                             
                                                
                                                   q
                                                
                                                
                                                   1
                                                
                                             
                                             )
                                          
                                          
                                             2
                                          
                                       
                                       +
                                       
                                          
                                             (
                                             
                                                
                                                   p
                                                
                                                
                                                   2
                                                
                                             
                                             -
                                             
                                                
                                                   q
                                                
                                                
                                                   2
                                                
                                             
                                             )
                                          
                                          
                                             2
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     

Distances were initially calculated in feet (the distance unit of the map used to assign spatial coordinates) and converted to miles for data analysis.

The ability to model and analyze travel patterns along a public transit network requires access to data sources that combine geographic and systemic data in a usable format. The complexity of public transit data varies by jurisdiction, but it generally includes multiple routes along multiple modes of transport, with various points of interchange. The General Transit Feed Specification (GTFS), also commonly referred to as Google Transit Feed Specification, creates a standardized format for public transportation information, including schedules, stop locations, trip data and record linkage for all transit routes within a given system. Files generated to conform to the GTFS standard have required variable and formats which allow developers to create applications which can consume data from multiple sources. The Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority (SEPTA) releases GTFS data for use in non-commercial applications (http://www2.septa.org/developer/index.php). These data were incorporated into a geo-database for use with GIS software.

The Network Analyst extension of ArcGIS 10.1 allows users to create and/or utilize network datasets to analyze travel patterns between two or more locations. Unlike straight-line distance measures that can be calculated from two or more spatial locations, network analyses include features of the natural and built environment that affect actual travel distance. We used street-level spatial data created and maintained by the City’s Department of Technology to construct a network dataset capable of analyzing basic travel patterns. The dataset uses information about street connections, one-way traffic and environmental features such as rivers and parks, to calculate the minimum travel distance between two or more locations. Based on data from supplemental surveillance projects which indicate that the majority of HIV patients in Philadelphia utilize public transportation, we also considered travel patterns associated with mass transit. Using tools developed by ESRI [36] and GTFS data supplied by SEPTA, we created a transit network geo-database that contains information for all transit lines (buses, trolleys, subway and elevated train) in the SEPTA network.

In the Network Analyst extension of ArcGIS 10.1, a route analysis can be used to find the shortest path between two or more stops. The analysis settings depend on the phenomenon under investigation and the desired outcome. Network analyses can be used to find the closest facility (or the n closest facilities) to a given location, the shortest route between two points, or the shortest distance avoiding specific types of roads (e.g. highways or congested urban streets). The outcomes and restrictions are limited only by the data available to the analysis solver.

The transit cost data presented here are a product of the transit evaluator developed for use with GTFS data and made available by ESRI. The total transit ‘cost’ includes the amount of time required to travel between locations using available public transit, including walking distances to and from transit stops. The transit cost evaluator attributes may include any number of parameters depending on the complexity desired, however the basic elements for this analysis include pedestrian travel to the transit stop, the time required to board the transit vehicle, travel time on the transit line, the time required to exit the vehicle, and any additional pedestrian time to reach the desired location. The route may include any number of transfers between transit routes, along with the associated wait time. Pedestrian travel was calculated using an average walking speed of 3mph. No boarding time or exiting time was included. Travel time on the transit line was calculated using the Transit Evaluator tool developed by ESRI, which calculates the shortest trip, in minutes, including wait time and travel time based on the start time, if specified. We used the start time of 8AM on a Monday morning for the calculations presented here. This time was chosen as a default to maximize the utility of the transit system and minimize wait times. The total transit cost was calculated as the sum of these elements.

The travel distance and driving time data represent a network analysis using location and city street-level data, including accessibility, traffic patterns, and directional impedances to calculate the driving distance in miles. The distance value is calculated by the sum of the lengths of each network edge traveled between stops. No time penalty is assessed for entering or exiting the vehicle, and speed limits on individual streets are not included in the calculation. However, available data suggest an average driving speed of 20.1mph for Philadelphia [37]. This figure is based on data collected by Google Maps that was used to assess and compare average driving speeds in several different urban areas, and was used here to convert distances (in miles) to an estimated drive time (in minutes). Maps of the network datasets, along with a reference map of geographic areas of Philadelphia, are presented in Fig. 1
                        .

Analysis of variance was used to assess differences in average travel distance from address of residence to HIV medical care/diagnosis site. Euclidean distance and travel distances were compared by area of the city to assess significantly different overall travel costs. Mean differences were evaluated for statistical significance using the Tukey method. Pairwise differences between the individual travel distance measures were assessed using paired t-tests, both for overall differences and difference by geographic area. All statistical analyses were conducted using SAS 9.2.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The initial analysis cohort included 2115 persons diagnosed with HIV between 2010 and 2012. Cases with invalid or insufficient address data (n
                     =118), and cases reported with correctional facility address at diagnosis (n
                     =208) were excluded from the analysis. The final sample size for the analysis was 1789. The average Euclidean distance between residence and diagnosis site for all cases was 2.9miles (IQR=[1.1–4.1]). Cases residing in the Northeast section of the city recorded significantly longer straight-line distance to medical care site than cases residing in all other areas of the city. Not surprisingly, the average driving distance was slightly longer at 3.5miles (IQR=[1.4–4.8]), and cases residing in Northeast Philadelphia recorded significantly longer distances on average than cases from other geographic areas. The differences between average distances by geographic area are presented in Table 1
                     . Based on paired t-tests, driving distances were an average of .5miles longer than straight-line distances (t
                     =60.92, p
                     <0.0001).

The average drive time for all cases was 10.3min (IQR=[4.3–14.2]). Cases in the Northeast had significantly longer drive times on average than cases in all other areas of the city. The mean travel time using public transport was much longer at 69.2min (IQR=[28.7–95.5]), and persons in the Northeast had significantly longer transit times than persons in other areas. The differences between average travel times by geographic area are presented in Table 2
                     . Based on paired t-tests, transit times were an average of 58.9min longer than drive times (t
                     =54.9; p
                     <0.0001).

In all four distance and travel time measures, significant differences between geographic areas were detected by analysis of variance procedures. Boxplots of the mean values of the four different measures are presented in Fig. 2
                     . Regardless of the measurement method, cases residing in the Northeast section of Philadelphia had significantly higher values than cases residing in other areas. Cases in Center City had significantly lower values than all other areas except South Philadelphia.

In comparing driving distance to Euclidean distance, cases in the Northeast section of the city reported the highest average difference (0.9miles; t
                     =22.48, p
                     <.0001) between the two measures using the paired samples t-test. Average differences between the two measures for other areas of the city ranged from a low of .28miles in Center City to .54miles in the Northwest.

When comparing transit time to driving time, cases from the Northeast had the highest mean difference (118.8min; t
                     =21.06, p
                     <.0001) in pairwise comparisons. Persons from the Northwest section of the city had the second highest mean difference (71.3min; t
                     =22.87, p
                     <.0001), followed by Southwest (56.2min), North (48.4min), South (39.7min), and Center City (23.2min).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Travel distances can be assessed using several different methods, and although some agreement can be found among the overall results, significant differences were observed. Straight-line distances and polygon centroids may suffice to describe general differences [28], however these results demonstrate that more nuanced analyses reveal differences that may be influenced by environmental and systemic factors. Fewer public transit options in some sections of the city may result in longer wait times, more frequent transfers, or increased pedestrian travel. Although the average difference between straight-line distance and driving distance does not appear to present a major burden of effort, the time difference between driving and public transit is, on average, nearly one hour. This suggests that reliance on public transport represents a significant burden of time compared to driving, and additional analyses that include these transit costs may help explain or predict missed appointments, lapses in routine care, or viral suppression.

The analyses presented here indicate that persons living in the Northeast section of the city appear to travel greater distances for HIV medical care than persons in all other areas of the city. In addition, although the difference between driving time and transit time were significantly different regardless of geographic area, the observed difference was more severe for persons living in the Northeast and Northwest sections of the city. Public transit in Philadelphia is comprised of two main subway/elevated train lines, a complex array of buses and trolleys, and a number of regional rail lines. Persons living near one of the two subway lines may have greater access to transit that is not impeded by rush hour traffic or slow driving speeds. These two lines run north and south through North, Center City and South Philadelphia, and east and west through Southwest and Center City. Persons residing in the Northwest and Northeast sections of the city are more likely to rely on bus service, which is subject to traffic delays, and regional rail service, which is more expensive and runs less often. These findings suggest that the burden of travel time is greater for persons living in the Northwest and Northeast.

Philadelphia has a high concentration of medical providers per capita, and includes a number of large teaching hospitals that provide medical care at little to no cost. Many of these facilities are located in the center of the city. Although providers that diagnose and treat HIV are located in all geographic areas of the city, and ten district health centers that mainly serve the poor and uninsured are also geographically dispersed, factors other than proximity likely impact where persons choose to access care. The city also includes a substantial MSM population, along with a variety of community-based organizations that arose to meet the needs of a community disproportionally affected by the HIV epidemic. Most of these services are also located in Center City, providing persons residing in Center City and the immediately surrounding areas with more options and easier access. The location of specific HIV clinics, especially those that offer an array of ancillary services such as case management and medication adherence programs, may draw patients from other areas of the city despite the need to travel greater distances. Previous analyses have shown that nearly half of all persons in care for HIV in Philadelphia travel more than three miles beyond the nearest care provider [22], indicating that choices regarding where to access care are not based solely on proximity, but are likely influenced by multiple factors.

Some research has suggested that stigma related to HIV may influence decisions to access care outside of a person’s local neighborhood [23,38,39]. Other factors such patient mobility (e.g. relocating for personal/professional reasons), or referrals by friends and associates who have more information about navigating the healthcare system may also account for the willingness to travel greater distances. Persons may also access healthcare in close proximity to where they work or spend most of their time, rather than where they live. That said, none of these factors seem sufficient to account for a substantial amount of the variance in this sample.

@&#LIMITATIONS@&#

Modeling travel preferences is complex, and no attempt was made in this analysis to account for individual preferences for specific modes of travel (e.g. subway vs. buses) or to predict which persons were more likely to utilize public transportation. The purposes of this analysis were to assess the differences between modes of travel and demonstrate the utility and capability of public transit network analyses.

Speed limit data for individual streets was not included in the spatial data used to create the driving distance network dataset. Although speed limits vary within the city, Philadelphia is a densely populated urban environment, and it seems doubtful that a significant portion of the difference observed is attributable to the estimated driving speed. Additionally, driving times do not include the time required to find available parking and complete travel to the destination. However, this is one of the strengths of the transit cost calculation, as the travel time to the mode of transit and on to the destination after disembarkation is included.

These observed differences between driving time and transit time demonstrate that network analyses which do not include public transit may vastly understate the true ‘cost’ of travel, especially for persons with less public transit options. Although information regarding mode of transit is not included in surveillance data, supplemental sources indicate that a majority of patients use public transit (unpublished data), and several large HIV clinics in the city provide transit tokens to improve patient compliance with treatment and services. Demographic data from Ryan White-funded providers also suggest that a large proportion of persons living with HIV/AIDS in Philadelphia live at or below the poverty level, and thus rely on public transit for most, if not all transportation needs. Because of these factors, along with the importance of public transit in the urban environment, transit network analyses may add a critical component to assess access to care, and to improve models that attempt to predict linkage and retention in care. These data provide the first realistic estimate of the time and effort required to access the healthcare system using public transport in Philadelphia. Additional analyses are needed to evaluate the accessibility of HIV prevention and care services in relation to public transit. In order to address some of the limitations described above, the ability to model individual preferences for mode of transit (e.g. subway vs. bus) is also warranted.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The authors would like to acknowledge Melinda Morang and Patrick Stevens of the ESRI Network Analyst team for their work in developing the ‘Add GTFS to a Network Dataset’ toolbox.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

