@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#WebBioBank: A new platform for integrating clinical forms and shared neurosignal analyses to support multi-centre studies in Parkinson’s Disease

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           WebBioBank is a new system for research data collection and biosignal analysis.


                        
                        
                           
                           It can be used in multicenter studies to integrate clinical and physiological data.


                        
                        
                           
                           It ensures homogeneous and anonymous data collection through sharable forms.


                        
                        
                           
                           It allows the creation of configurable analysis chains for data analysis.


                        
                        
                           
                           In a pilot multicenter DBS study it was useful to support integrated research.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Web-based platform

Database

Multi-centre clinical study

Operative unit

Parkinson’s Diseases

Signal processing

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Background
                  The web-based systems available for multi-centre clinical trials do not combine clinical data collection (Electronic Health Records, EHRs) with signal processing storage and analysis tools. However, in pathophysiological research, the correlation between clinical data and signals is crucial for uncovering the underlying neurophysiological mechanisms. A specific example is the investigation of the mechanisms of action for Deep Brain Stimulation (DBS) used for Parkinson’s Disease (PD); the neurosignals recorded from the DBS target structure and clinical data must be investigated.
               
               
                  Objective
                  The aim of this study is the development and testing of a new system dedicated to a multi-centre study of Parkinson’s Disease that integrates biosignal analysis tools and data collection in a shared and secure environment.
               
               
                  Methods
                  We designed a web-based platform (WebBioBank) for managing the clinical data and biosignals of PD patients treated with DBS in different clinical research centres. Homogeneous data collection was ensured in the different centres (Operative Units, OUs). The anonymity of the data was preserved using unique identifiers associated with patients (ID BAC). The patients’ personal details and their equivalent ID BACs were archived inside the corresponding OU and were not uploaded on the web-based platform; data sharing occurred using the ID BACs. The system allowed researchers to upload different signal processing functions (in a .dll extension) onto the web-based platform and to combine them to define dedicated algorithms.
               
               
                  Results
                  Four clinical research centres used WebBioBank for 1year. The clinical data from 58 patients treated using DBS were managed, and 186 biosignals were uploaded and classified into 4 categories based on the treatment (pharmacological and/or electrical). The user’s satisfaction mean score exceeded the satisfaction threshold.
               
               
                  Conclusions
                  WebBioBank enabled anonymous data sharing for a clinical study conducted at multiple centres and demonstrated the capabilities of the signal processing chain configuration as well as its effectiveness and efficiency for integrating the neurophysiological results with clinical data in multi-centre studies, which will allow the future collection of homogeneous data in large cohorts of patients.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Over the last decade, web-based systems for data collection have demonstrated their efficacy at supporting and optimising the management of large-scale multi-centre clinical trials [1–10]. These systems defined and shared dedicated clinical forms reflecting the aims of the data collection during the clinical trial, which were to collecting multi-centric data. During and after the trial, data analysis is usually performed in single specialised centres, and only raw data databases remain available for further investigations. Moreover, especially in pathophysiological research, the correlation between clinical data and neurophysiological results is crucial to uncover underlying mechanisms.

The investigation of the mechanism of action for using Deep Brain Stimulation (DBS) against movement disorders, especially Parkinson’s Disease (PD), is an example. In fact, while DBS is an established surgical treatment for PD that has recently been introduced to treat other neurological and neuropsychiatric diseases, its mechanisms of action remain unclear [11–17]. DBS treatment consists of delivering a high frequency electrical stimulus (100–180Hz, 60–120 us pulse width, 1–5V amplitude) through multi-electrode intracranial catheters to the deep brain structures targeted based on the pathology treated. The target for PD is the subthalamic nucleus (STN). Stereotactical neurosurgical procedures allow the precise placement of DBS electrodes in the target structure. Intraoperative monitoring procedures, including biopotential recordings with high impedance electrodes and functional stimulation, help to position the electrodes. In a second surgical procedure, the two electrodes are connected with an electrical pulse generator placed under the skin near the right shoulder.

The study of the DBS mechanism of action was boosted by the observation that DBS electrodes, once placed at the target, enabled the pathophysiology of the target structure to be studied directly in vivo, particularly the STN and the other basal ganglia structures for PD [18,19]. Deep electroencephalographic signals, which are known as Local Field Potentials (LFPs) were recorded and analysed, providing new insights into the basal ganglia motor and non-motor functions in PD and other movement disorders as well as the mechanism of action for DBS [19]. However, until recently, the research on LFP recorded during DBS was carried out in individual research centres using heterogeneous experimental protocols, recording settings, and analysis algorithms. This fragmented situation produced results that although significant, must still be compared and examined together to obtain any relevant and shared advances. Investigating the mechanisms of action for DBS would therefore require a coordinated effort between all of the DBS centres. However because the study of LFP recorded in DBS patients is an informative tool used to reveal the pathophysiology of PD, multi-centre clinical trials should combine the data from clinical assessments with that from the neurophysiological recordings.

Currently, different web-based systems are aimed at facilitating multi-centre data sharing for clinical trials or combining clinical data collection with data management and analytics workflow, integrating heterogeneous data and managing external semantic interoperability, particularly in the genomic/biological fields [1–10,20–24].

For example, BTM-Research™ by Daedalus Software [20] allows the collection, storage, annotation, and tracking of biosamples across research centres, which allows the sharing of the collection and research workflows. This system is devoted to biological and genomic data, but it does not allow online signal processing using shared algorithms or analysis chains. REDCap [22] is a secure web system for data capture and export in research studies, but does not include the possibility to create personal analysis functions.

The caBIG experience (now retired by the US National Institutes of Health, NIH, https://cabig.nci.nih.gov/) provided an open-source community for cancer data sharing and management, but it did not provide any tools to create clinical report forms (CRFs) for multicentre clinical trials [6]. Similarly, the “informatics for integrating biology and the bedside” project (i2b2) [7–9] was funded to integrate clinical and research data. To do so, the i2b2 “hive” provides a set of software modules called “cells” based on a common messaging protocol with interactions through web services and XML messages. The cells are developed by single researchers before integration into the hive, providing a scalable approach for the genomic research area. All of the software services are developed to contribute to the Clinical Research Chart (CRC). The CRC is fed by messages in form of an XML schema containing a header for the definition of basic communication information as well as a body with patient sets, including their phenotypic and genotypic data. However i2b2 does not support the creation of CRF for clinical trials. Other examples such as LORIS [5], OnWARD [10] are web-based tools for multicentre shared data management and scientific collaboration that are also ontology-based [10] but do not allow the management of signals and signal processing algorithms/chains. The SciPort system [25] is a web-based platform for scientific collaboration, integrating and sharing data from distributed institutions. It provides an XML based general approach to model complex scientific data by representing them as XML documents and allows each institution to manage documents independently on a Local SciPort Server.

However, none of the available examples integrated the neurophysiological signals with the collection of clinical data in a framework that provided a web-based multicentre-shared environment while allowing for a standard-based interoperable electronic health record EHR and the direct creation of CRFs for supporting multicentre clinical trials.

In this study, we describe the design, implementation and preliminary use of a new platform: WebBioBank. This platform has been developed specifically for combining the management and sharing of DBS patient EHR and biosignals (LFPs), including shared algorithms for DBS biosignal analysis, that were recorded during definable protocols as well as allowing for the possibility to create CRFs. The system may be accessed through a standard web browser, allowing users to perform various tasks for data management in an anonymous mode according to shared protocols. This system represents a new tool for the real time interaction between researchers and clinicians in different DBS centres. The clinicians will be able to add and manage information regarding a patient’s history, neurological signs and symptoms, therapy, neuropsychological test and scales, DBS surgery and follow-up. The researchers will provide shared advanced algorithms for LFP signal processing that can be combined in analysis chains, ensuring that the extraction of the LFP features is the same in all of the centres involved in the research study. The available analysis algorithms can be applied to the raw data to extract significant LFP features that can be correlated to the patient’s clinical state, as reported in the literature. Moreover, the system is open to any additional algorithm uploaded by researchers and can share it among centres. The system also ensures the anonymity of the clinical data/biosignal collection, protecting the privacy of the patients during large studies by other clinical centres. Since WebBioBank integrates the functionalities of traditional EHRs with those of research support systems, such as clinical research management systems (CRMS), it implements a “research” EHR (rEHR).

In the first part of the paper, we describe the technical aspects of this new system (requirements, architecture, prototype, data type and processing, UML use case and activity diagrams). In the second part of the paper, we present the results from the first implementation of the prototype in a DBS multi-centre study, showing its capability in a research field in which these technical aspects are highly required. Finally, we highlight the limitations and innovative aspects of the new system from its first implementation while comparing it to an existing system.

@&#MATERIAL AND METHODS@&#

WebBioBank was designed to meet the following requirements:
                           
                              1.
                              A unique common template for data and biosignal collection shared between different centres will guarantee the availability of comparable data to clinicians, researchers, and biosignal analysis specialists, while signals and data should be locatable, supporting a faster and more cost-effective protocol.

The integrated management of clinical data and biosignals will help to study the correlations between the clinical data and neurophysiological results to uncover the underlying mechanisms.

Uploading the mathematical and statistical shared algorithms that can be combined on-line to create signal processing chains specifically dedicated to LFP analysis will provide a set of tools to biosignal analysis experts ensuring that biosignal analysis is performed uniformly between centres and that the neurophysiological results are comparable.

Anonymous data processing and sharing between different centres ensuring patient’s privacy also when involved in multi-centre studies.

Users with different roles (Role-Based Access Control) will gain access according to their job function [26] in the clinical centre during each specific research protocol. User access must be controlled using authentication to avoid unauthorised access. Each user will only be authorised for access to the web-applications that implement their corresponding job tasks according to their assigned role.

The customisable database according to the research protocol applied for faster query performance during data extraction will facilitate data re-use from both the clinical and the neurophysiological viewpoints.

The possibility to create ad-hoc Clinical Report Forms (CRFs) dedicated to multi-centre clinical studies using shared templates will support researchers involved in clinical trials requiring specific data collection compliant with available regulations.

Compliance with rules and requirements to allow its use in a clinical setting is required because increasing amounts of data are captured digitally during clinical routine care; making these data available for scientific research has been discussed extensively [26].

wHospital is a proprietary configurable framework (LaserBiomed SpA) for the hospital EHR management which is currently used in many Italian and European hospitals. We configured and expanded the wHospital basic framework by adding newly developed functionalities to support multicenter clinical studies (such as the de-identification of patients) as well as a new module for biosignal storage, management, and analysis (processing layer). WebBioBank is hence a new system completely separated from wHospital that allows managing heterogeneous data in an anonymous way during multicenter studies that include also biosignal analysis and collection that we defined rEHR.

The framework defines a two-level user architecture: at the first level, there is the single clinical centre (named Operative Unit, OU), while a network of OUs called the “Super Operative Unit” (sOU) is available at the second level. The sOU is created and managed by the system administrator. The access policies are based on the definition of user roles. Each user is associated with a role that defines his/her the rights on data views and functions. The pre-defined user roles include the administrator, clinician, nurse and pharmacist. The system administrator can define additional roles according to the needs of the clinical centre or study.

The sOU administrator can configure a unique rEHR template working in all of the OUs included in the sOU. This allows homogeneous patient data collection and sharing among OUs belonging to the same sOU.

Each OU administrator can define the specific OU rEHR template, which is composed of modules (the Clinical Forms) that will be automatically translated into relational database tables according to the type of data collected. Any OU rEHR can be shared with other OUs included in the same sOU. Patients belonging to a single OU cannot be viewed by another OU unless specifically authorised. Consequently, homogeneous data collection is possible when sharing a defined OU rEHR among different OUs belonging to the same OU.

The fields in each clinical form are mapped onto an ontology of “clinical concepts” that allow the exchange of information among OUs using different forms, but with the same semantics. The “clinical concepts” act as mediators between heterogeneous data sources, which may conflict due to their structure or context. The “clinical concepts” can be used to label each field of a Clinical Form and, acting as metadata, to make the semantic content of the field explicit for further use. For example, the “clinical concepts” can be used to extract information from the patient’s rEHR and feed a form dedicated to a specific data collection for a clinical trial. This is particularly useful when a single OU participates to more clinical trials that may require semantically equal information collected on syntactically different forms.

Additionally, when configuring a specific rEHR template, the administrator can define a terminology to facilitate homogeneous data collection. This function is called the “Dictionary”, and it can be defined either using standard terminologies, such as SNOMED CT, or using ad-hoc terminologies defined by consensus and specific for the study. After configuring the dictionary, it is necessary to associate it with a MultiLineTextBox control in the Clinical Form to help the clinicians during information gathering. The “Dictionary” can be shared among the OUs included in the same sOU, ensuring that data collected in different OUs use the same semantics.

To enable anonymous data collection, the WebBioBank saves the patient’s registry (external file with .xml format) and its corresponding identifier code (ID BAC) locally in the single OU information system; on the web-based platform, only the unique ID BAC of patients are saved and there are no records composed by both data and codes corresponding to obscured personally identifiable information. Records composed by patient’s personal information and ID BAC are stored only in a local registry file (composed by identifiers and ID BAC) managed only by the authorized user during data collection: identifiers are not loaded into the web-based platform but they are necessary to insert data and signal in the corresponding rEHR. In WebBioBank there are only records composed by ID BAC and neurological parameters stored, and the ID BAC is the identification number of the single record.

These ID BACs can be transferred to other OUs. Therefore, the system can be flexibly adapted to manage single-and multi-centre data and signal collection. In a single-centre data collection, a research centre is defined as an OU and can define rEHR and experimental protocols for data collection. In the multi-centre data collection, each participating centre is an OU, and the OUs are grouped in a sOU. Within the sOU, users can share data based on a common rEHR template defined for the specific multi-centre study. The system can also support the creation of CRFs for clinical trials: a CRF can be defined as a Clinical Form belonging to a patient’s rEHR, and the clinical concepts needed for feeding the CRF can be extracted from the rEHR, facilitating data collection. More specifically, the creation of CRF is allowed according to the standard HL7 Clinical Document Architecture, R2 (CDAR2). During the generation of CRFs, data are encoded according to a common code system. In fact, CDAR2 codification allows data coming from several projects to be built using common metadata and to be structured using a consistent data model.

Moreover, the Data Manager generates an innovative role for the present prototype: a specific role for the data management and signal processing inside the sOU. A user with this new role can view all of the data and signals of the multi-centre clinical study information with only the corresponding ID BAC. The Data Manager is created by the sOU administrator and can be either associated with an existing OU or an independent user role.

In a multi-centre DBS study, each OU represents a single DBS centre and has different user roles. The OU Administrator role can create the OU and give the password to other users (clinicians or researchers). Each user belongs to an OU and can access the OU list of patients, create new patients, view or fill out clinical data forms associated with the OU. A single OU may be associated with one or more multi-centre studies (sOU). Usually, the Data Manager can access anonymous data from all of the OUs and analyse them with a shared analysis protocol; this user is associated with the research centre devoted to data analysis.


                        Fig. 1
                         summarises the general process for data management as well as the roles for the different users. The users are classified into three roles according to their tasks: Administrator, User and Data Manager. Each OU has an administrator and at least two users (clinician and researcher) who insert data. The Administrator of the sOU can give a single OU access to the multi-centre study and configure the clinical data form according to the protocol of the study. The Data Manager can view and process all of the data collected by the different centres.

WebBioBank is based on a three-layered architecture: a web application layer, a processing layer and an infrastructure layer (Fig. 2
                        A). In summary, the web-application layer allows the configuration of a unique common template for data sharing in multi-centre studies. The processing layer satisfies the research needs and allows for configuring processing chains that are dedicated to biosignal analysis. The infrastructure layer implements patient’s privacy, user’s authentication, the customisable database and the rules to enable use in a clinical setting. The second layer was specifically developed for WebBioBank and it is not available in wHospital that includes only the web-application and the infrastructure layers.

The web-application layer is designed in ASP.NET, Silverlight and C# languages; it consists of applications (modules, Fig. 2A) that manage patient’s records (rEHRs) patient’s registries, and signal processing interface. The rEHR modules can be “vertical” if it fully works within a certain rEHR in a certain OU (for example, patient’s medical history or therapies) or “horizontal” if it does not belong to a single rEHR (for example, patients’ lists, or the experimental protocol for signal acquisition).

The processing layer consists of server side service operations that extract the original signals and metadata (previously uploaded by users in .txt format) from the database and elaborate them according to the specific processing chain, as requested by the user. The resulting signals and metadata are stored in the same database located on the server. Any other processing is performed remotely. In WebBioBank, many processing chains can be created for different research protocols: users can upload mathematical and statistical algorithms (.dll extension) to create single analysis blocks that can be combined in appropriate sequences by researchers, creating dedicated processing chains. The collection of the mathematical and statistical algorithms (as a .dll extension) in the processing layer is not a pre-existing library implemented by the system developers; the library is built through the work of users/researchers in the field (Fig. 2
                        B).

The infrastructure layer is provided by the wHospital framework [27], which uses a relational database management system (RDBMS); the data are stored in a subject-centric manner and are accessible via the web. The server database is managed with a Microsoft SQL Server 2008 R2, but the wHospital framework allows the administrators to access and configure the database (for example, create new tables, j-query, data views) through a dedicated web-page called the “Framework Manager”. The access to the Framework Manager is strictly regulated to prevent unauthorised database access.


                        Fig. 2
                        C shows the Entity Relationship (ER) model of WebBioBank database. In a multi-centre view, the entity “OU” (Operative Unit) represents the single clinical centre using the system, and the “SuperOU” (super Operative Unit) represents an aggregation of OUs that share information, templates for data collection, and an analysis algorithm, similar to a clinical trial. Each OU can define a specific rEHR (entity “rEhrDef”) composed of modules (“ModuleDef”) called Clinical Forms. The structure of each Clinical Form is configurable, and the fields chosen in a Clinical Form create a Direct Table in the database (entity “DTModuleDefinition”). To ensure semantic interoperability, each field in the Clinical Forms is connected to a clinical concept included in a “Dictionary”, guaranteeing information exchange even if the syntax used among OUs differs. Users and their roles are defined for each OU according to the internal access rules. The processing algorithms (“Processing DLL”) are the biosignal analysis modules. Each patient has an “rEHR” connected to his/her “SignalDataSet”. In the database architecture, signals resulting from the processing algorithms are stored as “children” of the raw signals uploaded, inheriting the characterising properties and metadata of the raw signals.

This overall database architecture allows the sOU administrator to define a unique Clinical Form template according to the common research protocol during multi-centre studies. Additionally, the entities “rEHR” and “SignalDataSet” are characterised by the rEHR configuration of the equivalent OU and include the patient’s value.

The signal upload is usually occurs in the .txt format because the LFP recordings are generally stored according to the EDF (European Data Format) standard, and any biosignal acquisition system allows the export of raw data in .txt format. Each signal is characterised by its main acquisition parameters (sampling rate, bandwidth, number of channels recorded, ADC rate, recording system, gain); it is associated with a specific event/experiment that describes the experimental recording setting (i.e., patient with DBS implant, during a motor task, with DBS turned off). The event/experiment is fully detailed in a dedicated clinical form that forms part of the rEHR defined for the specific multi-centre study protocol. In addition, the association between the signal and the patient rEHR through the ID BAC ensures that all of the clinical data available regarding the patient can be considered when interpreting the results.

In general, the acquisition parameters are pre-defined in the experimental protocol to ensure comparable analysis results in each multi-centre clinical study. However, the metadata associated with the single signal provides sufficient details for signal re-use when combined with the details of the experimental protocol to which the acquisition belongs.

While defining the multi-centre study protocols during the configuration of the sOU, the Data Manager usually determines the LFP acquisition parameters and prepares the shared acquisition form for use during the study, according to the experimental setting. The researchers of the different OUs will upload raw data files and check the acquisition parameters for the dedicated form.

Subsequently, in WebBioBank, the signal processing can be performed both at the OU and the sOU level. The signal processing at the single OU level involves the roles of the researcher:

They can collect and process biosignals recorded through the DBS electrodes (upload, classify, display and create dedicated signal processing chains). A dedicated module for signal processing is included in each OU: researchers can upload the signal in .txt format, including the metadata (sampling rate, bandwidth, number of channels recorded, ADC rate, recording system, gain). The signal can be then displayed with a “Biosignal Viewer” and processed. In the module for signal processing, a processing chain can be defined by combining different mathematical and statistical functions (in .dll format). Algorithms can be created in Matlab and compiled to obtain the .dll for upload, creating an analysis block. The researcher can use either personally uploaded or the available shared algorithms/chains. Signals are all processed remotely by the central server.

Conversely, at the sOU level, the signals are processed by the Data Manager. The signals collected from each OU are remotely processed according to the common algorithms defined for the analysis in a multi-centre study. All of the signals collected by all of the OUs in the study can be processed and compared.

In both cases, the signals are processed remotely. For the data exchanged between the analysis blocks, each .dll algorithm processes signals with a predefined dimension and format: a 2×N matrix in .txt format. The output of each analysis is in the same 2×N format. A parent–child relationship between the raw and processed signals ensures that the analysis results inherit all of the metadata related to the experiment during which the signal was acquired.

The WebBioBank actors include the following: the administrator of sOU, the data manager and a single operative user (clinician, researcher or administrator of the operative unit). The sOU administrator can create a sOU dedicated to a specific multi-centres research protocol. This use case includes the systematic addition of different operative units (research centres) that participate in the protocol and the creation of an account for the Data Manager. The “System Configuration” use case defines the type of measures, signal classification, database architecture, type and roles of users, section and modules of the clinical forms. All of these definitions depend on the specific research protocol and are defined by the sOU administrator and the Data Manager. The System Configuration includes the creation of user accounts for each operative unit. The OU user can add new patients (new registry item and new clinical forms associated to the patient) and analyse data regarding only his/her patients. The personal details of patients are managed locally: the Data Manager can only elaborate the anonymous data collection.

Before WebBioBank is used for a new multi-centre study, the administrator of the sOU must perform the following tasks (Fig. 3
                        ):
                           
                              1.
                              Define the protocol of the trial (type of data, content of clinical forms, signal processing algorithms) in collaboration with all of the professionals involved in the study to standardise the data collection.

Create the sOU, including the OUs representing each research centre involved, and give the Data Manager the password to access to the sOU and access to all anonymous data collected from all of the clinical centres.

Configure the system and the database according to the protocol in collaboration with the Data Manager and check the configuration according to the research protocol.

Give the password to single OUs for their administrator and users (clinicians and researcher).

Consequently, each OU from the sOU will have the same clinical form template, signal processing application and user’s roles according to the protocol defined. All of the data will be automatically sent to the sOU without any personal information to ensure anonymous data sharing. Once the system is configured, data collection can begin: inside the single OU, users can insert clinical data and bio-signals through a user-friendly interface:
                           
                              •
                              Clinicians can complete medical records during outpatient visits or hospitalisation for surgery.

Researchers can upload, classify, and preprocess biosignals (particularly LFPs).

During data collection, the OU users can extract data regarding the OU patients in Excel format. The Excel file will not include registry data from patients; only the patient ID BAC will be utilised. This file could be useful for local periodic monitoring.

At the end of data collection, the Data Manager of the sOU will be able to manage all data collected from the different OUs.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Users can access WebBioBank through three sections of its front-end layer: (1) Patient List (Fig. 4
                        A), (2) Clinical Form (Fig. 4
                        B), and (3) Signal Processing Module (Figs. 4C and 4D
                        
                        ).


                        Fig. 4A shows the user interface for clinicians within a single OU: the user can create a new patient and export the personal information of the OU patient in a .xml file. Consequently, only the ID BAC is shared on the network, ensuring anonymity during data processing. Fig. 4B shows an example of a clinical form that all of the clinicians of each OU can fill in during the visits, enabling homogeneous data collection within the same sOU. The template for the clinical form is defined by the administrator of the sOU; this person can create the OU within the sOU, insert the users’ accounts, assign their roles, define the clinical form template, and create relative database tables.

Concurrently, the researchers can access the signal processing module (Figs. 4C and 4D) to manage the biosignals. In this module, the signals can be uploaded, classified, and viewed and the chains of processing algorithms can be defined. In the case of a multi-centre study, a set of signal processing chains has to be defined and shared inside the sOU.

A first release of WebBioBank was used over the last year for a multi-centre study of DBS patient, named “Local field potential recordings in Parkinson’s Disease from deep basal ganglia structures during levodopa and DBS therapy: a multi-centre Italian stud”.

The study comprised 4 DBS research centres in the Lombardy Region: the Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico (Milan), the IRCCS Galeazzi (Milan), the IRCCS Istituto Nazionale Neurologico Carlo Besta (Milan), and the IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Mondino (Pavia). The study aimed to establish the effect of levodopa and DBS on the LFP oscillatory pattern in PD to understand whether the pharmacological and the electrical therapies share a similar mechanism of action. Moreover, this preliminary study defined the LFP-based variable for future adaptive DBS therapies [18,19,28].

The PD patients were enrolled according to the standard criteria for DBS [29]; they signed written informed consent forms saved on WebBiobank. The study was performed according to the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by local ethical committees.

Patients were assessed during a visit before undergoing DBS; afterward, they underwent surgery for DBS electrode placement. The electrodes were placed primarily in the STN, but some case studies involved electrodes placed in the Globus Pallidus internus (GPi) and in the Pedunculopontine Nucleus (PPN). Two or three days after surgery, when the electrode wires were still accessible before the connection to the high-frequency pulse generator, LFPs were bilaterally recorded in the following conditions: ON pharmacological treatment, ON DBS treatment, without treatment, or ON DBS-ON pharmacological treatment. Not all patients were recorded under all conditions based on their clinical state. However, the recording devices, settings and the experimental protocol were the same between centres.

Recordings during DBS were performed using the FilterDBS system, allowing simultaneous LFP recordings while DBS is turned ON from the same electrode [30].

Ad-hoc clinical forms were defined to manage the clinical data collections involving more than 10 clinicians. According to the present DBS multi-centre protocol, the sOU Administrator configured rEHR with the following structure: each rEHR includes two sessions named “Clinical Data” and “Evaluation Scales”. The first includes the following clinical forms: PD onset (Table 1
                        ) pre-DBS surgery visit, DBS surgery details, follow-up visit and cause of death. The “Evaluation Scales” section is composed of the Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) Parts I, II, III and IV evaluated before and after DBS surgery. When the rEHR was configured by the sOU Administrator, the framework automatically generates an empty table in the SQL database for each clinical form. These tables than are populated by clinicians during the patient evaluations.

Also, the multicentre study required the definition of a homogeneous terminology for PD description, in order to compare patients evaluated by different clinicians in the different centres. To do so, after having reached a consensus among the clinicians involved in the study, the function “Dictionary” allowed the creation of a shared terminology for the description of: (1) the causes and consequences of patient’s falls; (2) the causes of hospitalization after DBS implant; (3) the patient’s drug therapy, including antidepressant, psychotic, and dementia drugs. This terminology was linked to the dedicated rEHR fields, so that the clinicians could choose among the shared terms without using free text. Conversely, in this multicentre study, it was not necessary to implement the “Clinical Concepts” because all the forms were shared and specifically configured for the trial and none of the clinical centre required additional un-shared forms.

For the data extraction, specific views on the SQL database were generated by the Data Manager to collect data from all of the DBS research centres into a single and easy-to-use excel file. These views include both the clinical data and the signal elaboration outputs.

The researchers uploaded approximately 186 LFPs recorded from the STN, GPi, and PPN; this dataset represents the largest homogenous collection of DBS LFP recordings in PD patients (Table 2
                        ). The signals were analysed using the ad-hoc functions uploaded in WebBiobank. To evaluate the oscillatory nature of the LFPs, signals were studied in the time domain and in the frequency domain after pre-processing. LFPs were studied in the classical EEG frequency range (below 50Hz). In particular, the low-frequency (2–7Hz), low-beta (10–20Hz), high-beta (20–35Hz), and gamma (35–45Hz) were studied. Table 3
                         shows the list of functions used for spectral analysis and noise reduction generated by the Data Manager: each function represents an analysis block and is concatenated into the processing chain dedicated for the present multi-centre DBS study. The “Rimozione_DC” was the first analysis block of the processing chain, and it was used to remove the DC component from the raw signal uploaded by the clinical centre. Then, the researcher could choose between different analysis blocks in order to perform a signal analysis in time or frequency domain. For example, the “Filtraggio_banda_Alfa” block can be applied to filter the pre-processing signal in the band 8–12Hz through a band pass finite impulse response (FIR) filter. Another possibility was to apply the “Spettro” block to calculate the power spectrum with a non-parametric method based on Discrete Fourier Transform. The “Bande” and “PiccoBetasignificativo” were used later to calculate the absolute and normalized power spectrum in the four bands of interest and to identify, if existing, the value of the maximum significant peak within the beta band and its frequency.

Pilot user groups were interviewed regarding their early experience of using the WebBioBank system. The feedback from clinicians was positive; the system requires only the completion of a clinical form. The clinicians were also involved into the definition of a unique protocol dedicated to the DBS patients. Also the researchers were positive about the large amount of data collected in anonymous and uniform mode as well as about the configuration of dedicated signal processing chain. Table 4
                         shows the results of the anonymous survey administered to the investigators (n
                        =10) regarding user satisfaction. The interview consisted of 7 questions scored between 0 and 3: 0 corresponded to “not at all satisfied” and 3 to “very satisfied”. We considered a threshold score of 2 to consider the judgement as positive. All of the questions obtained a mean score higher than 2.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

We presented the prototype implementation and the first use of WebBioBank, which is a dedicated rEHR – signal processing framework that is able to collect clinical and neurophysiological data from different research centres while managing multi-centre data collection.

WebBioBank represents a significant advancement for neurophysiological research for DBS and PD. First, no databases are specifically devoted to LFP recordings from Parkinson’s Disease patients. Second, this database provides a shared set of analysis algorithms and processing chains dedicated to DBS LFP, allowing homogeneous data collection and signal processing. Third, this system can manage multi-centre neurophysiological studies towards elucidating the mechanism of action of DBS using a two-layer user organisation based on OUs and sOU with specific user roles. Fourth, this database is a flexible solution that allows for the definition of roles and data access permissions for different users according to the protocol. Finally, WebBioBank is the first system in neurological research integrating a framework for clinical form management with a web-based platform for advanced bio-signal processing that can be updated by the researchers with new algorithms through .dll functions. Although it is becoming increasingly outdated, the .dll format for algorithm upload reflects the present practice of researchers working in biosignal analysis: the preferred work environment is Matlab, which allows the developed scripts to be compiled as executable files. The Matlab Compiler Runtime provides the libraries for running the executable files. Consequently, researchers in biomedical signal processing can easily use the system without learning any additional languages.

This system can meet the specific needs of multi-centre studies regarding different pathologies and bio-signals. Using the WebBioBank in the multi-centre study for DBS patients over the last year has introduced several benefits: a user friendly interface, the collection of large amounts of data in a homogeneous and anonymous manner and data processing at different levels. However, more effort should be devoted towards developing the signal processing module, particularly for classifying the biosignals and of the results of the elaboration.

Since the WebBioBank was only used for one year, we could not directly verify to what extent this approach can improve research regarding DBS mechanism of action. Additional patient enrolment and data collection are required to test its robustness and to obtain statistically relevant results. In particular, we did not set up an experiment comparing a multi-centre trial run with WebBioBank with other trials run without it. In our experiment, the researchers of the centre devoted to signal analysis in a study titled “Local field potential recordings in Parkinson’s Disease from deep basal ganglia structures during levodopa and DBS therapy: a multi-centre Italian study” reported that using WebBioBank sped up the process of signal collection and pooling as well as facilitated signal analysis because of standardised and pre-defined elaboration chains. Also, they suggested to improve the connection speed by moving the service from a local server to a cloud service. These suggestions relied nevertheless on a small number of investigators (10) and were sometimes inhomogeneous and require further studies with more centres to drive definite conclusions.

The use of WebBioBank is not limited to neurological signals coming from DBS electrodes. Any biosignal that can be represented in a bidimensional matrix (time, value) can be processed and stored within the system, including electroencephalogram electrocardiogram, respiratory signals, electromyogram, electrooculogram, and continuous blood pressure monitoring. Each signal can be represented in WebBioBank and connected to the patient’s rEHR/CRF, associating it with the appropriate clinical information. The system is limited by the single-channel inputs, implying that all of the derivations of a multi-channel signal (e.g., EEG) can be stored in the repository; their analysis cannot be multi-dimensional. The next release of the system will solve this problem by allowing multidimensional inputs while maintaining the parent–child relationship between the raw and analysed signals.

The present experiment did not fully use the semantic interoperability functionalities and the definition and validation of the dictionary was based on the protocol defined by the four DBS centres involved. The system, through the Framework Manager, is however ready to include standard diagnostic terminologies (such as ICD10) instead of ad-hoc dictionaries and has an annotation capability (through the “clinical concepts”) that was not tested in this experiment.

Regarding patient privacy, WebBioBank can be improved by using a client-oriented encryption process. In fact, the present version of the system re-identifies the patients based on the re-association of the ID BAC to a corresponding item inside the patient’s registry (which is an external file saved locally under the responsibility of the clinician who creates patient’s rEHR). The WebBioBank Use Policy instructs the user on how to enter personal information into the system so that the information shared on the platform does not contain demographic details. During the first implementation of the prototype, the diagnosis code refers to neurological evaluation scales or to LFP parameters: for the genomics biobanks, the risk for re-identification is lower. To understand whether the health data were sufficiently de-identified, we used the principles proposed by Malin et al. [31]. The data type shared on WebBioBank has a low risk of replicability, availability and distinguishability. Consequently, the risk of re-identification is very low without the external registry. Therefore, we can consider the data sharing implemented in WebBioBank during neurological multi-centre studies as anonymous from the Data Manager point of view. The user with the role Data Manager can view all data collected in the database but he has not the possibility to access to the local registry (.xml file) necessary to connect demographic data to clinical/research data. In fact on the web-based platform there are not identifying information stored and neurological parameters cannot be considered as indirect identifiers. Moreover in the database the IDBAC is the unique identifier of each record and cannot be removed as commonly done during data anonymization. This architecture ensures that the role “Data Manager”, who has access to all the data collected for the analysis, cannot access patient’s demographics in any way, since this information is stored separately from research data in the local registry managed by the single OU and it is replaced by the unique identifier that creates a new identity, thus protecting against accidental disclosure outside the research protocol (Safe Harbor Method according to HIPAA Privacy Rule at 45 CFR Part 164). On the clinical OU side it is necessary to maintain the possibility to link the IDBAC with patient’s demographics in order to allow the clinical user to manage and assess the patient properly. Data in this case can be considered as de-identified. In addition, in Italy, data are considered as anonymized for research purposes (D.L. n. 179/2012, art. 12, comma 6) if data do not contain information that can be used to identify the patient, as: tax number, name and surname, birth date, ID card number, address, telephone number, email address (or any other digital account information), scanned copy of documents that include identification information. None of these is included in WebBioBank on the server side and cannot be shared among centres. Hence, according to the Italian law, WebBioBank treats only anonymized data for research purposes.

To use WebBioBank in different medical research fields, the privacy of the patients must be improved using a client-oriented encryption process to reduce the risk of re-identification. The experience with the i2b2 use cases [32] indicates that the privacy of the patient should be considered on three fronts: technical de-identification of the data, trust in the researcher and the research, and the security of the underlying technical platforms. These three fronts are controlled in WebBioBank using the following: re-identification risk assessment, Use Policy signed by users and SSL with 128bit key encryption standard guaranteed by the wHospital framework.

The integration between clinical data and information and research data have been increasingly addressed. Several systems that are able to share clinical and research data are available to the research community in addition to others that are able to store, process, and manage data from multi-centre collections as well as supporting clinical trials. However, none of these integrate their neurophysiological signal management and analysis capabilities with an interoperable EHR configurable framework that also supports the creation of CRFs in multi-centre clinical trials. These integrated functions represent the unique features that characterise WebBioBank compared to other available systems.

Compared to the software developed by Daedalus [20] WebBioBank is dedicated to neurophysiological signals and not to data for hospitals and research centres. Therefore, it provides dedicated algorithms and analysis chains that can be uploaded by single researchers and shared. Moreover, WebBioBank allows for the creation of CRFs to be shared across centres in multicentre clinical trials through the included interoperable rEHR framework.

Even though both WebBioBank and REDCap [22] include automated export procedures for seamless data downloads to Excel, WebBioBank also allows researchers to create personal analysis functions and to generate signal processing chains dedicated to each research protocol.

Similarly to i2b2, WebBioBank implements the integration of neurophysiological signals and clinical characteristics in patients using a document-oriented message system: within the Signal Processing Module, all metadata are exchanged among different analysis blocks according to the processing chain specifically developed for the research protocol. Each analysis block is composed of a .dll file uploaded by users that is used to configure the processing chain based on the multi-centre study. WebBioBank hence provides clinical investigators with the software tools necessary to construct and manage their research charts in the neurophysiological domain and does not require them to be familiar with XML messages to manage integration: they can create analysis blocks just uploading their signal processing algorithms to the web-based interface in a common .dll format. Another advantage of WebBioBank is the relational schema that speeds up the query process.

When considering systems for shared document management, like LORIS [5], OnWARD, and SciPort, WebBioBank provides functions for the integration between CRFs and biosignal processing, can define different user roles, and allows the OU administrator to configure the digital clinical form flexibly according to the data types needed in a specific multi-centre study. In addition, the administrator of each UO and sUO has complete control over a unique database: through the FrameWork Manager, administrators can configure the database (tables, views, j-query) according to the type of data they want to collect and share. Also, WebBioBank uses a single server that is easily accessible via the web after authentication to ensure homogeneous data collection from different centres and integrate signal processing with the CRFs.

Similar to the Julius system [21], WebBioBank is integrated with a rEHR system, but Julius does not enable the configuration and sharing of CRFs according to a multi-centre study protocol, guaranteeing uniform data collection into the centralised database. The Julius system allows integration with the pre-existing local EHR system. Conversely, WebBioBank includes the rEHR system in a multi-centre workflow.

In conclusion, even though different systems that are devoted to research fields other than neurology and neurophysiology provide capabilities similar to those provided by WebBioBank, none of them have the same set of functionalities nor do they allow for the integration of multi-centre clinical data, signal management and analysis tools with the definition of CRFs in an interoperable rEHR environment.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The pilot use of WebBioBank in a multi-centre DBS study demonstrates that a user-friendly and anonymous tool for data sharing that utilises a common research protocol can ensure homogeneous data collection and immediate inter-centre data comparisons. The administrator of a Super Operative Unit can configure the system by using the experimental protocol, while the Data Manager can define signal processing chains dedicated to bio-signal analysis. These two aspects make WebBioBank a flexible and robust tool for anonymous data sharing between different multi-centre studies, which are not limited to neurological research.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The authors thank the clinicians and researchers of each DBS research centre in the Lombardy Region, specifically the Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico (Milan), (Milan), the IRCCS Galeazzi (Milan), the IRCCS Istituto Nazionale Neurologico Carlo Besta (Milan), and the IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Mondino (Pavia) for their participation in this study. The authors thank Laserbiomed srl for providing the wHospital framework for the development of the web-based platform WebBioBank. All patient/personal identifiers have been removed or disguised such that the patient/person(s) described are not identifiable and cannot be identified through the details of the story.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

