@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Automation of a high risk medication regime algorithm in a home health care population

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Automated algorithm that predicts re-hospitalization risks for elderly patients.


                        
                        
                           
                           Created tool that automatically maps patient drug data to coding standards.


                        
                        
                           
                           Designed tools for easy replication by different health care information systems.


                        
                        
                           
                           Achieved accurate results that matched manual study of same patient population.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Rehospitalization

Avoidable readmission

High Risk Medication Regimen

Home health care

Algorithm

RXNorm

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Objective
                  Create an automated algorithm for predicting elderly patients’ medication-related risks for readmission and validate it by comparing results with a manual analysis of the same patient population.
               
               
                  Materials and methods
                  Outcome and Assessment Information Set (OASIS) and medication data were reused from a previous, manual study of 911 patients from 15 Medicare-certified home health care agencies. The medication data was converted into standardized drug codes using APIs managed by the National Library of Medicine (NLM), and then integrated in an automated algorithm that calculates patients’ high risk medication regime scores (HRMRs). A comparison of the results between algorithm and manual process was conducted to determine how frequently the HRMR scores were derived which are predictive of readmission.
               
               
                  Results
                  HRMR scores are composed of polypharmacy (number of drugs), Potentially Inappropriate Medications (PIM) (drugs risky to the elderly), and Medication Regimen Complexity Index (MRCI) (complex dose forms, instructions or administration). The algorithm produced polypharmacy, PIM, and MRCI scores that matched with 99%, 87% and 99% of the scores, respectively, from the manual analysis.
               
               
                  Discussion
                  Imperfect match rates resulted from discrepancies in how drugs were classified and coded by the manual analysis vs. the automated algorithm. HRMR rules lack clarity, resulting in clinical judgments for manual coding that were difficult to replicate in the automated analysis.
               
               
                  Conclusion
                  The high comparison rates for the three measures suggest that an automated clinical tool could use patients’ medication records to predict their risks of avoidable readmissions.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

@&#BACKGROUND@&#

Avoidable hospital readmissions are indicators of “wasteful” health care spending [1] and of poor quality care and discharge planning for patients. A 2003–2004 claims analysis found that a fifth of Medicare patients were rehospitalized within 30days of initial discharges, and that 90% of those readmissions were unplanned [2]. The cost to Medicare in 2004 alone was $17.4billion, the analysis found, and the readmissions were associated with longer follow-up hospital stays. Estimates vary widely in terms of how many unplanned readmissions are avoidable, [3] but all hospital stays expose patients to risks of delirium, infections and iatrogenic consequences of tests and procedures [4,5]. Identifying patients at greatest risk and offering them support to prevent readmissions has consequently become a top priority for hospitals – especially now that the federal Medicare program financially penalizes hospitals with 30-day readmission rates deemed unacceptably high [6].

Some health systems and hospitals have reported early success in identifying patients at risk for potentially avoidable readmissions [7] and providing these at-risk patients with post-discharge home visits and other preventive care services [8–10]. However, one study concluded the evidence in favor of such post-discharge programs remains weak [11] and another concluded that systems to identify patients at greatest risk for readmissions have “performed poorly” [12]. Meanwhile, two-thirds of U.S. hospitals are paying federal penalties for having more readmissions than would be expected given their patient populations [13].

In the search for a better way to reduce readmissions, focusing on medications would seem to offer a promising target. A survey of 377 elderly patients discharged from Yale-New Haven Hospital found 81.4% of elderly patients experienced medication problems after hospital discharges because they did not understand changes to their drug regimens or because doctors erred in making prescriptions, setting doses, or telling patients to stop taking drugs they needed [14]. Just the prescribing of medications with known risks that outweigh benefits for the elderly added an estimated $7billion to U.S. healthcare expenditures in 2001 [15]. Recent research has evaluated whether readmissions are associated with polypharmacy (patients who take multiple medications) [16–18]; Potentially Inappropriate Medication (PIM, drugs known to be risky to the elderly) [17]; or medication regimen complexity (drugs with complex dose forms, instructions and administration) [19,20]. While research has demonstrated an association between polypharmacy and avoidable readmissions, at least one study failed to find a relationship [21]. PIM alone has not emerged as a meaningful indicator [17].

Dierich hypothesized that these variables did not consistently predict readmission on their own, and used factor analysis to construct a measure called high risk medication regimens (HRMRs) that combined all three [22]. A structural equation model using HRMR as a mediating variable was more predictive of readmissions than using comorbidity or any of the three components on their own as mediating variables. HRMRs accounted for a unique variance of 10% in patients’ readmission risks as well as 20% of the comorbidity effect of readmission [22].

However, the manual process of deriving HRMR scores for this study was tedious and limited the utility of this discovery. Automation of this process is necessary for follow-up research to verify the predictive power of HRMRs, and for the potential development of a clinical tool that uses prescription data from electronic health records to assess patients’ readmission risks.

This study seeks to advance Dierich’s discovery by developing an automated algorithm for determining HRMR scores – thereby determining which patients are at greater risk for medication-related hospital readmissions and would benefit the most from medication management services. The specific aims are to: (1) map medication data automatically to RxNorm coding standards (2) create an automated algorithm that uses the coded medication data to calculate patient HRMR scores for easy replication and application across different health care systems and databases, and (3) test the algorithm’s accuracy by seeing if it derived the same HRMR scores that Dierich calculated through her manual analysis.

The data set developed in Dierich’s study was utilized for this study. It contains Outcome and Assessment Information Set (OASIS) and medication data from 911 older adults from 15 Medicare-certified home health care agencies. Patients were 65 and older whose first episodes of home care took place after initial hospitalizations in 2004. Home care clinicians reviewed the medication records and validated their accuracy by observing the medications in patients’ homes. Only patients with complete OASIS and medication records were included in the data set. OASIS is a comprehensive assessment tool completed by home care clinicians to track conditions of patients at admission, various points during their episodes of care, and discharge [22]. It is used to calculate outcome and risk factors of patients in Medicare-certified home care agencies, and includes demographic, environmental, support system, health and functional status, and health service utilization information [23]. The medication data includes all prescribed and over-the-counter medications and contained the medication name, dose, frequency, dose forms, frequencies and special instructions.


                        RxNorm: A standardized nomenclature for clinical drugs that is produced by the National Library of Medicine (NLM) [24]. RxNorm’s standardized naming conventions allow health systems, which might catalog drugs in different ways in their computer systems, to communicate efficiently and accurately [25].


                        RXCUI: A unique numerical identifier for clinical drugs and their concepts. Medications with the same RXCUIs are considered the same drugs with the same ingredients, strengths and dose forms.


                        TTY: Term types (TTYs) are used along with RXCUIs to further identify generic and branded drug by their properties (ingredients, dose forms, etc.) Examples are shown in Table 1
                        .


                        RXNORM APIs: Online tools that convert drug descriptions from datasets into normalized RxNorm drug codes for research and analysis [26]. Examples from this study are in Table 2
                        .

@&#METHODS@&#

In Dierich’s study, medication record data was cleansed as follows:
                              
                                 •
                                 Medication names were converted to generic names.

A patient’s “likely disease” was derived from the medication’s indication. (While the OASIS records contained ICD9 diagnostic values for a patient, the records were limited to one primary and five secondary diagnoses. In addition, medications were not linked to ICD9 codes, and could have been used for reasons for which there are no diagnostic codes.)

Medication dose forms, frequencies and special instructions were manually derived by splitting the medication text into appropriate concepts.

To further prepare the data for this study, medication names were converted to RXCUI values with a TTY of IN or MIN. A SAS program was created that used RXNORM APIs for this conversion (Fig. 1
                           ). Dierich’s medication dose forms were converted to RXCUI values with a TTY of DF using a RXNORM API. Dose forms that were not found by the API were converted to custom codes (Fig. 2
                           ). In addition, a separate SAS program was created for future use to convert Medication RXCUI values with a TTY of SCD, SCDF, or SBD to Dose Form RXCUI values with a TTY of DF (Fig. 3
                           ).

“Likely diseases” were manually converted to ICD9 values for each patient based on the expertise of the authors – a doctorally prepared informatician (Olson), a geriatric nurse practitioner (Dierich), and a nurse researcher with expertise in geriatrics and home health care data (Westra), and validated against the Charlson comorbidity index [27]. A separate record was created for each patient consisting solely of “likely diseases” and corresponding ICD9 values.

Lastly, medication frequencies and special directions were converted to custom codes from Dierich’s manually derived values from her previous study. No standard was found for these values in the literature.

Dierich defined polypharmacy as a continuous count of all regularly taken medications (prescribed or over the counter) via any route listed in the first episode of care [22]. Polypharmacy was also used as a categorical variable for descriptive analysis; patients with less than 9 medications were assigned a “0” and patients with 9 or more medications were assigned a “1”. PRN medications (those used as needed), over-the-counter medications and medications with limited dosing time such as antibiotics were included in the count. The count excluded certain items documented in the patients’ medication records such as oxygen or saline used to dilute IV medications. Combination and variable dosed drugs were counted as one drug, rather than counting each active ingredient as a separate drug.

An automated algorithm was created to count medication records containing RXCUI values, and also count each medication record whether or not an RXCUI value was assigned using the same logic and cleansed data as Dierich used in her study.

The 2003 version of the Beers’ criteria, a list of 48 drugs and 20 drug classes that the elderly should avoid, was used in Dierich’s study to create PIM scores [28]. There is a newer version of the Beers criteria, but it was not available at the time of Dierich’s study, hence the same version was used in this study for comparison of the manual process and algorithm. In the Beers’ criteria, Fick et al. identified two categories of inappropriate drugs: PIM Table 1 includes those inappropriate for older adults no matter their diagnosis and PIM Table 2 includes medications that could be inappropriate depending on the diagnosis. The criteria also differentiated drugs by whether or not they posed risks of severe adverse outcomes (Appendix A).

Fick et al. did not assign scores to medications; hence, based on clinical judgment, Dierich operationalized the PIM criteria by assigning a score of 2.5 to each medication that was considered always inappropriate, and a score of 2 for each medication with a lower severity ranking. For medications with risks related to specific diseases, the assigned scores were 1.5 for medications with the highest risks and 1.0 for medications with lower risks. A drug may have more than one score, and the highest score was kept for each drug. The medication scores were then summed to provide a total risk level score for each patient.

A SAS program was created to generate a crosswalk that maps drug names from PIM Table 1 to RXCUI values with TTY types of IN, MIN, BN, SCD, SCDF and SBD. The program used RXNORM APIs to generate the RXCUI values. It also assigned Dierich’s score to each medication record (Fig. 4
                              ). Another SAS program matched RXCUI crosswalk information and patient medication records to produce PIM Table 1 scores (Fig. 5
                              ).

A SAS program was created to generate a crosswalk that maps medication names to RXCUI values, and medication classes to medication names to RXCUI values. The NLM Drug portal was used to map medication classes to medication names. A standard was not used for the drug class, and the medication class from PIM Table 2 was manually typed into the web portal which then displayed all medications for that drug class. A SAS program then converted the medication names to RXCUI values using RXNORM APIs. Clinical judgment was used to manually map diagnoses to ICD9 values. The ICD9 values were then assigned to each entry of the crosswalk along with Dierich’s score (Fig. 6
                              ). Another SAS program combined medication records, patients’ likely diseases, and PIM Table 2 crosswalk data to produce patients’ PIM Table 2 scores (Fig. 7
                              ).

Dierich used a modified version of the Medication Regimen Complexity Index (MRCI) developed by George et al., because at the time it was “the only validated and reliable non-disease specific measure addressing medication complexity in the published literature” [29]. The index utilizes weighted scores in three subscales – by the complexity of their route (MRCI Table A), their dosing frequency (MRCI Table B), and their directions or preparation (MRCI Table C) – and then combines the subscale scores into a summary score (Appendix B). George et al. did not provide a cut point for highly complex regimens. Dierich used a continuous score in her structural equation modeling, and a cut point of 20 or above in her categorical data analysis as an indication of high medication regimen complexity.

A SAS program was created to generate a crosswalk that maps the dose forms from MRCI Table A to RXCUI values with a TTY type of DF using a RXNORM API. Dose forms that were not found with the API were converted to custom codes (Fig. 8
                              ). Similar to its use in PIM scoring, a SAS program generated patients’ MRCI Table A scores through the input of medication records and MRCI Table A crosswalk data (Fig. 9
                              ).

SAS programs were created to generate a crosswalk that maps custom codes for dosing frequency and special directions to MRCI Table B and C. Two other SAS programs were created to then generate patients’ MRCI Table B and C scores. The programs entered the medication records, and then MRCI Table B and Table C crosswalks, and produced the patients’ MRCI Table B (Fig. 10
                              ) and C scores (Fig. 11
                              ).

@&#RESULTS@&#

Results in this study include the percent of medications from Dierich’s study that were automatically mapped to RXCUI values for both dose forms and medication names, as well as the polypharmacy, PIM and MRCI patient scores that were produced through this conversion of drug names.

Overall, 99% of drugs in the medication data set were converted to RXCUI values. Initially, without any manipulation of Dierich’s data, 82% of the drug names were converted to RXCUI values. The 82% consisted of exact generic drug names that were recognized by the API. After adjusting the data to redefine combination drugs with multiple ingredients into the naming formats that the NLM API expected, the match rate increased to 90%. (Dierich used “And” instead of “/” in the names for multi-ingredient drugs. So “aspirin and dipyridamole” was reformatted to “aspirin / dipyridamole”.) Another 9% of the drug records were then converted, either by using the brand names in Dierich’s data to find the active ingredient(s) RXCUI types of “IN” or “MIN,” or by correcting misspellings in generic drug names. In the end, 1% of drug records could not be converted; they lacked specific generic or brand names. Rather, the medication terms represented broad medication categories such as “Laxative” or “Sports Cream”.

Lastly, 80% of the dose forms in Dierich’s study were converted to RXCUI values. Custom codes were created for irrigant, g-tube, intravesicle, dressing, nebulizer and peg tube values. After adding custom codes, 100% mapping of dose forms was achieved.

Polypharmacy was calculated two ways: by counting medication records containing RXCUI values, and by counting each medication record whether or not an RXCUI value was assigned. The count of all medication records for patients produced a 100% match to Dierich’s data. The count of records with RXCUI values per patient produced a 99% match to Dierich’s data.

The match between the automation of patients’ PIM scores and Dierich’s manual PIM counts was 87%. PIM Table 1 consists of potentially inappropriate medications independent of patients’ diagnoses. PIM Table 2 consists of potentially inappropriate medications that were linked to diagnoses. Medications could have more than one score between PIM Table 1 and PIM Table 2; the highest score was assigned to the medication.

In order to reach 87%, the manual calculations and logic in the automated design were adjusted (Table 3
                        ). The manual count, for example, included all long acting NSAIDs, such as diclofenac, whereas the automated count only included specific drugs in PIM Table 1. These missing drugs from the manual count were added to the PIM Table 1 crosswalk to be included in patients’ scores and to increase the match rate. The automation for PIM Table 2 found more drugs in diagnosis-specific drug classes than the manual scoring. More muscle relaxants such as quinine, for example, were found by the automated search of patients’ medication records. These drugs were removed from the PIM Table 2 crosswalk so they would not be included in the patients’ automated scores. The automation also caught mistakes made in the manual review, such as not applying medications consistently across all patients’ records. The correction of these errors resulted in modest changes to the manually derived PIM scores.

The 13% that did not match included drugs that were obscured by the conversion of all drug names to their generic forms and to RXCUI values. For example, there is only one RXCUI value for the generic nifedipine. The manual calculations used the brand names and differentiated between long- and short-acting formulations of this medication. The automated design did not, because it utilized the single RXCUI value from the generic conversion. The drugs that did not match also included those with dose or form considerations such as Estrogen which were considered in the manual calculations but not the automated design. Future adjustments to the automated design could allow it to account for these considerations (Table 4
                        ).

MRCI Table A consisted of complex dose forms and a corresponding weighting assigned to each entry of the table. The following results were produced for MRCI Table A:
                           
                              •
                              When the automation ran against a crosswalk that converted MRCI Table A dose forms to RXCUI dose form values, the match was 80% to Dierich’s manual calculations.

When the automation ran against a crosswalk that converted MRCI Table A dose forms to RXCUI dose form values, and included custom values for irrigant, g-tube, intravesicle, dressing, nebulizer and peg tube, the match was 99% to Dierich’s manual calculations.

MRCI Table B consisted of complex dose frequencies and a corresponding weighting assigned to each entry of the table. MRCI Table C consisted of complex special instructions and a corresponding weighting assigned to each entry of the table. The automation of patients’ MRCI Table B and MRCI Table C scores produced a 99% match.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Automated analysis of clinical data is rapidly emerging as a way for health care providers to predict patient needs and risks for a variety of disorders and adverse events [30,31]. McDonald et al. in 2012 created a successful approach to determining MCRI scores of patients in post-acute home care settings through an algorithm using medication data from their electronic health records [32]. Medication data presents unique challenges in this pursuit, though, because of the heterogeneous nature of prescription recordkeeping by different health care providers and the lack of standards for drug data coding and entry [33]. RxNorm is viewed as an “ideal standard” for standardizing prescription data [34], and making it available across health care systems for secondary analysis [35]. This study provides further validation of the utility of RxNorm and of automated algorithms for secondary analysis, and takes an important next step in applying this approach to the scoring of HRMRs, which Dierich showed have unique potential to assess medication-related risks for hospital readmissions. Automating HRMR calculations was a step that Dierich found necessary for further study in this area in order to “greatly improve the quality of research, the accuracy of findings, and the speed of release of findings” [22].

@&#LIMITATIONS@&#

The absence of coding standards from the data used in the original Dierich study created several limitations in terms of the ability to truly automate the process of assembling HRMR scores and analyzing patient readmission risks. If a medication record had a misspelling for a dose or medication name, an RXCUI value was not automatically found for that record, and manual editing was needed to clean up the database.

For PIM Table 2, the NLM drug portal was used to find all the medication names associated with a medication class.This was not a truly automated process, and drug class coding standards were not used. Medication classes were typed into the portal to find associated medication names, and a SAS program was created to map the medication names to RXCUI values using RxNorm APIs. In addition, ICD9 values were manually mapped to a patient’s likely disease. This study would have benefited from automation and tools to convert diagnosis text to ICD9 codes, just as this study utilized NLM APIs to convert medication names to RXCUI values.

For MRCI Table A, the SAS program created to generate dose form RXCUI values, based on medication RXCUI values, was created for future use and was not validated with Dierich’s data. The data did not consist of medication records that were stored by Semantic Clinical Drug (SCD), Semantic Clinical Drug Dose Form Group (SCDG) or Semantic Clinical Drug Form (SCDF). For MRCI Tables B and C, informatics standards were not used, and custom codes were created for dose frequency and special instructions.

The rapid expansion of electronic health records with common or relatable terminologies – increased by federal meaningful use financial incentives for hospitals and clinics [36] – would address some of the limitations experienced in this study. The standardization of prescription information is necessary so that physicians can review the safety of drug regimens with patients who transition out of hospitals or to new levels of care. A secondary benefit beyond this process of medication reconciliation is more consistency in the format of prescription information for data preparation and analysis. Federally funded projects such as SHARPn also are developing open source tools that extract clinical text from disparate EHRs and “normalize” it for secondary analysis [35]. An attempt at using the HRMR algorithm in this study with a dataset prepared under today’s EHR conditions and requirements would likely result in fewer setup problems.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The tool developed in this study is a novel approach for assessing medication-related readmission risks that can be replicated and applied across hospital and health care recordkeeping systems. The APIs available through the NLM website, and the crosswalks generated, allow the algorithm to be adapted and adjusted in other systems for future clinical analysis and research. An important next step is to adjust criteria in the automated algorithm to determine optimal cut-points that separate patients at higher risk of hospitalization from patients who have lower risk based on their high risk medication regime scores. The scores of 2.5, 2, 1.5 and 1 that Dierich used for PIM calculations were arbitrary based on clinical judgment. Future users could determine that greater scoring weight should be given to certain medications, such as those presenting the greatest risks of severe adverse outcomes. Using the algorithm to identify the most sensitive scores and cut-points will hasten the use of HRMR as a meaningful source of patient information in clinical, hospital and home health care systems.

Potentially inappropriate medications

(See Tables A1 and A2
                     
                     ).

Medication regimen complexity index

The Medication Regimen Complexity Index, Section A (George et al., 2004, p. 1374), used with permission.
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

The Medication Regimen Complexity Index, Sections B and C (George et al., 2004, p. 1375), used with permission.
                        
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

