@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Identifying direct miRNA–mRNA causal regulatory relationships in heterogeneous data

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We propose an integrated method to infer direct miRNA–mRNA causal regulatory relationships.


                        
                        
                           
                           We investigate miRNA and TF regulation and causal feedforward patterns of TF–miRNA–mRNA.


                        
                        
                           
                           We evaluate the method on an EMT data set.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

MicroRNA

mRNA

Causal regulatory relationships

Epithelial–mesenchymal transition

Causal feedforward patterns

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Discovering the regulatory relationships between microRNAs (miRNAs) and mRNAs is an important problem that interests many biologists and medical researchers. A number of computational methods have been proposed to infer miRNA–mRNA regulatory relationships, and are mostly based on the statistical associations between miRNAs and mRNAs discovered in observational data. The miRNA–mRNA regulatory relationships identified by these methods can be both direct and indirect regulations. However, differentiating direct regulatory relationships from indirect ones is important for biologists in experimental designs. In this paper, we present a causal discovery based framework (called DirectTarget) to infer direct miRNA–mRNA causal regulatory relationships in heterogeneous data, including expression profiles of miRNAs and mRNAs, and miRNA target information. DirectTarget is applied to the Epithelial to Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) datasets. The validation by experimentally confirmed target databases suggests that the proposed method can effectively identify direct miRNA–mRNA regulatory relationships. To explore the upstream regulators of miRNA regulation, we further identify the causal feedforward patterns (CFFPs) of TF–miRNA–mRNA to provide insights into the miRNA regulation in EMT. DirectTarget has the potential to be applied to other datasets to elucidate the direct miRNA–mRNA causal regulatory relationships and to explore the regulatory patterns.
               
            

@&#BACKGROUND@&#

A fundamental challenge of understanding complex gene regulatory mechanisms is to identify how the regulators regulate their target genes in different biological processes, especially in disease progression. Many studies have demonstrated that microRNAs (miRNAs) are primary metazoan gene regulators at the post-transcriptional level. miRNAs are short (∼22nt) endogenous non-coding RNAs and recognise target genes by binding to complementary sequences on the target messenger RNA (mRNAs) transcripts. The binding activities usually result in translational repression or target degradation and gene silencing [1,2]. The research into miRNAs has revealed the roles that they play in negative regulation and possibly in positive regulation. By regulating target genes, miRNAs are likely to be involved in most biological processes, including developmental timing, cell proliferation, metabolism, differentiation, apoptosis, cellular signaling, stress responses and cancers [3–9].

miRNA target prediction using sequence data [10–13] can provide the direct reference of miRNA binding sites on the target genes. However, these methods are based on sequence complementarity and/or structural stability of the putative duplex. This may result in a high rate of false positives and false negatives [14], mainly because of the role played by RNA folding as well as accessibility due to protein binding. Moreover, the currently available sequence-based target prediction algorithms produce hundreds to a few thousands of target genes for each miRNA, which makes it difficult to focus on a small number of most likely targets of the miRNAs of interest.

Complementary to the target prediction based on sequence data, some methods have been developed to use gene expression data or the combination of expression data and sequence data to find out miRNA targets. For example, the approaches presented in [15–18] identify miRNA regulatory modules (MRMs) by integrating heterogeneous datasets, including expression profiles of miRNAs and mRNAs, and putative target binding information. The discovery of MRMs has demonstrated that using both sequence information and expression profiles can produce more accurate predictions. Attempts have also been made to infer functional miRNA–mRNA regulatory modules (FMRMs), which are regulatory networks of miRNAs and mRNAs for specific biological conditions [19–26]. The identified FMRMs give insights into biological processes, functional regulatory interactions of many diseases and gene target therapy. The limitation shared by these methods is that they can only infer statistical correlations or associations between miRNAs and mRNAs. However, correlations or associations may not reveal gene regulatory relationships which are indeed causal relationships. For example, a strong correlation between miRNA A and a target gene B does not necessarily imply that A causally regulates B. This strong correlation between A and B may be due to a common cause (regulator) of them.

Recently Le et al. [27] adapted the causal modelling and discovery approach, IDA [28,29] to infer miRNA–mRNA causal regulatory relationships from gene expression data. The discovered miRNA–mRNA causal regulatory relationships were found to have a large portion of overlap with the results of the follow-up gene knockdown experiments. This outcome has demonstrated the high accuracy that can be achieved by the computational method. However, the method does not distinguish between direct and indirect causal relationships. Therefore, a discovered causal regulatory relationship can be a direct interaction between a miRNA and a mRNA, or indirect regulation of a miRNA on a mRNA that is mediated by some other regulator(s). Given that a major benefit of identifying miRNA–mRNA causal regulatory relationships is to provide biologists with high quality hypothetical miRNA target information to assist them in setting up gene knockdown experiments, it is essential to have direct miRNA–mRNA causal regulatory relationships identified and presented to biologists.

In this paper, we extend the work in [27] to infer direct miRNA–mRNA causal regulatory relationships. Our framework (called DirectTarget) makes use of multiple sources of data, including gene expression profiles and target binding information. We hypothesise that target information predicted using sequence data provides evidence of direct interactions between miRNAs and the predicted targets. With DirectTarget, firstly we apply the approach in [27] to the expression profiles of miRNAs and mRNAs to identify all the pairs of miRNA and mRNA that are causally related. Then based on the target information, we select from the pairs only direct causal relationships. We then use experimentally confirmed target databases to validate the computational results.

Since transcription factors (TFs) are main regulators at the transcriptional level, they are also essential for the regulation of gene expression, including miRNA expression levels. Therefore, to further explore the upstream regulators (TFs) of miRNA regulation, we repeat the procedure of DirectTarget for inferring the direct TF–miRNA and TF–mRNA causal regulatory relationships, where miRNAs and mRNAs are targets of the TFs. Then they are integrated with the direct miRNA–mRNA regulatory relationships found to generate the causal feedfoward patterns (CFFPs).

We apply DirectTarget to the EMT datasets and use experimentally confirmed target databases to validate the identified direct causal relationships. Validation results show that the proposed method is suitable for discovering direct miRNA–mRNA causal regulatory relationships. Moreover, the enrichment analyses on the top ranked target genes show that their functions are highly relevant to the biological conditions of the datasets. The computational results of miRNA–mRNA regulatory relationships as well as CFFPs provide good resources for cancer research and future experimental validations.

@&#METHODS@&#

@&#OVERVIEW@&#

In this section, we present DirectTarget, a framework for inferring direct miRNA–mRNA causal regulatory relationships. As shown in Fig. 1
                        , the overall process contains three steps: (1) data preparation, (2) inferring miRNA–mRNA causal regulatory relationships, and (3) identifying direct miRNA–mRNA causal regulatory relationships. In the following, we present each of the steps in detail.

The aim of this step is to obtain the input data for the causal discovery step (Step (2)), including miRNA target binding information and expression profiles of miRNAs and mRNAs. Since we will apply DirectTarget to the Epithelial to Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) datasets, we use the EMT datasets as an example to introduce the data preparation step in the following.

EMT is a process in which cells lose their epithelial features characterised by the high E-cadherin expression level and acquire mesenchymal characteristics, including Vimentin filaments and a flattened phenotype. EMT is a part of the process of tissue remodelling during embryonic development and wound healing [30], and during carcinogenesis [31] when cancer cells undergo a change transforming into a more invasive tumor [30,32]. By expressing proteases, cells become more invasive, and they can pass through the underlying basement membrane and migrate. These are crucial steps in the multi-step process of metastasis [33].

To obtain target binding information of miRNAs, several databases [10–13] may be queried. In this work we use Microcosm (Version v5) [11]. The miRNA expression profiles are from Søkilde et al. [34]. They were profiled from the 60 cancer cell lines of the drug screening panel of human cancer cell lines at the National Cancer Institute (NCI-60). They are available at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE26375. The mRNA expression profiles for NCI-60 are obtained from ArrayExpress (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress, accessionnumberE-GEOD-5720). In total 47 samples, including 11 epithelial samples and 36 mesenchymal samples are used for this work.

With the retrieved miRNA and mRNA expression profiles, we perform differential gene expression analysis to identify differentially expressed miRNAs and mRNAs between the epithelial and mesenchymal samples. In this work, the limma package [35] of Bioconductor is used for the analysis. The expression values of differentially expressed miRNAs and mRNAs are to be used as an input for Step (2).

This step is based on the causal discovery method, IDA [28,29] and the adaptation of IDA presented in [27] for finding miRNA–mRNA causal regulatory relationships. Therefore two sub-steps need to be carried out: (2a) using the PC algorithm [36] to learn the causal structure from expression data; (2b) applying do-calculus [37] to infer the causal effects of miRNAs on mRNAs.

In Step (2a), each miRNA or mRNA is considered as a random variable whose values are its expression levels. The PC algorithm assumes that there is a true causal structure in the form of a directed acyclic graph (DAG), where a node corresponds to a variable (a miRNA or mRNA in our case) and an edge between two nodes represents the existence of a causal relationship between them. The PC algorithm is used to learn the causal structure (the DAG) from the expression profiles of miRNAs and mRNAs.

The structure learning by the PC algorithm starts with a fully connected undirected graph, assuming that initially every pair of nodes (i.e. a pair of miRNA–mRNA, miRNA–miRNA or mRNA–mRNA) is related. Then, the algorithm decides if an edge is to be removed from or retained in the graph by conducting conditional independence tests for the two nodes connected by the edge. Finally, the directions of edges in the obtained graph are oriented with the aim of getting a DAG. However, the PC algorithm can only generate a completed partially directed acyclic graph (CPDAG) which contains both directed edges and undirected edges. From a CPDAG, there are several ways to orient the undirected edges to form a DAG. Therefore, the resulting causal structure is not a unique DAG, but a class of DAGs generated from the CPDAG. Fig. 2
                            shows an example of a CPDAG, G, and from G there are four different ways to orient the edges, resulting in the four DAGs in the equivalence class [28].

In Step (2b), do-calculus [37] is used to estimate the causal effect that a miRNA has on a mRNA. Given a DAG, do-calculus can estimate the causal effect of a node on any other node in the DAG using observational data, by way of ‘simulating’ the interventions in controlled experiments. However, the problem is that we do not have just one unique DAG, but a class of DAGs as described above. The solution [27–29] is that to find out the causal effect of a miRNA on a mRNA, we estimate the causal effects using the DAGs resulting from a CPDAG one by one and take the minimum causal effect value as the final result for this pair of miRNA and mRNA. The idea is that, since we are not able to estimate the unique causal effect between each miRNA and each mRNA, we use the lower bound of all possible causal effect absolute values as the output.

For illustration, assume that we have the CPDAG G and a class of DAGs as in Fig. 2, where 
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       R
                                    
                                    
                                       1
                                    
                                 
                              
                            is a miRNA and T is a mRNA. We can use do-calculus to estimate the causal effect of 
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       R
                                    
                                    
                                       1
                                    
                                 
                              
                            on T in all four DAGs, 
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       G
                                    
                                    
                                       1
                                    
                                 
                                 ,
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       G
                                    
                                    
                                       2
                                    
                                 
                                 ,
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       G
                                    
                                    
                                       3
                                    
                                 
                              
                            and 
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       G
                                    
                                    
                                       4
                                    
                                 
                              
                           . Suppose that the causal effects calculated based on the four DAGs are 0.5, 0.2, −0.3, and 0.4 respectively, then the value of 0.2 will be chosen as the final result. We use absolute values when comparing the strength of causal effects, as a calculated causal effect can be either negative or positive.

Details of the causal discovery procedure and its implementation in R can be found in [27].

In Step (2), we have found the causal effects for all possible pairs of miRNA–mRNA. Each obtained causal effect value indicates the strength of the regulation of a miRNA on a mRNA. However, the value does not tell whether the relationship between the miRNA and the mRNA is direct or mediated by other miRNAs or mRNAs.

A simple solution for differentiating direct from indirect relationships is to use the signs of causal effects obtained from Step (2). A positive causal effect means that when we manipulate the expression value of the miRNA to be increased, the expression value of a target gene will increase too. In other words, a positive causal effect implies up-regulation, and vice versa. As the common knowledge about miRNA regulation is that a miRNA usually down-regulates its target genes (only a few reported cases for up-regulation so far), we may simply assume that miRNA–mRNA relationships with negative causal effect values are direct interactions, and those with positive causal effects are indirect relationships. However, as human knowledge about miRNA regulation is still limited, the above assumption does not necessarily hold.

In this paper, we propose a solution that is based on target information predicted using sequence data. We argue that the binding site information about a target gene can provide evidence for direct miRNA–mRNA interactions. In other words, miRNA target information predicted from sequence data can be used as a means for differentiating direct and indirect miRNA–mRNA relationships. However, the predicted miRNA target information usually involves a high number of false discoveries. Therefore, to take advantage of and to compensate for the drawbacks of the target prediction and the causal discovery approaches, in Step (2) above, we use the causal discovery approach to find out the miRNA–mRNA causal relationships (with higher accuracy), and then in this step, from these discovered causal relationships, target information is used to select direct miRNA–mRNA interactions.

For the EMT case, we query Microcosm to retrieve target information for the differentially expressed miRNAs that were identified in Step (1). We use the target information to filter the miRNA–mRNA causal relationships discovered in Step (2). The miRNA–mRNA causal relationships that are not supported by the target information are removed. Then we rank all the remaining direct interactions for each miRNA based on the absolute values of its causal effects on mRNAs. The top interactions in the final result will have high causal effects and have been predicted using sequence data, and they are selected for validation (see the Results section).

To further explore the upstream regulators of miRNA regulation, we use the same steps described above to infer the direct TF–miRNA and TF–mRNA causal regulatory relationships, where TFs are considered as regulators while miRNAs and mRNAs are targets of the TFs. Then they are integrated with the direct miRNA–mRNA causal regulatory relationships found to form the causal feedfoward patterns (CFFPs). With each CFFP, a TF regulates a mRNA directly and indirectly via a miRNA.

To find all the TFs in the EMT datasets, we use the list of TF repertoire [38] to extract all the TF genes. This list is then used to query against the mRNA expression profiles for EMT to obtain TF expression profiles. The TF–miRNA target information is downloaded from MIR@NT@N [39]. To obtain TF–mRNA target information, we use TRANSFAC 9.3 [40] and promoter databases [41] integrated in the composite regulatory signature database (CRSD) [42].

Using DirectTarget, we infer all the direct causal regulatory relationships of TF–miRNA and TF–mRNA. Then we rank all the causal regulatory interactions of miRNA–mRNA (found previously), TF–miRNA, and TF–mRNA. Theoretically, any interactions with causal effects different from zero can be used to explore the TF–miRNA–mRNA causal feedforward patterns. In order to reduce false negatives (type II error) and for exploration purpose, we keep the interactions with ‘above-the-middle’ strength for the exploration. Specifically, we use the median of the absolute values of the causal effects as the cutoff to determine candidates of potential miRNA–mRNA, TF–miRNA, and TF–mRNA causal interactions. These causal interactions are then integrated to explore the causal feedforward patterns of which TFs are the upstream regulators. Details of the patterns are presented in the Results section.

@&#RESULTS@&#

After the differentially expressed gene analysis of the EMT datasets using the limma package [35], 46 probes of miRNAs and 1612 probes of mRNAs are identified to be differentially expressed at a significant level (adjusted p-value<0.05, adjusted by Benjamini–Hochberg (BH) method). We extracted 112 probes of TFs from the differentially expressed mRNAs using the list of TF repertoire [38]. The detailed result can be found in Supplementary material 1.

The input of DirectTarget is a 47
                        
                           
                              ×
                           
                        
                        1658 matrix for the 47 NCI-60 samples of two different types. For inferring miRNA–mRNA causal regulatory interactions, the first 46 columns of the input data matrix are miRNA expression data, and the remaining 1612 columns are mRNA expression data. For exploring causal feedforward patterns of TF–miRNA–mRNA, the first 112 columns of the input data matrix are TF expression data, the next 46 columns are miRNA expression data, and the remaining 1500 columns are mRNA expression data.

The PC algorithm [36] is used to learn the causal structure from an input dataset. To estimate the completed partially directed acyclic graph (CPDAG), G from the input dataset, we use the open source R-package, pcalg 
                        [43], and set the significance level of the conditional independence test, α
                        =0.01, as the tuning parameter for the PC algorithm. As described in the Methods section, for each causal regulatory relationship, the causal effect with respect to each of the DAGs in the equivalence class is calculated, and we regard the causal effect with the minimum absolute value as the final result.

Since a small number of samples can cause unstable estimations of causal effects, we use bootstrapping to estimate causal effects of the discovered causal regulatory relationships. The number of bootstrapping is set to 100 and the median of 100 estimates for each relationship is regarded as the final result.

To show the effectiveness of DirectTarget in identifying direct miRNA–mRNA interactions, we compare the performance of DirectTarget with the Pearson correlation method [24], Lasso [25], GenMiR++ [15], ProMISe [26] and the generic IDA method [27] respectively using the number of validated miRNA–mRNA interactions as the criterion. We define the ground truth for validating computational results as the union of the two largest experimentally confirmed target databases: miRTarBase v4.5 [44] and TarBase v6.0 [45]. Pearson correlation is computed using the R built-in function, cor (Package stats). We implement Lasso using glmnet 
                        [46] with the parameter alpha
                        =1, and remove those miRNA–mRNA interactions with Lasso’s correlation coefficient of 0. The Matlab code of GenMiR++ is obtained from http://www.psi.toronto.edu/genmir/. To implement ProMISe, we use the average expression values across the 47 EMT samples of miRNAs and mRNAs as the input. Since the seed matrix between miRNAs and mRNAs is very sparse, which leads to failure in running ProMISe, we add a ones matrix based on the original seed matrix. As for generic IDA, we infer miRNA–mRNA causal regulatory relationships without using target binding information. To have a fair comparison of all methods, we extract from the discovered direct regulatory relationships the top 10 and 20 target genes of each validated miRNA respectively, based on the absolute values of the causal effects, correlations or probabilities. The detailed results of each method in identifying miRNA–mRNA regulatory relationships can be seen in Supplementary material 2.

Out of the 46 differentially expressed miRNAs in the EMT dataset, 44 are to be validated since 2 miRNAs do not have confirmed targets in the databases or do not have target binding information available. As shown in Fig. 3
                        , DirectTarget is comparable with the Pearson correlation method, and performs better than Lasso, GenMiR++, ProMISe and generic IDA in terms of the total number of validated miRNA–mRNA interactions for the two cases (Top 10 and Top 20). This implies that DirectTarget can be used as a good alternative to existing methods for discovering target genes of miRNAs.

However, each method discovers a different set of confirmed miRNA–mRNA interactions, suggesting their own predicting merits. Fig. 4
                         shows the differences in the numbers of validated miRNA–mRNA interactions predicted by DirectTarget and the other five methods. In the top 10 lists for the 44 miRNAs, there are 6, 2, 6, 6 and 4 validated miRNA–mRNA interactions discovered by Pearson, Lasso, GeneMiR++, ProMISe, and generic IDA respectively, but missed by DirectTarget. However, there are 5, 12, 8, 10, and 17 validated miRNA–mRNA interactions identified by DirectTarget but missed by Pearson, Lasso, GeneMiR++, ProMISe, and generic IDA, respectively. In the top 20 lists of the 44 miRNAs, DirectTarget does not identify 4, 0, 11, 5 and 11 confirmed miRNA–mRNA interactions discovered by Pearson, Lasso, GeneMiR++, ProMISe, and generic IDA respectively. Nevertheless, in the top 20 lists, there are 6, 20, 12, 9 and 27 validated miRNA–mRNA interactions discovered by DirectTarget, but missed by Pearson, Lasso, GeneMiR++, ProMISe, and generic IDA respectively. The detailed information of validated miRNA–mRNA interactions by different methods is in Supplementary material 3.

In order to assess the statistical significance of the number of validated miRNA–mRNA interactions, we conceive a cumulative hypergeometric distribution model for this.

Let S be the number of possible target genes for n miRNAs used in the validation in the EMT dataset, K be the number of miRNA–mRNA interactions from the ground truth for these miRNAs, N be the number of miRNA–mRNA interactions predicted by each method for these miRNAs, and x be the number of validated miRNA–mRNA interactions by the ground truth for these miRNAs. The p-value of the validation results, which is the probability of the random method equal to or better than each method, is calculated using the cumulative hypergeometric test formula:
                           
                              (1)
                              
                                 p
                                 (
                                 X
                                 ⩾
                                 x
                                 )
                                 =
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          ∑
                                       
                                       
                                          i
                                          =
                                          x
                                       
                                       
                                          N
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         K
                                                      
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         i
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         S
                                                         ∗
                                                         n
                                                         -
                                                         K
                                                      
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         N
                                                         -
                                                         i
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         S
                                                         ∗
                                                         n
                                                      
                                                   
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         N
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        Table 1
                         shows the total number of validated miRNA–mRNA interactions out of all the top 10 and 20 lists of the 44 miRNAs obtained by each method together with the p-values for each of the results. The low p-values for DirectTarget in Table 1 suggest that the validation results of the method in discovering direct miRNA–mRNA causal regulatory relationships are statistically significant and not obtained by chance.

We also use the cumulative hypergeometric test to assess the statistical significance of the prediction for each single miRNA, i.e. using formula (1) when n
                        =1. With the assessment based on the top 10 list of each miRNA, the numbers of significant miRNAs, i.e. miRNAs with statistically significant predictions (p-value<0.05) by the six methods (DirectTarget, Pearson, Lasso, GenMiR++, ProMISe and generic IDA) are 9, 8, 4, 6, 6 and 1 respectively. With the assessment based on the top 20 list of each miRNA, there are 7, 5, 1, 6, 5 and 1 significant miRNAs respectively for the six methods. The results show that DirectTarget could identify more miRNAs with validated targets that is statistically significant than the other five methods in both cases. The detailed information of the statistical significance of each miRNA by different methods is in Supplementary material 3.

In order to balance the chance of finding more novel interactions and the cost of the exploration, instead of using the top-k interactions (e.g. k
                        =100), we use the median of the absolute values of all calculated causal effects as the cutoff in selecting potential causal relationships. When we list the interactions between miRNAs and mRNAs at probe level, a mRNA having different probe names may have multiple interactions with the same miRNA. Therefore when we represent the interactions at mRNA level, i.e. using gene symbols, there are duplicated miRNA–mRNA causal interactions. For each set of duplicated interactions, we keep only the interaction with the highest causal effect. As a result, we obtain 975 unique direct miRNA–mRNA causal regulatory relationships which involve 44 miRNAs and 493 unique mRNAs for EMT (details in Supplementary material 4).

Given that the miR-200 family is closely associated with epithelial to mesenchymal transition, we focus the exploration on direct causal regulatory relationships of the miR-200 family. As shown in Fig. 5
                         (red bold-faced line), the results indicate that ZEB1 is causally co-regulated by miR-200b, miR-200c and miR-429, and ZEB2 is co-regulated by miR-141, miR-200a, miR-200b, miR-200c and miR-429. Previous research [47–50] has shown that the miR-200 family inhibits the initiating step of metastasis and EMT by targeting the E-cadherin transcriptional repressors ZEB1 and ZEB2. The expression and inhibition of the miR-200 family causally determine the regulation types of ZEB1 and ZEB2. The discoveries using DirectTarget are consistent with these results in the literature. Furthermore, ZEB1 and ZEB2 as bio-markers are also confirmed by our findings. The two mRNAs causally regulated by the miR-200 family are the markers in all three subtypes of EMT [51].

As the results are generated based on the EMT datasets, we extract the significant direct miRNA–mRNA causal regulatory relationships with the median of the causal effect (absolute) values as the cutoff, and validate those mRNAs as target genes for EMT. The functions of the target genes and the molecular pathways they potentially constitute are performed with the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA, Ingenuity Systems, www.ingenuity.com). Significant biological functions are identified for the target genes with a p-value cutoff of 0.05.

The causally regulated target genes are significantly enriched for several biological functions. The top five biological functions from IPA that are crucial for EMT are cancer, reproductive system disease, endocrine system disorders, cellular movement and dermatological diseases and conditions. Especially, the sub-categories of cellular movement, migration, invasion and scattering are critical for EMT since they have been identified as the functional markers of EMT in vitro [52]. As illustrated in Table 2
                         (details in Supplementary material 5), a significant number of target genes are associated with migration and invasion biological functions at significant level (max p-value<0.05) and they are functional bio-markers for EMT.

Great efforts have been made in investigating how miRNAs act in regulating target genes and their roles in various biological conditions. However, we have seen relatively few research into how miRNAs are regulated by TFs (TF–miRNA regulation). In fact, the genes with more TF-binding sites have a higher probability of being targeted by miRNAs and have more miRNA-binding sites on average, indicating that miRNAs and TFs may collaborate to regulate gene expression [53]. Therefore in this paper, we also examine the causal feedforward patterns (CFFPs) of TF–miRNA–mRNA in order to get insights into the indirect TF–mRNA regulation as a result of direct TF–miRNA and miRNA–mRNA causal interactions.

To explore the CFFPs, we only retain the direct TF–miRNA and miRNA–mRNA causal interactions with high absolute values of causal effects. We also use the median of the absolute values of the causal effects of all indirect TF–mRNA relationships as the cutoff to get significant CFFPs of TF–miRNA–mRNA. In total 1188 significant CFFPs of TF–miRNA–mRNA are selected, which involve 8 unique TFs, 29 miRNAs and 317 unique mRNAs for EMT (details in Supplementary material 6).

We focus on the significant CFFPs of TF–miRNA–mRNA that involve the miR-200 family (miR-141, miR-200a, miR-200b, miR-200c and miR-429) because some causal relationships in this category have been validated. As shown in Fig. 6
                        , transcription factor ZEB2 can also directly regulate miR-200a, miR-200b and miR-429 (red bold-faced line). This implies that ZEB2 and the miR-200 family are reciprocally linked in a feedback loop, each one strictly controlling the other. This result is consistent with previous reports that a ZEB/miR-200 feedback loop plays a role in regulating EMT and cancer invasion [48,54]. Another transcriptional factor associated with EMT is SNAI2 (SLUG), and it plays an important role in EMT events during development, cancer and fibrosis [55]. Our results infer that SNAI2 directly regulates the miR-200 family transcript (red bold-faced line in Fig. 6). This discovery is consistent with the known discovery that SNAI2 regulates the miR-200 family [56].

We have also confirmed an observation that when the direct regulation of both TF–miRNA and miRNA–mRNA are up-regulation (positive causal effects) or down-regulation (negative causal effects), the indirect regulation of TF–mRNA shows as up-regulation. Meanwhile, when the direct regulation of TF–miRNA is different from the regulation type of miRNA–mRNA, the indirect regulation of TF–mRNA shows as down-regulation. The consistency of the occurrences is up to 100% when the median of causal effect (absolute) values is used as the cutoff when selecting indirect TF–mRNA relationships for examination. Even when considering all indirect TF–mRNA causal relationships the consistency is up to 95.58% (details in Supplementary material 6). The results demonstrate that we can infer indirect regulation types of TF–mRNA using direct regulation types of TF–miRNA and miRNA–mRNA.

miRNAs are important gene regulators at the post-transcriptional level. However, it is still very challenging to achieve accurate prediction of the regulatory relationships between miRNAs and their target genes. In this paper, we have proposed a causal discovery based framework (DirectTarget) to identify the direct causal relationships between miRNAs and mRNAs. DirectTarget utilises both gene expression data and the target information predicted based on sequence data. The computational results of DirectTarget have been validated to be effective with experimentally confirmed target databases.

Most existing computational methods can only discover from observational data the statistical relationships between miRNAs and mRNAs, neglecting the causal nature of gene regulatory relationships. The recent work in [27] has adapted the idea of causal discovery for identifying causal regulatory relationships between miRNAs and mRNAs. However, the method is not able to distinguish direct causal regulatory relationships from indirect ones, while knowing whether a possible regulatory relationship is direct or indirect is essential for biologists when setting up lab experiments. On the other hand, miRNA target prediction based on sequence data is expected to provide the evidence of direct regulation of miRNAs on mRNA, but most target prediction methods based on sequence data have high false discovery rates and output too many possible targets, which makes the results less valuable in experiment design.

In this paper, we exploit the advantages of the causal discovery approach and sequence data based target prediction. DirectTarget firstly uses causal discovery to identify causal regulatory relationships between miRNAs and mRNAs with high accuracy, then we use predicted target information to guide the selection of direct regulatory relationships from the causal relationships identified in the first step. When applying DirectTarget to the EMT datasets, the validation results indicate that DirectTarget can effectively infer the direct causal relationships between miRNAs and their target genes. Moreover, the functional validations of the causally regulated target genes show that a significant number of target genes are highly associated with EMT. The experimental validations show that DirectTarget can be a useful tool to assist the experimental design for gene regulatory studies. Apart from the experimentally confirmed miRNA–mRNA relationships, the results generated by DirectTarget for other miRNAs still need further research and follow-up experiments.

Several methods [57–59] have been proposed to infer the regulatory relationships involving the three components, miRNAs, TFs, and mRNAs. However, to the best of our knowledge, there is no study specifically examining the direct causal regulatory relationships of TF–miRNA and miRNA–mRNA simultaneously and how these two types of direct regulatory relationships are connected. As a first attempt to this challenging problem, in this paper, we have also applied DirectTarget to explore the causal feedforward patterns of TF–miRNA–mRNA. The results show that TFs can indirectly regulate their target genes by directly regulating miRNAs.

DirectTarget provides a means to identify direct miRNA–mRNA causal regulatory relationships in heterogeneous data. The method is based on causality discovery and thus is different from existing correlation/association based approaches. As gene regulatory relationships are causal relationships, theoretically, DirectTarget is designed to return a correct set of miRNA–mRNA interactions when the number of samples is large. However, the large sample size requirement is often violated in real world datasets, and therefore the predictive power of DirectTarget is decreased.

The experimental results show that DirectTarget demonstrates some advantages over the other existing methods. Note that the validation results are based on currently available experimentally confirmed miRNA targets which are still far from complete. Moreover, each method discovered a unique set of validated interactions that other methods failed to identify, indicating that DirectTarget and other existing methods have their own merits in predicting miRNA targets.

In the future, we plan to tackle the small sample problem by integrating domain knowledge in causal structure learning. In this way, we may reduce the false identification of edges in a causal Bayesian network introduced by conditional independence tests with a small number of samples. The improved causal network will help achieve more accurate estimation of causal effects. We also plan to evaluate the performance of DirectTarget and other existing methods on larger cancer datasets from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA, https://tcga-data.nci.nih.gov/tcga/tcgaHome2.jsp), where the number of samples for each cancer type is larger than what we used in this paper and the causality discovery based method will have more advantages than other methods.

Based on the results of this paper, nonetheless DirectTarget is a promising and complementary alternative to other existing methods for discovering target genes of miRNAs. In the future, we will further improve the computational efficiency of the method, and use more comprehensive miRNA target binding information to identify direct miRNA–mRNA causal regulatory relationships. Furthermore since many diseases are more likely caused by the effects of several miRNAs rather than a single miRNA [60], it is useful to infer the miRNAs synergistic effects and investigate gene regulation mechanisms at a system-wide level in the miRNA–miRNA synergistic networks. In the future we will construct miRNA–miRNA synergistic causal networks that reflect the co-regulation of miRNAs.

JPZ, TDL and JYL conceived the idea of this work. LL and JH refined the idea. JPZ and TDL designed and performed the experiments. GG, BL and TDL provided the miRNA data and validated the results. JPZ, TDL, BL and JYL drafted the manuscript. All authors revised the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

We are grateful to the reviewers for their constructive comments. This work has been partially supported by the Applied Basic Research Foundation of Science and Technology of Yunnan Province (No: 2013FD038), the Australian Research Council Discovery Grant DP130104090, and the Science Research Foundation for Youth Scholars of Dali University (No: KYQN201203).

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2014.08.005.


                     
                        
                           Supplementary Material 1
                           
                              Differentially expressed miRNAs and mRNAs. Differentially expressed miRNAs and mRNAs are identified by limma package at significant level (adjusted p-value<0.05, adjusted by Benjamini–Hochberg (BH) method).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  


                     
                        
                           Supplementary Material 2
                           
                              miRNA–mRNA regulatory relationships of each method. DirectTarget and the other four methods (Pearson, Lasso, GenMiR++ and ProMISe) use target binding information when inferring miRNA–mRNA regulatory relationships. The generic IDA method does not use target binding information in identifying miRNA–mRNA interactions.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  


                     
                        
                           Supplementary Material 3
                           
                              Validated miRNA–mRNA interactions and statistical significance of each miRNA with validated targets by different methods. The p-value cutoff of statistically significant level is set to 0.05. For the top 10 lists of the 44 miRNAs, the numbers of validated miRNA–mRNA interactions of the six methods (DirectTarget, Pearson, Lasso, GenMiR++, ProMISe and generic IDA) are 17, 18, 7, 15, 13 and 4, respectively, and the numbers of statistically significant miRNAs of the six methods are 9, 8, 4, 6, 6 and 1 respectively. For the top 20 lists of the 44 miRNAs, the numbers of validated miRNA–mRNA interactions are 28, 26, 8, 27, 24 and 12 respectively, and the numbers of statistically significant miRNAs of the six methods are 7, 5, 1, 6, 5 and 1, respectively.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  


                     
                        
                           Supplementary Material 4
                           
                              Direct miRNA–mRNA causal regulatory relationships. We have identified 1866 unique causal regulatory interactions between 44 miRNAs and 660 unique mRNAs, and 975 unique direct miRNA–mRNA causal regulatory relationships which comprise 44 miRNAs and 493 unique mRNAs for EMT.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  


                     
                        
                           Supplementary Material 5
                           
                              Causal feedforward patterns of TF–miRNA–mRNA. We have identified 1188 significant CFFPs of TF–miRNA–mRNA which comprise 8 unique TFs, 29 miRNAs and 317 unique mRNAs for EMT.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  


                     
                        
                           Supplementary Material 6
                           
                              Functional validation of mRNAs for EMT in IPA. The functions of identified mRNAs that they potentially constitute are also extracted by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) software. A significant number of mRNAs associate with EMT functional markers.
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

