@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Development and validation of a continuous measure of patient condition using the Electronic Medical Record

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           New method to estimate patient condition during a hospital visit.


                        
                        
                           
                           Patient condition is computed by summing risks measured in each of 26 variables.


                        
                        
                           
                           Leverages data already in the EMR: vital signs, lab results, nursing assessments.


                        
                        
                           
                           Rothman Index, a measure of patient condition, is independent of diagnosis and spans all acuity levels.


                        
                        
                           
                           May help clinicians to improve continuity of care and to detect trends.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Health status indicators

Deterioration

Nursing assessments

Electronic health records

Acuity score

Patient condition

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Patient condition is a key element in communication between clinicians. However, there is no generally accepted definition of patient condition that is independent of diagnosis and that spans acuity levels. We report the development and validation of a continuous measure of general patient condition that is independent of diagnosis, and that can be used for medical-surgical as well as critical care patients.
                  A survey of Electronic Medical Record data identified common, frequently collected non-static candidate variables as the basis for a general, continuously updated patient condition score. We used a new methodology to estimate in-hospital risk associated with each of these variables. A risk function for each candidate input was computed by comparing the final pre-discharge measurements with 1-year post-discharge mortality. Step-wise logistic regression of the variables against 1-year mortality was used to determine the importance of each variable. The final set of selected variables consisted of 26 clinical measurements from four categories: nursing assessments, vital signs, laboratory results and cardiac rhythms. We then constructed a heuristic model quantifying patient condition (overall risk) by summing the single-variable risks. The model’s validity was assessed against outcomes from 170,000 medical-surgical and critical care patients, using data from three US hospitals.
                  Outcome validation across hospitals yields an area under the receiver operating characteristic curve(AUC) of ⩾0.92when separating hospice/deceased from all other discharge categories, an AUC of ⩾0.93 when predicting 24-h mortalityand an AUC of 0.62 when predicting 30-day readmissions. Correspondence with outcomesreflective of patient condition across the acuity spectrum indicates utility in both medical-surgical unitsand critical care units. The model output, which we call the Rothman Index, may provide clinicians witha longitudinal view of patient condition to help address known challenges in caregiver communication,continuity of care, and earlier detection of acuity trends.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The increasing adoption of Electronic Medical Records (EMRs) enables the consistent and accurate manipulation of large amounts of clinical data for computational purposes. This provides an opportunity to use a wide range of clinical variables to quantitatively determine the acuity of a hospitalized patient’s condition without risking the burden of complexity or miscalculation on the part of clinicians [1–4].

Clinicians can currently choose among many tools [4] designed to quantify some aspect of patient acuity. In almost all cases these tools assess risk for a specific event such as cardiopulmonary arrest, mortality, or transfer to the ICU [5–11], specific disease or procedure [12–16] or are specific to an environment, such as PRISM [15], APACHE III [17] and SOFA [18] in the ICU.

These systems were developed using one of two approaches. In some cases researchers compute acuity based on a set of easy-to-apply rules that are derived from expert opinion; the Modified Early Warning Score (MEWS) is a well-known example of this approach [19]. In other cases researchers have developed models using standard regression methods applied against specific events, such as unexpected death or transfer to the ICU [20,21].

One characteristic of MEWS [19] and related scores such as VitalPAC [22], PEWS [2], Bedside-PEWS [23], C-CHEWS [24], is that they depend on experts to specify the input variables and the risk associated with particular values or states of each input variable. For example, the Behavior/Neuro sub-score used in the C-CHEWS model is assigned a value of zero when the patient state is “playing/sleeping appropriately”, a value of 1 when “sleepy, somnolent when not disturbed”, a value of 2 when “irritable, difficult to console”, and a value of 3 when displaying “reduced response to pain”. There are about 40 values in the model that have similarly assigned risk weightings. These expert distinctions form the basis of this model. In general their implied risk functions do not have any rigorous validation, although some authors follow iterative processes based on the model’s performance [24]. Difficulties arise in application of expert-based models; for example, to identify 44% of transfers to ICU occurring in the next 12h, MEWS generates 69 false positives for every correctly identified event [19].

A more rigorous approach is to build a regression model, which is then evaluated on an independent test set. Kirkland et al. [20] have taken a parsimonious modeling approach (using only 4 parameters) to predict within 12h: Rapid Response Team calls, unplanned transfers to the ICU, or unexpected death (AUC=0.71). Escobar et al. [21] have taken advantage of a large dataset from 14 hospitals to develop a model using approximately 100 data items, from which are derived about 40 regression parameters. The three outcomes which they chose to regress against were, within the next 12h: unplanned transfer from ward to ICU; or unplanned transfer from transitional care unit (TCU) to the ICU; or sudden unexpected death on ward or TCU without a “do not resuscitate” order in place (AUC ranged from 0.57 to 0.84 depending on the disease specific sub-model). A problem with both these regression models is the use of infrequent heterogeneous events as targets, which lessens their practical applicability and lowers their signal to noise ratio. For example, Escobar makes a direct comparison with the MEWS statistic above: to identify 44% of transfers to ICU occurring in the next 12h, his model generates 34 false positives for every correctly identified event.

Rather than attempting to forecast a particular adverse event,we argue that intervention during early deterioration can help prevent such an adverse event from occurring [25,26]. Quantifying each patient’s condition on a continuous basis could provide an opportunity to detect a declining trend in time for clinicians to act, enabling an appropriately graded response to changes in patient condition [26,27].

We report the development and validation of a general measure of individual patient condition using 26 clinical variables commonly available in the EMR including vital signs, lab results, cardiac rhythms and nursing assessments. We describe our approach to variable selection, the evaluation of risk represented by the value of each variable, and the creation of a heuristic model to compute overall risk. We have named the resulting score of patient condition the “Rothman Index” in memory of Florence A. Rothman, whose death inspired this work.

Leveraging the EMR realizes the vision [4,28] of a continuously updated patient condition score independent of specific events, diseases, procedures or environments, and incorporating sufficient clinical variables to provide sensitivity to patient risk across the spectrum of acuity, from the unimpaired to the gravely ill. In developing this patient condition model we have taken a new methodological approach to quantify patient risk by following a data-intensive process that avoids the ad-hoc nature of MEWS-type models while using more frequent outcome events to assign risk values to the model inputs.

@&#MATERIAL AND METHODS@&#

This section presents the methodology to create and validate a general risk model. We describe criteria for variable selection, the approach to determining risk associated with each candidate variable, and how the selected inputs are combined into a final model. As we are seeking to model “patient condition”, a quantity that does not have a defined reference standard, we validate the reported model by showing correlation with quantities that are related to the patient’s general condition [29].

We used a single dataset for model construction and five datasets for model validation. Data access was in some cases opportunistic, leading to variation in dataset sizes and time frames.

Model construction used data for 22,265 in-patients admitted from January 2004 through December 2004 at Sarasota Memorial Hospital (SMH), an 806-bed regional medical center.

Model validation used in-patient data from 3 hospitals: 19,055 admissions from July 2005 to June 2006, 32,341 admissions from September 2007 through June 2009, and 45,771 admissions from January 2008 through May 2010 at SMH; 32,416 admissions from July 2009 to June 2010 at Abington Memorial Hospital (AMH), a 665-bed regional referral center and teaching hospital; and 19,402 admissions from July 2008 to November 2008 at Hospital C, an 800-bed teaching hospital in the southeastern US. In two instances (discharge disposition and APACHE III correlation), we used the SMH 2004 model construction dataset for validation.

Data at all three hospitals were recorded in the same type of EMR system, Allscripts (Eclipsys) Sunrise Clinical Manager. Data from pediatric (<18years of age), obstetric, psychiatric, were excluded. All other in-patients were included. One-year post-discharge mortality was determined using the Social Security Administration’s Death Master File.

This work received independent approval from the Institutional Review Board at each hospital.

A survey of the EMR data collected from SMH yielded approximately 7000 variables (nearly 6500 flowsheet inputs and 500 laboratory tests). However, the aim of a general, continuous, and sensitive measure of patient condition imposed certain constraints upon the variables, that they be: (a) related to patient condition, (b) regularly collected on all patients, and (c) susceptible to change over the course of a patient’s hospital stay. Hence, demographic or descriptive variables that do not change during a patient’s time in the hospital, such as age, sex, diagnosis, comorbidities, and hospitalization history were excluded. The focus is on “how the patient is” rather than “who the patient is”. These constraints reduced the dataset to 43 candidate variables: 13 nursing assessments, 6 vital signs, 23 laboratory tests, and cardiac-monitoring rhythms.

For each of these 43 clinical variables, an excess risk function was computed. “Excess risk” is defined as the percent increase in 1-year all-cause mortality associated with any value of a clinical variable, relative to the minimum 1-year mortality identified for that variable. For example, Fig. 1
                         shows the excess risk function for white blood cell count (WBC). The points represent average excess 1-year post-discharge all-cause mortality vs. average WBC at discharge; data from 22,265 patient discharges from SMH (2004) are bucketed by WBC range. The regression line is a polynomial fit to the data, normalized to the lowest risk value. Above and below clinical value extrema, where data are sparse, the function is set to a constant. Although risk almost certainly increases at values beyond the data extrema, we choose not to extrapolate owing to the fact that the actual slope of the risk function in these domains is unknown. As excess risk functions are important building blocks of our model, in Fig. 1 we also show data points from a second 1-year period, to show the consistency of the underlying relation.

The goal is not to predict mortality; rather, 1-year post-discharge mortality is chosen as an outcome that is well defined, easy to determine, encompasses a significant part of the sample population (approximately 10%), and is related to in-hospital patient condition at the time of discharge [30,31]. Excess risk functions were calculated for the numerical, continuous clinical variables including vital signs and laboratory measures.

Excess risk values were also determined for nursing assessment results. Nursing assessment data are collected in the course of a “head-to-toe” or “body system” patient examination [32] performed at least once per nursing shift and recorded in the EMR in one of two ways. If charting by exception, [33] the nurse answers a master question for each physiological system, such as “Is the patient’s respiratory function within normal limits?” (“normal” limits might be defined as respiration at 12–24 breaths/minute, nail beds pink, bilateral breath sounds). Alternatively, the nurse may answer a series of questions, such as, “What are the breath sounds?”, and “What color are the nail beds?”. The answer to a master question is “pass” or “fail”, and when there are multiple questions per assessment, we map the entire category to a “fail” if any answer reflects a deviation from normal. Assessment questions may vary between hospitals but share the aim of noting non-normal physiological system fundamentals. Example definitions of standards for each nursing assessment are shown in Table 1
                        .

Excess risk for each nursing assessment category was calculated from the difference in 1-year mortality between patients who passed and patients who failed their last assessment prior to discharge. In Fig. 2
                        , we show excess risk computed for 12 nursing assessments (excluding the Braden score) for 2 separate 1-year periods at SMH to show the stability of the relative impact of failing a particular nursing assessment. The 2004 results were used in the model development.

With all 43 variables on a common 1-year excess mortality risk scale, multi-collinearity was determined using Pearson correlation coefficients. If any pair of variables had a Pearson correlation coefficient greater than 0.7, the less frequently collected variable was excluded. The relative importance of the remaining variables was determined using forward stepwise logistic regression (SAS Version 9.2) of the excess risk values against 1-year mortality. Variables were added subject to the added regression coefficient having a p-value of less than 0.05. The final set of variables is shown in Table 2
                        . The logistic regression is used only to select variables; its coefficients are not used. The resultant model is hence not a regression model trained on 1-year mortality but rather a heuristic model built using excess risk functions. See Appendix A for the risk functions associated with the selected variables.

The variable selection and the transformation of raw variables into risk functions are conducted using empirical methods; however, the model itself is partially heuristic. As there is no general quantitative measure of patient condition, regression methods are not applicable.

The score is indexed from 100 and reduced as a function of increasing risk. Risk is calculated as the sum of the excess risk represented by each individual variable at a given time, as shown in following equation:
                           
                              (1)
                              
                                 Rothman Index
                                 =
                                 100
                                 -
                                 (
                                 Scale factor
                                 )
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          ∑
                                       
                                       
                                          Input
                                          =
                                          1
                                       
                                       
                                          #
                                          Variables
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       Excess risk
                                    
                                    
                                       Input
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     

A score of 100 is achieved only when all input variables are at a minimum (zero excess risk) value. A scaling factor ensures the majority of patients on a general medical-surgical unit fall within a dynamic range from 0 to 100, rendering subtle deterioration easily detectable as a falling RI score. Critically ill patients may have negative RI values (the minimum possible RI score is −91). As it is rare that all 26 variables are measured at the same time, the model must allow for missing data. We address this by using the most recent value of each variable when computing the RI, limiting the acceptable time that a measurement can be carried forward (e.g. to 15h in order to span nursing shifts). If a variable is completely missing for a particular patient, zero excess risk is assigned.

Laboratory tests are generally collected less frequently than vital signs and nursing assessments. To take advantage of the information from laboratory tests without sacrificing accuracy over time, the RI model is composed of 2 sub-models (RInoLab and RIwithLab). Both sub-models are computed as in Eq. (1); RInoLab uses only nursing assessments and vital signs; RIwithLab uses nursing assessments, vital signs and laboratory tests. As the laboratory data ages its relevance to the patient’s current condition diminishes; therefore, RIwithLab is blended by a linear decay with RInoLab; after 48h, RInoLab is used solely, until new laboratory data becomes available. At a minimum, computing a patient’s RI requires a set of vital signs and nursing assessments.

Stepwise forward logistic regression is used to select variables for each sub-model. Variables selected for RInoLab include all inputs listed in Table 2, except for the laboratory results. The same procedure for RIwithLab yielded 24 variables; with the inclusion of lab data, the cardiac rhythms and peripheral vascular inputs do not meet the minimum criterion (p
                        <0.05) for inclusion in the model.

The model is thus a simple linear combination of the two sub-models as a function of time, based on the most recent available laboratory data, as shown in following equation:
                           
                              (2)
                              
                                 Rothman Index
                                 =
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                RI
                                             
                                             
                                                noLab
                                             
                                          
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         TimeSinceLabs
                                                      
                                                      
                                                         48
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 +
                                 Smoothing function
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                RI
                                             
                                             
                                                withLab
                                             
                                          
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   1
                                                   -
                                                   
                                                      
                                                         TimeSinceLabs
                                                      
                                                      
                                                         48
                                                      
                                                   
                                                
                                             
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        where “TimeSinceLabs” has a maximum value=48h.

This approach allows the lab results to smoothly and gradually “age-out” as they became too far removed in time to be relevant. When new lab data arrive again, then the RIwithLab sub-model is selected. A “Smoothing Function”, shown in Eq. (2), and described in Appendix B, was added to enhance continuity when RI switches from RInoLab to RIwithLab.

The Rothman Index is a heuristic model and as such is not designed to predict a specific quantity. Because neither validity nor reliability can be exactly quantified [29,34], we use the method of construct validity as used by Richardson et al. in the development of the Score for Neonatal Acute Physiology. [29] Construct validity is specifically defined by Boudreaux et al. [35] as “… the degree to which a measure actually assesses the attribute it is purported to measure” based on “whether the measures relate to other variables in expected and predictable ways”. In this work the relationship of the RI to an outcome independently associated with patient condition was examined on the assumption that poorer condition is expected to correspond to poorer outcomes.

Construct validators were chosen to assess patient condition over different time frames and acuity levels. Sensitivity and specificity are important discriminatory parameters [3,36], and area under the receiver operating characteristic curves (AUC) for several construct validators are reported on a by hospital basis.

Discharge disposition provides a method for ascertaining how consistently the RI corresponds to patient condition across the acuity spectrum of discharged patients. The average final RI prior to discharge for patients was compared to each of 6 categories of discharge disposition: home, home healthcare, rehabilitation (outpatient facility or rehabilitation ward), skilled nursing, hospice, and death. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) procedures were employed to determine if statistically significant differences existed between the RI averages associated with discharge categories. The ANOVA was followed with pair-wise contrasts using the Tukey–Kramer HSD test. [37]. Additionally, the final RI was used to separate the first 4 categories from the last 2 categories (patients dying or discharged to hospice) for all three validation hospitals, and the associated AUC was calculated. Patients who left the hospital against medical advice or were transferred to another hospital (e.g. a psychiatric facility) were excluded.

The RI score is calculated every time a new model input is available. Many RI scores are thus recorded for each patient’s hospital stay. When the patient is in critical care, data are collected more frequently. Every RI score for every patient was categorized as being within 24h of death or not; this measures the effectiveness of the RI in discerning patients who are critically ill. AUC for this 24-h mortality correlation was calculated for each hospital.

The relationship between final RI prior to discharge and 30-day hospital readmission rate was investigated by computing AUC. To explore the sensitivity of the RI to variations in condition for relatively well (low acuity) patients, only readmission rates for patients discharged to home or home healthcare were used in the calculation of the AUC.

To examine high-acuity patients, the RI just prior to admission to ICU was compared to APACHE III initial estimates of mortality [17] upon entry to the ICU, using the SMH 2004 dataset. In this dataset there were 804 patients with APACHE III scores, for whom there was also enough data to compute RI scores. Patients entering from operating, recovery or emergency rooms were excluded because data required to compute RI were unavailable.

RI scores and MEWS values were computed for 32,416 AMH patients (yielding more than 1.86 million scores) to contrast the sensitivity of the two scores across the acuity spectrum. MEWS calculations were based on the model of Subbe et al. [19]. A mapping was done from the Glasgow Coma Score to approximate the Alert/Painful/Verbal/Unresponsive (AVPU) input, which was not available in the dataset [38].

@&#RESULTS@&#

The results show the correspondence of the RI to patient outcomes across a range of acuity levels. Validation using outcomes across hospitals yields an area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) of ⩾0.92 when separating selected patient discharge categories, and an AUC of ⩾0.93 when predicting 24-h mortality, and an AUC of 0.62 when predicting 30-day readmissions. To compare with an accepted ICU scoring model, we correlate our results with APACHE III estimates of mortality. To compare with an expert-based system for hospital wards, we calculate MEWS scores and show that the RI provides a fine gradation of patient condition.


                        Table 3
                         shows the mean, standard deviation, and percentage of patients by discharge category for SMH, AMH, and Hospital C. The mean values of the final RI show a decreasing rank order corresponding to discharge categories associated with increasing patient acuity. The mean RI values for each discharge category are similar across the 3 demographically varied institutions.

All pair-wise comparisons of means were statistically significant (p
                        <0.05) using the Tukey–Kramer HSD test. When the final RI was used to separate the first 4 categories in Table 3 from the last 2 categories (hospice and death), the AUC was 0.923 (95% CI, 0.915–0.930) at SMH and 0.965 (95% CI, 0.960–0.970) at AMH and 0.915 (95% CI, 0.900–0.931) at Hospital C. A statistically significant difference was found between RI values associated with the discharge disposition categories F(5, 22,265)=4665.0, p
                        <0.0001, at SMH, see Fig. 3
                        .

A small number of patients in Fig. 3 (3.9% of total deaths) died with RI scores higher than 65. Chart reviews revealed that these relate to sudden cardiac or pulmonary death. Patients discharged to home with a low RI score typically represent instances when care was continued outside the hospital, e.g. outpatient treatment for congestive heart failure patients. Similar results were obtained at all hospitals: F(4, 32,104)=8204.23, p
                        <0.0001 for AMH and F(5, 18,809)=1643.41 p
                        <0.0001 for Hospital C.

The average likelihood of death within 24h as a function of the RI is shown in Fig. 4a. The AUCs relating the RI to 24-h mortality are: 0.933 (95% CI, 0.931–0.936) for AMH; 0.948 (95% CI, 0.945–0.951) for SMH; 0.929 (95% CI, 0.919–0.940) for Hospital C. The figure shows a non-linear relationship between a falling RI and the percentage of patients who die. A 10-point RI decrease when the patient is at 90 has little impact on risk, while a 10-point RI reduction from 20 to 10 reflects a large increase in risk. This fits a general understanding that patients in poor condition have a reduced physiological reserve; [18] hence a disproportionately increased risk is associated with additional impairment.


                        Fig. 4b relates the final RI at discharge to the likelihood of hospital readmission within 30days for patients discharged to home or home healthcare. The fall-off in readmissions for RI values below 30 results from the increased mortality rate of these patients. These numbers underestimate the actual 30-day readmission rate as only patients returning to SMH could be identified, thus omitting any readmission events at other hospitals. The AUC was 0.62 (95% CI, 0.61–0.63).

The final RI prior to transfer into the ICU for 804 SMH patients from the SMH 2004 dataset was compared with the corresponding APACHE III mortality estimates as shown in Fig. 4c. A significant correlation was found (Pearson’s correlation=−0.47, p
                        <0.001). While we do not replicate APACHE III, which has different diagnosis-specific inputs and a goal of predicting death in the ICU, we do demonstrate that low RI values correspond to high APACHE III initial estimates of mortality in the ICU and high RI values correspond to low APACHE III initial estimates of mortality.

The MEWS system is designed to highlight critical deteriorations that may precede cardiac or pulmonary arrest; however, more subtle changes that continually occur in the majority of the patient population are largely invisible to MEWS. RI scores and MEWS values computed on a common data set show that 93% of MEWS readings (Fig. 5
                        ) are 0, 1, 2 or 3; these values, which typically fall below the clinical response threshold, are seen in shades of blue) [19,39].

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

We have developed a continuously updated index using a novel methodology, based upon 1-year mortality. Asynchronous vital signs, cardiac rhythms, lab tests and nursing assessments are taken as inputs, and multiple validation tests across several independent test sets at three US hospitals are reported. The RI surpasses MEWS in predicting 24-h mortality, correlates with APACHE III in the ICU, and also is sensitive across the full acuity spectrum, with an average final value prior to discharge properly ordered by acuity of discharge dispositions.

There is no generally accepted definition of patient condition that is independent of diagnosis and which spans acuity levels. Nevertheless, patient condition is a crucial concept referenced by healthcare providers and is a key element in the communication between clinicians. The approach taken here follows a methodology which recognizes that, while patient condition is difficult to quantify, death serves as a well-defined state that is the farthest point from good condition. This contrasts with approaches that rely on other outcomes, such as transfer to the ICU or RRT calls, neither of which indicates a well-defined state. [21] We have computed excess risk, based upon a comprehensive set of clinical variables, in an effort to quantify distance from death. If a patient has no excess risk, he or she is as far from death as possible at that time and hence in good condition.

Instead of in-hospital death, which is relatively rare (approximately 1–2% of patients), our model is based on 1-year post-discharge mortality, where death is far more common (approximately 10% of patients). This provides five to ten times the signal strength with which to determine the relationships between clinical measures and risk. Possibly other tests could have been substituted. The requirement is that the test be consistently applied across all variables and that the outcome is both sufficiently frequent and a plausible surrogate for condition.

As a generalized assessment of a hospitalized patient’s condition, the RI is not designed to predict any specific event. However, we have tested correspondence with immediate measures such as discharge disposition, and future events such as 30-day readmissions and 24-h mortality. We additionally test the RI through comparison with existing validated scores that provide a proxy for current patient condition (e.g. APACHE and MEWS).

The reported construct validation demonstrates a clear correspondence between the RI and events indicative of patient condition, independent of variations in diagnosis, demographics, and acuity, and also conforms to clinical expectations associated with different degrees of acuity, thus substantiating the content and face validity of the RI. [40] The discharge disposition and 24-h mortality validation is based on an independent SMH data set, as well as AMH and Hospital C data sets, representing 3 independent test sets.

Our purpose of using 30-day readmissions for only those patients discharged to home and home healthcare is to complement the other validations: we wanted a measure of low acuity situations. None of our other validations focus on the large majority of patients who have recovered from their illness, and are going home from the hospital. Our AUC of 0.62 is comparable with models designed exclusively to predict 30-day readmission [41–43].

The consistency of the relationships between RI and discharge disposition and RI and 24-h mortality across hospitals is notable, given varying approaches to documenting nursing assessments, and different patient demographics and providers. Furthermore, while the three hospitals in this work have the same type of EMR, our use of common clinical data allows the RI model to be employed regardless of how the information is recorded in any particular EMR system. We believe this establishes the generality of the RI as a transportable measure of patient condition. We have also implemented the model at hospitals using four other EMR systems.

A particular application of a continuous score of current patient condition lies in assisting physicians or nurses in assessing a patient, as well as in considering any assessment as part of a series of assessments to discern a trend. Progression of the patient’s general condition over time can be plotted. Hence a graphical depiction of a patient’s Rothman Index may provide valuable context for clinicians seeking to understand and communicate the general state of a patient (see Appendix C for examples).

Variations in data collection frequency and lag between the time a clinician takes a measurement and enters it into the EMR leads to asynchronous data input. [44] The RI accommodates this by recalculating when any input variable changes, regardless of whether other inputs are modified. The RI is more robust due to partial redundancy: for example, respiration information is captured by a nursing assessment and also by a vital sign. These input variables are not collinear and are not interchangeable, they contribute different information about the patient’s respiratory state and may be measured at different times. Vital signs are taken throughout the day, usually at 4-h intervals. Nursing assessments are determined once per shift, usually every 12 h. Since we are trying to provide a longitudinal tracking view of the patient’s condition, we need to incorporate data as soon as they become available.

One of the inputs to the RI calculation is pulse oximetry (blood oxygen saturation). The RI model does not distinguish between patients with and without supplemental oxygen. The model simply reflects the patient’s current condition without regard to what that condition might be if circumstances or treatments were otherwise. This approach eliminates uncertainty or complications that can arise, as with the Worthing score, [45] when oxygen saturation must be ascertained with the patient on room air, potentially inconveniencing the provider and adding risk for the patient [3].

The inclusion of selected laboratory values when available adds sensitivity to the score, while the 48-h time-decay function imposed on the lab values accounts for their diminishing relevance and reliability over time. However, it is recognized that not all lab values have identical durations of relevance, and a more sophisticated treatment of lab value inputs, which allows for different decay-functions or phase-out periods for each of the lab components, may enhance the contribution of lab values to the model.

Patient deterioration is not always apparent to a physician or nurse, particularly when there is no prior familiarity with the patient. Sensitivity to deterioration, especially when not evidenced by compromised vital signs, is thus crucial for effective patient monitoring in a general medical-surgical unit. Nursing assessments that span the body’s physiological systems have high responsivity to a wide range of modes of patient deterioration (see Table 1). Similar to observations of functional measures [31,46], these data can improve sensitivity to early deterioration [47–49] and are particularly relevant to non-critical patients in a general medical-surgical unit. The RI is the first score to incorporate nursing assessments to assist in identifying patient deterioration by capturing “softer fails”, such as a patient who is not eating, or is confused (see Table 1). Nursing assessments have been shown to be an important source of dynamic clinical information. The functional deteriorations they reflect may precede vital sign changes and have been found to correlate strongly with in-hospital mortality [30].

The impact of each category of inputs in computing the index can be estimated from the maximum RI point loss possible from each category as a percentage of the total model possible point loss. The contributions of each variable category in RInoLab are: nursing assessments (47%), cardiac rhythms (11%) and vitals (42%). For RIwithLab they are: nursing assessments (34%), vitals (35%), and lab results (31%). These numbers can be derived from the excess risk functions shown in Appendix A.

Scores designed to predict specific critical events focus on the relevant set of variables providing the greatest discriminatory power in these instances; [5] however, this focused selection of inputs limits such scores’ sensitivity to patient risk in other domains of acuity. This is illustrated by APACHE III, which predicts the likelihood of in-ICU mortality. [17] The APACHE III algorithm does not assign additional mortality risk to patients whose temperature is between 96.8°F and 103.8°F. Although this may be appropriate when assessing ICU mortality risk, temperatures within that range are of interest when caring for patients in a general medical-surgical unit. Similarly, MEWS is developed to identify patients at risk for cardiac or pulmonary arrest, with little capacity to capture more subtle changes in condition.

Numerous aggregate weighted track and trigger systems and MEWS variants have been validated against 24-h mortality, but have shown a mixed ability to discriminate between survivors and non-survivors. [50] Previous efforts to take advantage of EMR data to improve the sensitivity and specificity of MEWS systems have fallen short. [51] In contrast, this work has found excellent 24-h mortality AUC values for all 3 hospitals (⩾0.929). This compares favorably with the recently reported VitalPAC Early Warning System (ViEWS) AUC of 0.888 (95% CI, 0.880–0.895), [22] though it is noted that differences in RI and ViEWS AUC values may be in part due to the scores being calculated with different data sets.

@&#LIMITATIONS@&#

The RI is unavailable for obstetric, psychiatric, and pediatric patients (<18years of age) because of lack of data at SMH. Investigation into the relationship between risk and clinical values in the pediatric population is currently underway at several children’s hospitals.

Data sets obtained from each of the three hospitals do not reflect patient visits over identical periods of time. Additionally, validation analyses for 30-day readmission rates and APACHE III and MEWS score correlations were each restricted to populations from a single hospital (SMH, SMH, and AMH respectively) owing to the limited availability of 30-day readmission, APACHE, and MEWS data at the other hospitals.

Availability and accuracy of social security numbers may limit the determination of 1-year mortality, which is used in the excess risk functions. As a test, we note that for patients with numbers who were discharged to hospice, 98% matched as having died within 1year of discharge; since we do not expect everyone in hospice to have died, this is an indication that our 1-year mortality estimates are good.

While the RI is intended for automated real-time computation, it can be subject to a time lag owing to the fact that data are not always entered into the EMR promptly upon measurement.

Further, while we have found nursing assessment data valuable, they are subject to a certain subjective variability. The extent of variation and the degree to which nurse education impacts consistency is a topic of ongoing investigation.

Clinical studies using the RI need to be completed in order to ascertain the impact of this tool, in practice, on improving communication and quality of care.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

The RI is a general measure of patient condition spanning the acuity spectrum, from relatively well patients, to acutely ill patients. It is computed using data commonly available in hospital EMRs, specifically 26 clinical metrics including vital signs, laboratory results, cardiac rhythms and particularly nursing assessments, which are an important source of dynamic clinical information. It is independent of diagnosis, demographics, or comorbidities. Leveraging data now electronically available in the EMR enables the RI to be updated continually throughout the duration of a patient’s hospital stay.

The RI has been tested using construct validators and demonstrates excellent correlation with measures reflective of patient condition. Validation work was conducted using data from 170,000 in-patient admissions at 3 US hospitals. This technology may provide clinicians with a longitudinal view of patient condition to help address known challenges in caregiver communication and the early detection of deterioration.

The authors are employees and shareholders of PeraHealth, Inc. of Charlotte NC, a company that uses the Rothman Index within its products, which are currently installed at several major medical research centers and hospital systems. The modeling methodology described herein was performed prior to the formation of the company. PeraHealth did not manage, approve or affect any aspect of the writing of this article. Research contributing to improvements in the Rothman Index is being conducted both by the company and by an independent nonprofit foundation, the F.A.R. Institute of Sarasota, FL.

The authors will provide access to software for computation the Rothman Index, at no cost to qualified researchers.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The authors express their deep appreciation to the staffs of Sarasota Memorial Hospital, Abington Memorial Hospital, and Hospital C. Particular thanks are extended to G. Duncan Finlay, MD, without whose support this work would not have been possible, as well as to George Almasi, PhD, Daniel Rothman, MBA, Alan Solinger, PhD, and Steve Lascher, PhD, for their expert input and advice. Research was funded by grants from the Sarasota Memorial Healthcare Foundation and the Goldsmith Fund of the Greenfield Foundation.

Excess risk functions are based on 1-year all-cause mortality as a function of pre-discharge values of the measurements specified. The minimum 1-year mortality is subtracted from all points in order to show incremental risk above baseline.

Each excess risk function reported was constructed using the approach described in Methods section. In a few instances, the function fitted to the data points falls slightly below zero, in which case the risk at those values is set to zero. As the data become sparse about the extrema of the measurements, the risk is set to a constant; we do not extrapolate beyond the actual data. The piecewise-continuous functions which constitute this set of excess risk functions (Fig. A1
                     ) are only used to interpolate.

Our approach is based upon the assumption that there is a single number that characterizes a quantity called “patient condition”. We use two sub-models to allow us to use laboratory data that, while frequently collected, are not collected as frequently as vital signs. Each sub-model, independent of the number of variables it contains, should measure this same patient condition. The model that uses lab data should be slightly more sensitive, as it incorporates more indicators for assessing patient condition.

To estimate patient condition we compute overall risk, computed by summing the risk inherent in each individual variable. Since the two sub-models have different numbers of variables (RInoLab has 19 and RIwithLab has 24) combining them requires a scaling factor so that the overall risk computed by each is on a common scale.

As we described above, RI gradually and smoothly shifts from the RIwithLab model to the RInoLab model as a function of “time since the lab data have arrived”, over 48h. However, if the latest lab data are more than 48h old, there is an abrupt shift to RIwithLab when new lab data arrive. Although both models are measuring the same quantity, when switching between sub-models, information may in fact be present in RIwithLab which was not contained in RInoLab, causing an appropriate jump or drop in RI. However, it is also possible that in switching from RInoLab to RIwithLab there may be a small jump or drop in RI not indicative of a change in patient condition, but that is simply an artifact of combining the two sub-models. To match the sub-models, a smoothing function is applied, which is the variable scaling factor shown in Eq. (2).

To derive the smoothing function, we computed the ratio of RInoLab over RIwithLab for 34,612 instances from the SMH 2004 dataset in which new lab data had arrived and RI switched from RInoLab to RIwithLab. We then grouped these ratios into 25 buckets, as a function of RInoLab. For each bucket we computed the average ratio and the average RInoLab and then fit a polynomial to the curve. This provided a variable scaling factor that is a function of overall risk. When RInoLab outputs a high overall risk, the value of the smoothing factor is 0.9. In instances of very low risk the difference increases between the two sub-models increase and the smoothing factor falls below 0.6.

Patient deterioration may occur hours or days in advance of critical events but can be difficult to discern [5,47,52]. For example, the National Patient Safety Agency reports that 11% of serious incidents are a function of deterioration not acted upon, and primary root causes include the failure to recognize the importance of a deterioration [53].

The challenges of early detection of patient deterioration are exacerbated by communication problems arising from fragmentation of care. The Institute for Healthcare Improvement observes that, with over 24 handoffs per patient during the course of an average 4.8-day stay, effective communication between caregivers is critical for maintaining continuity of care. [54] The Joint Commission reports that “80 percent of serious medical errors involve miscommunication between caregivers when patients are transferred or handed-off” and 37% of hand-offs are judged defective, in that the receiver does not have enough information to properly care for the patient. [55] Additionally, studies show that nurses deciding to call Medical Emergency Teams sometimes hesitate due to uncertainty in identifying changes in patient condition. [56] In any communication between caregivers, and especially at patient handoffs, information is lost, to the possible detriment of the patient [54,55,57]. Fortunately, the increasing use of information technology by clinicians, e.g. EMRs, can improve this situation. [58] The ability to see trends and changes in patient condition afforded by a continuously updated measure of patient condition may augment existing surveillance efforts [59] and is especially applicable to the “air traffic controller” model [51] where central monitoring can backstop clinicians who may not notice subtle patient deterioration over time.

The goal of this work was to develop and validate a continuous measure of general patient condition for medical-surgical as well as critical care patients using routinely recorded data from the Electronic Medical Record. Such a continuous measure of patient condition provides an opportunity to understand and communicate the current condition of a patient and may assist in the earlier detection of deterioration. By capturing, quantifying, and integrating data, the RI may provide a longitudinal perspective on both sudden and subtle changes to patient condition and assist in communicating these changes to clinicians.


                     Fig. A1
                      shows a graph of RI scores for a single patient over a 5-day period. Each point represents a new score computed when any of the 26 inputs was updated.

Presenting RI scores over time (e.g. graphically) provides context for understanding the implications of a patient’s current condition and aids in early detection of deterioration. When viewing graphs of RI scores (Figs. C1 and C2
                     ):
                        
                           •
                           RI of 100 means that the patient is unimpaired.

RI of 65 corresponds to the average acuity level of patients discharged to a SNF (see Table 3).

RI of 40 corresponds to a MEWS score of 4, based on computations using the AMH dataset (using the MEWS model of Subbe et al.). A MEWS value of 4 is considered a critical score for activating an escalation pathway for intervention or transfer to a higher level of care [19,39].

RI of 0 is generally the lowest score seen on a medical-surgical unit.

Negative RI values are often seen in the ICU.

This RI graph (Fig. A1) illustrates potential opportunities for intervention throughout day 4, hours prior to the first Rapid Response Team call. Contextual understanding of patient condition as it is changing may improve the timeliness and confidence with which providers respond to deteriorating patients. This is particularly relevant when deciding to call Rapid Response and Medical Emergency Teams [48,56,60].


                     Fig. C1 shows RI graphs of patients in the final 5days of their hospital stay. All the patients in Fig. C2a died in the hospital, while all the patients in Fig. C2b were discharged to home. Graphs were randomly sampled, subject to discharge criteria, from a common patient population (same 5-day date range from a single hospital).

A majority of graphs in Fig. C2a illustrate deterioration, as seen in the downward trend of RI, preceding death in accordance with clinical expectation. [61–63] Conversely, the trajectories of the patients discharged to home show predominantly flat or upward trends.

The impact of the RI on the effectiveness of communication and the quality of care will be the subject of future research [64,65].

@&#REFERENCES@&#

