@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#An innovative portal for rare genetic diseases research: The semantic Diseasecard

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Diseasecard is a web portal delivering rapid access to rare diseases resources.


                        
                        
                           
                           Data integrated from distinct sources are managed in a semantic web environment.


                        
                        
                           
                           The aggregated semantic rare diseases network is available through an advanced API.


                        
                        
                           
                           Diseasecard is freely available online at http://bioinformatics.ua.pt/diseasecard.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Rare diseases

Biomedical semantics

Data integration

Interoperability

Semantic web

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Advances in “omics” hardware and software technologies are bringing rare diseases research back from the sidelines. Whereas in the past these disorders were seldom considered relevant, in the era of whole genome sequencing the direct connections between rare phenotypes and a reduced set of genes are of vital relevance.
                  This increased interest in rare genetic diseases research is pushing forward investment and effort towards the creation of software in the field, and leveraging the wealth of available life sciences data. Alas, most of these tools target one or more rare diseases, are focused solely on a single type of user, or are limited to the most relevant scientific breakthroughs for a specific niche. Furthermore, despite some high quality efforts, the ever-growing number of resources, databases, services and applications is still a burden to this area. Hence, there is a clear interest in new strategies to deliver a holistic perspective over the entire rare genetic diseases research domain.
                  This is Diseasecard’s reasoning, to build a true lightweight knowledge base covering rare genetic diseases. Developed with the latest semantic web technologies, this portal delivers unified access to a comprehensive network for researchers, clinicians, patients and bioinformatics developers. With in-context access covering over 20 distinct heterogeneous resources, Diseasecard’s workspace provides access to the most relevant scientific knowledge regarding a given disorder, whether through direct common identifiers or through full-text search over all connected resources. In addition to its user-oriented features, Diseasecard’s semantic knowledge base is also available for direct querying, enabling everyone to include rare genetic diseases knowledge in new or existing information systems. Diseasecard is publicly available at http://bioinformatics.ua.pt/diseasecard/.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Rare genetic diseases research is at the forefront of the most modern personalized medicine endeavors. The rare term broadly defines disorders that affect at most 1 in 2000 patients [1] and the European Organization for Rare Diseases (EURORDIS) estimates that there are approximately 6000–8000 rare diseases, affecting about 6–8% of the population [2]. Within these, about 80% are caused by genetic changes, further strengthening the relations between genotypes and phenotypes associated with these particular conditions [3,4]. Some of these chronic diseases hinder the patients’ quality of life and cause serious damage or social disability [5]. Moreover, the low patient number severely obstructs the creation of adequate research cohorts, making it very difficult to coordinate studies capable of generating results in a scientifically-relevant scale [6,7].

In addition to long-term patient care improvements, understanding gene-disease associations is a fundamental goal for bioinformatics research, especially at the rare disease level, where genotype-phenotype connections are typically limited to one or a few more genes. This moves rare diseases research from a relatively minor concern to a major player in a new era of “omics” research [8,9]. Genomics, metabolomics, proteomics or pharmacogenomics, among others, benefit from the focused approach enabled by rare genetic diseases research. A direct consequence of this growing importance is the renewed interest from pharmaceutical companies in this area, which are supporting multiple worldwide initiatives towards improved rare diseases research. On a broader scope, the International Rare Diseases Consortium (IRDiRC) (http://www.irdirc.org/) is leveraging several projects on the field. RD-Connect (http://rd-connect.eu/), RareConnect (https://www.rareconnect.org/), EuRenOmics (http://eurenomics.eu/) and NeurOmics (http://rd-neuromics.eu/) are some of the highlights from IRDiRC sponsorships. On the European level, GEN2PHEN (http://www.gen2phen.org/), EU-ADR [10] (http://euadr-project.org/), or EMIF (http://www.imi.europa.eu/content/emif/) projects are actively investing in setting up state of the art research activities for rare diseases stakeholders. A key feature of these projects is their multidisciplinary approach, leveraging on the natural connections between clinicians, researchers, bioinformaticians and patients, who, for once, are active elements of the proposed strategies.

With these miscellaneous initiatives, players and requirements, there is an overwhelming challenge to tackle the wealth of data being made available by next-generation sequencing hardware, omics databases, patient registries, and pharmacovigilance or electronic health records. Multiple new rare diseases research tools are emerging, focusing only a set of particular conditions. Niche databases for the domains of neurological disorders [11] or muscular problems [12], for example, tackle small specific sub-groups. While they provide high quality information and resources, their disease coverage is small and inadequate.

Likewise, platforms such as the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man database (OMIM) [13,14], the National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) website (http://www.rarediseases.org/) or Orphanet, among others, collect and filter available information, with a particular set of users in mind. Where OMIM is more focused on aggregating content for bioinformatics researchers, Orphanet has decade-long pedigree and content far beyond simple research data. It is geared towards clinicians, medical researchers and patients, boasting a large collection of curated clinical information such as patient registries, biobanks and specialized clinician contacts, among others, in multiple languages.

Despite these high quality efforts, entropy is a recurring problem in this field with the ever-growing number of resources, databases, services and applications. Therefore, a new approach is desired, one where everyone is able to quickly access the available knowledge regarding a given set of rare disorders.

Diseasecard addresses these needs by delivering a lightweight holistic perspective over the rare genetic diseases research field. Stemming from a legacy portal [15,16], a crawler-based system that kick-started a new strategy for in-context research, the new semantic Diseasecard version focuses on three fundamental elements:
                        
                           •
                           The rapid and lightweight access to a comprehensive semantic network of scientifically relevant resources for a given disease, covering multiple domains from proteomics to clinical studies up to medical ontologies.

The innovative in-context browsing allowing for the eased navigation amongst the multitude of connected resources without leaving the initial research focus.

The open interoperability layer, making the semantic knowledge base available for everyone to query and access, and enabling the integration of rich rare diseases data in new or existing information systems.

In addition, Diseasecard comprises a rich semantic layer, providing future-proof technologies for inference and reasoning over the created knowledge base. Diseasecard is publicly available online at http://bioinformatics.ua.pt/diseasecard/.

@&#METHODS@&#

Semantic data integration is, in itself, a complex data engineering issue [17], and the life sciences field further increases this complexity [18]. To support Diseasecard’s ambitious integration and interoperability features we rely on the COEUS framework [19]. Exploring COEUS flexible integration engine enabled us to simplify the overall platform architecture through the creation of a comprehensive dependency-based resource integration network.

Diseasecard’s integration pipeline, including COEUS’ use and the internal resource organization, are described in detail next.

To overcome the challenges behind the amount of scattered data for rare diseases, Diseasecard’s underlying objective is to collect, connect and deliver access to a network of the most relevant rare diseases scientific resources. To attain this, Diseasecard’s knowledge base is constructed from an integration network starting with OMIM’s morbid map and spanning through multiple resources, including proteomics data from UniProt [20], InterPro [21], Prosite [22] and Protein Data Bank (PDB) [23] up to ontology data from Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) [24] and International Classification of Diseases (ICD version 10), among many others. These data are obtained from multiple mapping studies [25–27] and genomic name servers, such as GeNS [28] and Bio2RDF [29]. This broad scope results in an extremely rich dataset, where OMIM’s rare disorder list is expanded to more than 2 million triples.

To improve its semantic data integration and interoperability features, Diseasecard is built with the COEUS semantic web application framework [30], which heavily influences Diseasecard’s architectural design. COEUS delivers a “Semantic Web in a box” approach, enabling the rapid development of new knowledge management systems adopting semantic web technologies [31,32].

By default, the COEUS framework already includes the necessary components to build and launch a new semantic information system from scratch. The platform comprises the tools to acquire and translate knowledge from miscellaneous data sources, and to deliver access to the constructed knowledge base through various interoperable formats. One of COEUS’ key caveats is the lack of advanced update methods. Despite this, the trade-off between its semantic integration and interoperability capabilities, and the lack of update features drawback is a positive one, especially considering COEUS’ build engine performance.

To complete Diseasecard’s architecture we created a dedicated client-side application, to support the agile web workspace; added an indexing engine to improve the efficiency behind the full-text search infrastructure; and added an object-oriented database, to cache data for each rare genetic disease network, to improve workspace access performance. The entire architecture is described in detail in Fig. 1
                        .

Diseasecard adopts a targeted warehousing data integration strategy [33,34]. Accordingly, the data import and translation process gathers all data from external resources in a single centralized knowledge base, in opposition to real-time data gathering strategies [35]. Curating a niche warehouse focused on rare genetic diseases knowledge enables Diseasecard’s future endeavors on advanced inference and reasoning algorithms. Since we were looking at managing semantic information from the start, Diseasecard’s integration process not only collects data per se, but it translates external data into a semantic knowledge base. Creating this new semantic layer leverages a major challenge on how to translate large heterogeneous datasets into a new semantic environment. This problem can be divided in two areas, focusing on the technological challenge and on the logical data modelling challenge.

From the technological perspective, Diseasecard relies on the COEUS framework to perform the data abstractions, triplifying data from the miscellaneous external resources into a unified Diseasecard knowledge environment.

On the integration modelling side, Diseasecard has a custom ontology to integrate OMIM’s data (http://bioinformatics.ua.pt/diseasecard/diseasecard.owl). This simple ontology is used to enhance the translation from OMIM’s morbid map into a semantic environment. Additionally, following Semantic Web’s “reuse instead of rewrite” motto, Diseasecard’s data model reuses existing schemas internally. Using COEUS’ instance configuration and taking advantage of existing ontologies and models for internal use is enough to organize collected data.

Diseasecard’s lightweight integration approach means that, for each individual, such as a UniProt protein or an OMIM entry, we only need to store its identifier. Hence, we can reuse the identifier term from the Dublin Core ontology [36]. As such, each individual has a dc:identifier data property, matching a string with the external identifier. Another example is the rdfs:label property, obtained from the Resource Description Format (RDF) schema ontology that is used to label each individual [37]. External LinkedData references are also included, establishing direct connections to external individuals. For instance, UniProt published interfaces are linked through the rdfs:seeAlso property. Despite this over-simplification, new relationships amongst integrated data are autonomously generated. Whereas in a CSV file we have a set of columns with text, with the move to a semantic environment all data are interconnected, generating a richer dataset. The same is true for SQL databases where foreign key relationships and table/column names are mapped to new properties, resulting in more metadata and more relationships.

Starting with OMIM’s morbid map, which has around 6300 entries related to a gene map with about 14,200 entries, Diseasecard’s engine expands the integration network, generating new knowledge, and collecting pointers for the resources mentioned in Table 1
                        , as detailed in the following section.

Diseasecard’s knowledge base covers miscellaneous resources within the rare genetic diseases research domain. The knowledge base is obtained from a dependency graph, the semantic integration network, where the acquisition of data from external sources is defined. Starting with OMIM’s morbid map, Diseasecard loads information about rare disorders and HUGO Gene Nomenclature Committee (HGNC) gene symbols. The integration engine then proceeds to expand the list of integrated individuals into new sources. For instance, using the OMIM accession number, Diseasecard obtains the associated UniProt and Orphanet identifiers. Likewise, from the integrated HGNC symbols, Diseasecard obtains identifiers for GWAS Central, Clinical Trials and Ensembl databases.


                        Fig. 2
                         displays a visual overview over Diseasecard’s complete semantic integration network, highlighting the multiple connections amongst resources and how each is extended to generate more data inputs into the knowledge base.

A sample example for semantic integration is the translation of UniProt and PDB identifiers into Diseasecard’s knowledge base. With UniProt becoming a major source for data mappings, it is used in Diseasecard to establish connections among diseases, proteins and external entities. This integration branch starts with the aggregation of UniProt entries associated with each particular OMIM code (using COEUS’ CSV connector to translate UniProt search results). Next, Diseasecard uses COEUS’ XML connector to load XPath query results and generate new triples. For instance, to create new PDB individuals and their respective connections, the “//entry/dbReference[@type=“PDB”]” XPath query is performed on each UniProt entry XML.

When Diseasecard retrieves the semantic network for each disease, the association graph between OMIM, UniProt and PDB entries is traversed.

@&#IMPLEMENTATION@&#

Using COEUS imposes some restrictions on the technologies used in the Diseasecard platform. As the framework provides a solid Java-based backend solution, we opted to deploy the Diseasecard client-side web environment also within an Apache Tomcat server (http://tomcat.apache.org/).

Diseasecard’s indexing engine is built on top of Solr (http://lucene.apache.org/solr/). This Lucene-based search engine enables indexing the resources connected in Diseasecard’s knowledge base and searching them with a notable performance.

Initial tests unravelled a slow response time for the disease network generation tasks. The complexity behind the SPARQL queries retrieving all identifiers associated with a given rare genetic disease reduces the web application usability. Hence, Diseasecard uses an object-oriented database, Redis (http://redis.io/), to store a cached version of the knowledge network for each disease entry. With this, the performance increased ten-fold from an average page loading time of 4.5s to an almost instant 300ms for the rare diseases workspaces.

For Diseasecard’s web interface, a combination of JavaScript algorithms with modern CSS and HMTL5 technologies was used. The main JavaScript library used is jQuery (http://jquery.com/), with several plugins for cookie management and tree displays. The JavaScript InfoVis Toolkit (http://philogb.github.io/jit/) is used to display the central workspace hypertree. The outcome of these technological implementation choices is a responsive and agile web application, further improving the final user experience.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Diseasecard’s knowledge base contains around 2 million triples, built from OMIM’s maps and the expanded rare genetic diseases network. These triples establish about 500 thousand connections to more than 100 thousand unique resources, which are entirely indexed by Diseasecard’s engine. From these numbers we can infer that, on average, each unique resource is present in 5 single disease networks.

Additionally, each rare disorder has, on average, around 24 connections to external resources. As expected, disease resources from OMIM represent the biggest slice of individuals with around 18 thousand entries for more than 11 thousand HGNC entries. Another interesting result stems from Ontology mappings, as MeSH and ICD terms are the least represented concepts in Diseasecard’s knowledge base.

The entirety of these data are stored in Diseasecard’s semantic knowledge base, made available for end-users through an innovative in-context web workspace and to developers through an advanced semantic interoperability layer, which are detailed next.

One of the main premises behind the creation of a new Diseasecard version lied in the need to better explore the powerful technologies pushed forward by the Semantic Web paradigm. With these, Diseasecard is able to construct a rich and comprehensive semantic knowledge base for rare genetic diseases. Its knowledge infrastructure extends the capabilities of the majority research platforms by making the collected knowledge interoperable and future-proof.

With this knowledge network the door is open for inferring new relationships amongst connected resources and for reasoning over gathered data in search for previously uncovered connections. In the future, these methods can be used to enrich Diseasecard’s knowledge base with new annotations, and to federate knowledge discovery through multiple databases with the publicly available SPARQL endpoints.

It is equally important to note that the lightweight integrative approach adopted in Diseasecard re-uses existing ontologies to describe data. Consequently, data from the knowledge base is easier to integrate by third parties and to connect using LinkedData technologies.

Diseasecard is a unique alternative for exploring biomedical rare diseases information in a centralised web-based workspace. Along with direct access to diseases’ workspaces through any of the integrated resources identifiers, full-text searching enables querying all the web pages for all the resources integrated in Diseasecard’s knowledge base.

For a more comprehensive access, Diseasecard has a powerful search feature comprising three components: browsing, identifier search and full-text search.

With Diseasecard’s browsing feature, users can browse all entries by their starting letter – http://bioinformatics.ua.pt/diseasecard/browse. This displays the OMIM accession number, the disease name and the number of available connections in the generated network.

The identifier search, selected by default, searches through the extended identifier network. This network includes accession numbers for resources listed in Table 1. In addition to search boxes, using the query string to perform searches is also available. For instance, http://bioinformatics.ua.pt/diseasecard/search/id/HTT will retrieve all entries where the HTT string identifier is present.

At last, full-text search is the most powerful search mechanism. This method, selectable in the home page search button, searches web pages for the connected resources. This results in detailed access to a restricted set of locations, where users filter more specific queries such as author names, publication titles, protein sequences or more complex disease descriptions.

As mentioned, Diseasecard’s semantic integration network starts with OMIM’s morbid map. Consequently, disorders can be directly accessed using their unique OMIM identifier. For instance, OMIM’s “Huntington Disease” entry (OMIM #143100) can be explored in Diseasecard at http://bioinformatics.ua.pt/diseasecard/entry/143100. The displayed web workspace has two key features: the navigation tree and map – Fig. 3
                           (A), and the LiveView browsing – Fig. 3(B).

The navigation tree and map are two complementary alternatives for exploring each network. The left sidebar displays the disease navigation tree to quickly access all links with a familiar metaphor. The central area displays a circular navigation map, pointing to all individual identifiers. Both the navigation tree and map trigger the Live View feature. This opens the external resource application within Diseasecard, allowing users to browse the multiple collected connections without leaving the initial context.

With Diseasecard’s knowledge base built, several interoperability services are enabled by default. Hence, Diseasecard’s access API includes two main data access alternatives: a SPARQL endpoint [38] and a LinkedData interface [39]. These two options allow flexible output formats, thus facilitating the data integration from Diseasecard’s platform in external applications.

SPARQL is the most advanced query language available and enables distributed reasoning and inference, as well as combining Diseasecard’s data with other federated SPARQL endpoints.

The LinkedData interfaces provide quick access to all data for a given resource and the use of these resources, through their URIs, in any external context. The URI for accessing Huntington’s disease data in Diseasecard’s knowledge base is http://bioinformatics.ua.pt/diseasecard/resource/omim_143100.

In the discussion section we highlight how these methods can be used to enrich an existing system with Diseasecard’s rare genetic diseases knowledge.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The concept behind Diseasecard is a unique approach towards comprehensive access to rare genetic diseases research knowledge. To demonstrate Diseasecard’s innovative features, we detail in the following sections a couple real-world scenarios regarding Huntington disease.

Starting with an end-user oriented scenario, we highlight the variety of relevant questions that can be answered with Diseasecard for clinicians, researchers and patients. In comparison with the aforementioned systems, such as Orphanet, NORD or OMIM, none offers such a broad scope of directly accessible knowledge.

On top of end-user features, Diseasecard also provides an interoperability layer. Henceforth, we emphasize how its knowledge can be integrated in external systems through simple methods.

Huntington disease is an “autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disorder with midlife onset characterized by psychiatric, cognitive, and motor symptoms” [40]. Once a patient is diagnosed with Huntington’s disease, he has an average 12–15years until death [41]. Along with its genetic profile, Huntington’s disease affects about 5–10 people in 100 thousand [42]. To fully demonstrate Diseasecard’s capabilities we setup three use cases, targeting users with distinct needs, in the context of Huntington’s disease.

This study starts when a patient is seeking for diagnostic and starts being monitored by his general practitioner, who is traditionally not familiarized with Huntington’s disease, but suspects this is the patient condition. Consequently, the clinician wants to learn about this disorder, searching for answers for the following questions:
                           
                              1.
                              What are Huntington’s disease main features?

Are there any ICD terms for this disease?

What laboratories perform genetic tests for this disease?

What are the most relevant Huntington’s disease publications?

Once the clinician has a better understanding concerning Huntington’s disease, he proposes his patient for genetic analysis in a nearby institute. However, researchers working with this patient may also be unaware of the deep genotype characteristics of this disorder. To further understand the genomic and proteomic scope of this disease, the researcher starts by exploring answers to multiple questions. Some of these are:
                           
                              5.
                              What are the underlying genes associated with Huntington’s disease?
                                    
                                       a.
                                       What are the gene names?

What are known gene mutations?

What are the proteins coded by these genes?
                                    
                                       a.
                                       What is the 3D structure of these proteins?

In what pathways are the genes for this disease involved?

At last we need to consider the patient perspective, of someone who was recently diagnosed with an unknown disease, and that is looking into understanding what is happening in his organism. The patient searches for answers for the following questions to learn more about Huntington’s disease:
                           
                              8.
                              Where can I get a description of this disease?

Are there any clinical trials open for this disease?
                                    
                                       a.
                                       What are the results of previous clinical trials?

Are there any patient registries or biobanks for Huntington’s disease?

Finding the answers for these questions is not a straightforward process. Without a tool like Diseasecard, clinicians, researchers and patients will loose precious hours browsing Google, Wikipedia, OMIM, Orphanet or UniProt. This is a rather inefficient and ineffective endeavors. Diseasecard’s streamlines this workflow. Starting by typing “Huntington” in Diseasecard’s homepage search box, the entry for Huntington’s disease appears almost immediately on the top results (http://bioinformatics.ua.pt/diseasecard/entry/143100). From there, the disorder workspace provides quick access to multiple web resources where users can find the answers to their questions:
                           
                              1.
                              Huntington’s disease clinical features aptly start with the mention of classic signs of progressive chorea, rigidity and dementia. Clicking the disease name on Huntington’s disease entry loads the disorder OMIM page in LiveView, where this information is highlighted.

On Diseasecard’s navigation map and tree (Ontology node), the ICD10 node shows one link to the ICD version 10 “G10” term, entitled “Huntington disease”.

Orphanet is the best resource to find genetic testing laboratories and is also linked in Diseasecard (Disease node). Orphanet lists around 180 diagnostic testing laboratories covering almost the entire Europe, from Portugal to Finland.

Pubmed is the key resource for relevant scientific publications. Diseasecard links directly to Pubmed’s search engine (Literature node), where this publication list can be retrieved.

HGNC genes are loaded from OMIM’s morbid map, thus playing a key role in Diseasecard’s integration network. From the disease workspace, we can access HTT HGNC page (Locus node), Huntington’s disease approved gene.
                                    
                                       a.
                                       From the previous page, we learn that HTT gene is denominated “huntingtin”.

WAVe is a gene-centric web portal collecting links for multiple locus specific databases [43]. WAVe access is provided in Diseasecard (Variation node) and it lists two locus-specific databases for the HTT gene, where we can find the variants in an LOVD [44] instance curated by Weilleke van Roon-Mom.

Huntington’s disease proteins can be inferred from underlying genes of this disease. In Diseasecard’s navigation interface, we learn that UniProt entry P42858 (HD_HUMAN) is associated with Huntington’s disease (Protein node).
                                    
                                       a.
                                       Like UniProt, PDB is available in Diseasecard and this resource includes multiple 2D and 3D models portraying this protein.

Using KEGG (Pathway node), Diseasecard delivers easy access to the Huntington’s disease pathway.

Like the clinical features, a disorder description is available in Huntington’s disease OMIM entry (Disease node).

Clinical Trials detail studies and analysis over a variety of cohorts. The Study node lists two open Clinical Trials (as of early 2013), NCT01597128 at the University of Kentucky, USA; and NCT01065220 at the Medical University of Vienna, Austria.
                                    
                                       a.
                                       The Clinical Trial NCT00491842 has already finished and the collected data is also available in Diseasecard.

The previously mentioned Orphanet database also lists available patient registries and biobanks for Huntington’s disease, easing the tasks of accessing and contacting these sites spread throughout Europe.

Diseasecard’s focused environment provides a broad amount of connections where the answers to critical clinical and research questions can be answered. In comparison to using multiple applications, Diseasecard’s always in-context browsing environment dynamically improves the end users data exploration workflow.

The European Huntington disease network is a large-scale patient registry, with multiple centres spread throughout Europe focused on creating a wide patients community [45]. Taking in account the amount and variety of knowledge that is offered to patients, clinicians and researchers of this database, and, additionally, the scope of knowledge that could be available, the inclusion of external data provided by Diseasecard is a welcome addition.

Despite being a closed system, we can assert from the various documentation available that this patient registry could be improved with the introduction of further clinical-oriented information. This information can be in the form of related ICD terms or links to Orphanet database entries, both containing relevant information for clinical practice. For instance, ICD classifications are already widely used in multiple hospital information systems [46–48].

The following SPARQL query can be sent to Diseasecard’s endpoint, at http://bioinformatics.ua.pt/diseasecard/sparql, retrieving a unified list of ICD and MeSH terms, for the OMIM entries regarding Huntington’s disease (#143100) and the “huntingtin” gene (*613004).
                           
                              
                                 
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          PREFIX coeus: <http://bioinformatics.ua.pt/coeus/>
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          PREFIX diseasecard: <http://bioinformatics.ua.pt/diseasecard/resource/>
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          PREFIX dc: <http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/>
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          SELECT DISTINCT ?icd {
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                          ?item dc:title ?icd.
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                          ?item coeus:hasConcept diseasecard:concept_ICD10.
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                          ?item coeus:isAssociatedTo ?orpha.
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                          ?orpha coeus:isAssociatedTo ?omim.
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                          ?omim coeus:hasConcept diseasecard:concept_OMIM.
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                          { ?omim diseasecard:omim “143100” }
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                          UNION
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                          { ?omim diseasecard:omim “613004” }
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          }
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       
                                          ORDER BY ASC(?icd)
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     

The results list the ICD10 identifier “G10” as the term matching Huntington’s disease. The query can be tested at http://bioinformatics.ua.pt/diseasecard/api/sparqler/. While SPARQL may have a steep learning curve, its advanced features make it the most complete query language for accessing any semantic knowledge base. Furthermore, results can be obtained in CSV, XML or JSON, making the use of these data in any programming language very straightforward.

While these mappings are also provided through several other services, Diseasecard’s interoperability API offers a bigger variety of identifiers than most common systems. Querying UniProt or PDB identifiers is a similar process to querying the detailed ICD and Orphanet entries.

Diseasecard can be seen as an initial step towards a comprehensive integrative “omics” suite. This will make it a key player in future large-scale research projects, acting as a channel for delivering a rich set of connections to rare genetic diseases knowledge.

A vital enhancement for future Diseasecard developments regards the inclusion of deeper semantic relationships amongst aggregated data. Whereas all individuals are connected through similar predicates in the current version, future iterations will comprise new rich connections between particular individuals, obtained from data mining workflows [49] and new scientific discoveries [50,51]. New metadata will improve Diseasecard’s genomics perspective, with annotations for relationships regarding diseases, genes and proteins interactions [52]; and the clinical perspective, with annotations mined from electronic medical records [53] and specialized patient registries [54].

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

We presented Diseasecard, a portal for rare diseases researchers, clinicians and patients. Diseasecard features a rich semantic knowledge base to deliver a lightweight holistic perspective over the wealth of genetic diseases information stemming from the growing number of “omics” research projects.

Diseasecard’s results are significant in at least three major respects. (1) The use of semantic web technologies to collect connections to the most relevant resources regarding rare diseases is a pivotal step in the future of data integration and interoperability. (2) The available in-context research features – full text search and LiveView augmented browsing – enable full access to external resources within each disease workspace. (3) At last, making all data available for further inclusion in other systems, whether through LinkedData or the SPARQL endpoint, empowers other developers to enrich their systems with a myriad of connections to the most relevant rare diseases resources.

The new Diseasecard represents a milestone towards semantic interoperable rare diseases knowledge, and is publicly available online at http://bioinformatics.ua.pt/diseasecard/.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The research leading to these results has received funding from the European Community’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007–2013) under Grant agreement No. 200754 – the GEN2PHEN project, and under Grant agreement No. 305444 – the RD-Connect project.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

