@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Clinical simulation: A method for development and evaluation of clinical information systems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           A methodological approach for using clinical simulation in development of e-Health.


                        
                        
                           
                           Key issues using clinical simulation in form of 10 steps to a successful simulation.


                        
                        
                           
                           Clinical simulation reveals unintended benefits and challenges of e-Health.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Clinical simulation

eHealth

Evaluation

Human factors

Clinical information systems

Clinical practice guidelines

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Use of clinical simulation in the design and evaluation of eHealth systems and applications has increased during the last decade. This paper describes a methodological approach for using clinical simulations in the design and evaluation of clinical information systems. The method is based on experiences from more than 20 clinical simulation studies conducted at the ITX-lab in the Capital Region of Denmark during the last 5years. A ten-step approach to conducting simulations is presented in this paper. To illustrate the approach, a clinical simulation study concerning implementation of Digital Clinical Practice Guidelines in a prototype planning and coordination module is presented. In the case study potential benefits were assessed in a full-scale simulation test including 18 health care professionals. The results showed that health care professionals can benefit from such a module. Unintended consequences concerning terminology and changes in the division of responsibility amongst healthcare professionals were also identified, and questions were raised concerning future workflow across sector borders. Furthermore unexpected new possible benefits concerning improved communication, content of information in discharge letters and quality management emerged during the testing. In addition new potential groups of users were identified. The case study is used to demonstrate the potential of using the clinical simulation approach described in the paper.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

eHealth is extremely complicated due to the substantial complexity of organizations, work practices and physical environments in healthcare. These matters greatly influence the development and application of IT in the healthcare sector. Additionally, poor eHealth puts patient safety at risk. Up to 70% of patient safety incidents are estimated to be related or due to human factors [1]. The study of human factors is also called ergonomics and may be described as the “scientific discipline concerned with the understanding of interactions among human and other elements of a system, and the profession that applies theory, principles, data and methods to design in order to optimize human well-being and overall system performance” [3, p. 2]. The impact that information systems may have on clinical work practices is also difficult to assess by use of quantitative methods, necessitating application of qualitative approaches. Clinical simulation has gained acceptance during the last decade as a powerful qualitative method for evaluating clinical information systems and their impact on human factors and work flow [4,5]. A simulation or a simulator may be defined as a device “that attempts to re-create characteristics of the real world” [6, p. 52]. This may be real work actions or processes. Clinical simulation has been used for training clinical skills for more than 40years [7–10]. Also social-team-oriented and cognitive-individual-oriented aspects of clinical work practice may be trained by use of simulation [11–13]. During the last decade clinical simulation has gained a growing place in the design and evaluation of clinical information systems [4]. Simulation testing can be a beneficial method for evaluation of clinical information systems, as the tests can take place in controlled environments, without the risk of injuring real patients [14]. Simulation based evaluation may take place in all phases of the life cycle of a clinical information system [15], and may be used for a number of different purposes [5].

Simulation-based evaluation can also be used for testing IT-systems in new contexts. This may involve consideration of performance optimization, safety engineering, modeling of natural or human systems, examining effects of alternative conditions and courses of actions when real systems are not accessible [4,16–18].

Simulation may be conducted with [17] or with-out end-users, or as a hybrid, where simulations with end-users are combined with computer-based simulations [4]. This paper focuses on clinical simulation with real users enacting realistic clinical work scenarios in relation to development and evaluation of clinical information systems.

Clinical simulation should cover the sociological aspects in the socio-technical interaction, and these kinds of tests are focused at the “human-in-the-loop” as opposed to computer-based simulations focused on the “computer-in-the-box” simulations [16]. Simulation-based evaluations lead to both technical changes in the IT system and organizational changes. The technical part of changes might be user-interface aspects as well as functional changes according to the support of clinical work flows [2,23,25]. The socio part of changes might be changes or optimization of work practice and implementation aspects such as training [26,27,39].

In the Capital Region of Denmark clinical simulation has been applied since 2007 for evaluation of clinical information systems before they are implemented at the hospitals in the region. The clinical simulations take place at the IT Experimentarium (ITX) [17,19], which is located at the Danish Institute for Medical Simulation (DIMS) [20] at one of the major university hospitals in Copenhagen. The ITX-lab was established in 2007 with the purpose of improving the quality and optimization of clinical information systems. The results have been promising, and since 2011 it has been mandatory to conduct clinical simulation evaluations before new systems that affect clinical work practice are implemented. In the last 5years there have been more than 20 clinical simulation studies conducted in the ITX-lab, as seen in Table 1
                     , to improve the development of activities and assist in the evaluation of clinical information systems [17].

The simulation studies vary from design of computerized clinical support [21,22] and standardized nursing documentation [23] to evaluation of the impact of innovative technology [24,25]. This has included evaluation of various kinds of clinical information systems ranging from Computerized Prescription Order Entry (CPOE) for medications [26] and clinical documentation templates [27] to the evaluation of entire Electronic Health Records (EHR) [28].

Usability may be defined as the “extent to which a system, product or service can be used by specified users to achieve specified goals with effectiveness, efficiency and satisfaction in a specified context of use” [29, p. 3]. When using simulations it is possible to assess the effect of an information system in different contexts as well as evaluating efficiency, satisfaction and effectiveness [30]. Efficiency may be defined as “resources expended in relation to the accuracy and completeness with which users achieve goals” [29, p. 3], effectiveness may be defined as “accuracy and completeness with which users achieve specified goals” [29, p. 3], and satisfaction may be defined as “freedom from discomfort and positive attitudes towards the use of the product” [29, p. 3]. Traditional usability testing methods such as heuristic inspection and usability testing tend to focus on technology assessing the user-technology interface taking the clinical context into account, whereas clinical simulation enables inclusion of additional aspects of the complex clinical work context [17]. Heuristic inspection focuses on the user interface and low fidelity usability testing focuses on the observation of representative user interacting with the technology while carrying out representative tasks. These methods may make a rigorous evaluation of the user interface and uncover usability challenges in the graphical user interface. They do not, however, include the full clinical context and the interdisciplinary aspects of everyday clinical work. Clinical simulation also focuses on work flow and organization looking into human–job, human–environment and human–organization interface technologies as opposed to usability testing and heuristic inspections looking mostly into human–technology interface technologies.

The aim of this paper is to describe a methodological approach for planning, preparing and conducting clinical simulations. The method is a generalization gleaned from our experiences from more than 20 studies where clinical simulation has been used to support the design, evaluation and optimization of clinical information systems before launching them in real practice. In this paper one simulation study of a prototype for a planning and coordination module will be used as a running example [25]. In addition, some of the unintended consequences and benefits discovered during the evaluations will be discussed. In the end key issues and a methodological approach, in form of 10 steps to conduct a successful simulation will be highlighted.

In this section of the paper a case study involving clinical practice guidelines will be presented and the case study will be used to illustrate our approach to clinical simulations. Clinical practice guidelines have been used more frequently in recent years [31]. Continuity of care programs, containing clinical practice guidelines aimed at planning and decision support for healthcare professionals, have been a focus of some of recent work [32]. The Capital Region of Denmark is exploring the potential benefits of an information system for supporting the planning and coordination of chronic patient across sectors [33]. Patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) and Diabetes Mellitus Type 2 (DM2) were selected to establish a proof of concept project. At that time there were no information systems supporting coordination and planning across community nursing, general practitioners and hospitals in Denmark. The consequence was limited planning and reduced coordination across the three sectors followed by decreased quality and compliance with clinical practice guidelines. International experiences indicated that information systems can enhance compliance as well as quality of care so such systems began to be considered [34,35].

The project called “Chronic 5” was launched and aimed to demonstrate the potential benefits of a Planning and Coordination Module (PCM) [36]. The project analyzed and specified the requirements for such a system involving clinician end-users, clinical managers, quality managers, IT-architects and health informatics experts. In the end a PCM prototype was built on the basis of the gathered requirements.

The purpose of the PCM was to support the coordination across sectors, concerning status and planning for patients with COPD and DM2 according to clinical practice guidelines, and handling of derived activities and services. Fig. 1
                         shows the connection between user groups and the PCM. The digital support was anticipated to be groundbreaking in Denmark, and was hoped to offer new opportunities for coherence and continuity in care activities. Moreover it was expected that the system would be able to ensure a higher compliance with the existing continuity programs and clinical practice guidelines.

To realize the intended benefits of a PCM the usability of the system was essential [37]. The objective of the simulation study was to assess the potential benefits of a PCM for health care professionals involved in planning and coordination of patients with COPD and DM2, primarily focusing on effectiveness and usefulness of the PCM and user satisfaction. Prototypes may be evaluated in relation to accuracy and completeness with which users achieve specified goals, but evaluations of the resources spent in relation to this is difficult with prototypes and immature systems, and efficiency cannot be assessed. The clinical simulation approach is well suited for assessing user satisfaction in realistic contexts of use.

Nine leading simulation questions have been proposed in the project discussed in this paper as a case study:
                           
                              1.
                              Will the PCM increase clinical utility by allowing users to easily see recommended activities in the Continuity Programs?

Will the digital plan for recommended activities lead to improved decisions?

Will it be easy for users to adjust the course of disease for a chronic patient in a standardized program?

Will the PCM increase clinical utility by allowing users to get an overview of the plan and activities in the course of disease for a patient?

Will the PCM increase clinical utility by allowing users to see the activities and responsibilities in the course of disease?

Will the PCM increase clinical utility by allowing users to see relevant diagnoses for co-morbidity and complications, relevant findings and referrals in a separate window?

Will the PCM increase clinical utility by allowing users to use an assisted referral without having to re-enter data?

Will the PCM increase clinical utility by allowing users to monitor compliance in the Continuity Programs?

Will the PCM increase utility if patients can easily access data?

The nine leading simulation questions were to be verified or falsified in order to demonstrate the usefulness of the system.


                        Fig. 2
                         shows an example of the user interface of the system. The column furthest to the left consists of activities and check-ups in relation to the continuity of care programs (i.e. measurement of blood pressure or weight and 1year check-up), the second column from the left shows status for the activities (i.e. planned or done) and the third and fourth column from the left shows starts and end dates for activities and check-ups. The columns to the right show what activities have taken place at a certain date. Every line is an activity or a check-up according to the clinical practice guidelines in the continuity program for a certain area of disease.

@&#METHOD@&#

A clinical simulation study makes it possible to evaluate the use of a prototype in realistic environments [38] and is well suited for evaluating potential impact [26] as well as cognitive processes and usability [2]. The overall approach we propose and describe in this paper involves the following four steps: Purpose, Planning, Preparing and Performing (see Fig. 3
                        ). In this section we will describe the overall methodological approach and illustrate each stage of the approach in the context of the case study described in the previous section.

In the initial phases the purpose of clinical simulation may include analysis of work practice and user requirements, followed by design and evaluation of new technologies. Later on the purpose may include implementation aspects such as assessing training programs and the influence of new technology on existing or new work practices.

In the design phase clinical simulations may be used as a boundary object to gain consensus among different stakeholders; e.g. helping to develop common understanding between end-users and the quality unit [27]. Clinical simulation makes it possible for different stakeholders to observe new technology in use and the de-briefing interview and discussions that are part of simulations provide an opportunity for obtaining an understanding of work practices and user needs. Clinical simulations thereby assist in revealing divergences between different stakeholders and make it possible to gain an understanding of other stakeholders’ views. This may be as part of a participatory design approach making stakeholders actively involved in the design activities and influence the design solutions [23]. The clinical simulations may also be preceded by several design workshops with all stakeholders, where prototypes are built.

Clinical simulation also makes it possible to assess the needs for training and information before an actual implementation takes place. Knowledge concerning work practices and patient safety issues may be gained, and used as important inputs before or during a pilot implementation.

When conducting simulation studies it is important to define the purpose from the beginning [39]. As indicated in Fig. 2 the purpose influences the planning and preparing of the study and establishes the scope of the actual performing of the evaluation. It is therefore important that the purpose is defined in close cooperation with the key stakeholders and accepted by the owners of the project [40].
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   No. 1: The purpose of the clinical simulation must be focused and anchored in the organization
                                                

To illustrate step no. 1, the purpose of our running example, i.e. the evaluation of “Chronic 5”, was to evaluate the potential benefits of a PCM for healthcare professionals involved in planning and coordination of patients with COPD and DM2, which means that it was mainly the effectiveness of the PCM, that was evaluated, with a partial focus on user satisfaction (as noted above efficiency of the system was not evaluated during this round of clinical simulation). The purpose was defined in close collaboration with the core group of the project which represented the most important stakeholders such as quality managers, clinical managers, IT-architects and end-users from all three sectors and it was subsequently accepted by the steering committee of the project. The PCM was a prototype built to demonstrate the concept of such an information system and as such the user interface was merely a presentation of what such a system could look like. The main focus of the study was therefore on evaluation of potential usefulness of the system more than on the ease of use. The steering committee had decided that the purpose of the clinical simulation was to evaluate the clinical use of the PCM and not the patients’ use of a PCM. The simulation study therefore only encompassed healthcare professionals and no real patients were included in the evaluation.

After defining the purpose the next phase is planning and defining the scope for the evaluation. This includes defining which scenarios to use, deciding how many rounds of evaluations are to be conducted and determining the number and profile of the participating clinicians. The number of rounds of evaluation depends of the number of scenarios that needs to be evaluated, the amount of participating clinicians and the purpose of the evaluation.
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   No. 2: Choice of scenarios is crucial and must reflect the purpose of clinical simulation
                                                

Each scenario reflects typical tasks in a small fraction of the clinical work practice and together the scenarios used in clinical simulation should more or less cover the parts of work practice that the new technology affects. Scenarios are narrative descriptions of work practices; a kind of “story” about people and their activities [41]. Scenarios may highlight goals suggested by the appearance and behavior of the technology, and how people try to interact with and what they carry out with using the technology. Scenarios have characteristic elements such as environments and settings, and include actors. They include sequences of actions and events, things actors do and things that happens; i.e. changes in circumstances of the setting. The choice of scenarios affects the entire evaluation and must be considered carefully in order to meet the objectives of the evaluation.

The profile of the clinicians who participate in the clinical simulation must be defined. This concerns both the role of the potential users and the expectations to their participation during the evaluation [42].

If the evaluation covers broad functionality used in many different specialties and by many different groups of healthcare professionals, the number of evaluation scenarios tested must be greater than in evaluation of technology only used by physicians from a very specialized field for a very specific purpose. Depending on the purpose of the study, clinicians with several years of experience may be preferable rather than recently qualified clinicians in order for them to focus on the technology instead of focusing on their performance of the clinical skill. This may however not always be appropriate, as some studies may focus on use of technology by novice clinicians. Again the purpose of the evaluation decides the choice of profile for the clinicians.
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   No. 3: Choice and profile of clinicians must reflect the purpose of the clinical simulation
                                                

To illustrate step no. 2 and step no. 3, 5 scenarios were created in our running case study example. The scenarios covered key aspects in the coordination across sectors, and concerned status and planning for chronic patients according to the clinical practice guidelines. Since the POC was covering two patient groups; patients with COPD and patients with DM2, we ended up with 10 scenarios. The user groups were defined as hospital doctors, general practitioners and community nurses. As the purpose did not encompass patients’ use of the PCM, no patients were included in the evaluation. Instead it was decided to let team members act as patients during the simulations. It was decided to let 6 clinicians from each user group participate in the evaluation. The result was 18 simulation runs bundled into six rounds, where one from each user group was represented in each round. The profiles of the clinicians covered both management level and expected end-users. If for example the GP’s had not been included in the scenarios and as participants in the simulation, the purpose of the simulation study would not have been fulfilled.

When the overall frame for the evaluation has been planned out the actual test has to be prepared. This includes finding potential users, writing the scenarios as well as preparing the clinical and technical set-up [22]. The clinical set-up should reflect the real settings and the technical set-up must support the expected use of the system according to the scenarios, tasks and work practice.
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   No. 4: Complexity in scenarios and patient records must be carefully considered
                                                

The resources spent on preparing simulation studies can be rather expensive and time consuming, depending on the complexity in patient cases used during the simulation and the degree of fidelity and both aspects must therefore be carefully chosen and must correspond closely to the purpose [26,30]. To illustrate step no. 4 a simulation study concerning procurement of a large EHR-platform in two Danish regions scenarios with high complexity was abandoned [28], and the clinicians indicated afterwards that the patient cases lacked complexity [40]. The time spent with end-users in the actual simulation is however not that time consuming. By preparing the clinical and technical set-up carefully, the time spent by physician and nurse participants may be only a couple of hours for a session, depending on the evaluation set-up and the scenarios.
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   No. 5: Planning and preparing clinical simulation is resource demanding in order to make it time effective for clinicians
                                                

To illustrate step no. 5 each participating healthcare professional spent three hours at the simulation and in the evaluation for our running example. In contrast with that the planning and preparing of the running example took several hundred hours.


                           Fig. 4
                            shows the general relationship among the purpose of the evaluation, the degree of fidelity needed during the simulation and the different phases of the life cycle of clinical information systems [5].

The need for fidelity varies depending on the purpose of the clinical simulations, and the phase of the life cycle of the information system. The degree of fidelity involves attempts to re-create characteristics of the real world [6] and may include equipment fidelity, environment fidelity, task fidelity and functional fidelity [30]. The equipment and functional fidelity corresponds to the maturity of the system and the phase of the development life cycle, and the task and environment fidelity may be changed according to the purpose of the simulation study.

Analysis of user requirements may be conducted with the use of different degrees of fidelity; both in connection with high fidelity tasks in form as well described scenarios and high fidelity equipment and functionality in form as mature prototypes with realistic test data [26] and in a more experimental way with use of low fidelity equipment and functionality [43]. A “wizard-of-Oz” approach may be used in the latter, where cardboard boxes replace equipment and a person simulates the response and functionalities from the system in form of handwritten post-it labels [43]. The “Wizard of Oz” method offers interactive experience without having a real computer system and may produce adequate input to identify user requirements or explore key tasks in controlled environments [44,45].
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   No. 6: Degree of fidelity must reflect the purpose of the clinical simulation and the maturity of the technology
                                                

Rehearsals are well worth the effort to pilot test the simulation before bringing in the test participants for real simulation runs. Rehearsals may be conducted on scenarios, clinical set-up, technical set-up, test data implemented in information systems, and data collection.
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   No. 7: Rehearsals and pilot studies are important and well worth the effort
                                                

To illustrate step no. 6 the fidelity of tasks and environments were relatively high in our running example. The scenarios reflected the everyday life and health of patients with COPD and DM2 and the planning and coordination done by the healthcare professionals involved in their treatment and care. The task fidelity was also high reflecting real tasks typically performed by the healthcare professionals. The simulation room was set up as an office, which could simulate an office in all three sectors. The technology and functional fidelity was not as high; it was an electronic prototype built to demonstrate the concept of a PCM with just enough functionality needed for assessing usefulness and as such the user interface was merely a presentation of what such a system could look like. Even though it was installed on a PC, there was no real integration and log in with other systems. In another case study equipment and functional fidelity were very low. In that case study cardboard boxes and post-it labels were used [43]. As a result it was not possible to evaluate a technical solution. Instead the study was used to analyze user requirements as opposed to our running example where the purpose was to evaluate the effectiveness and user satisfaction of an actual IT-system.

Eighteen healthcare professionals participated as subjects: six general practitioners from primary care, six nurses from Community nursing, six hospital doctors and two simulation patients. The simulation runs were bundled into six tests. In each test healthcare professionals from each of the three areas participated, and the profiles of testers covered both the management level and the expected end-users. Ten scenarios were composed; five with a patient diagnosed with COPD and five with a patient diagnosed with DM2. The scenarios represented situations involving planning of therapy and further diagnosis concerning a recently diagnosed patient at the general practitioner, visitation with a community nurse, rehabilitation with the community nurse, treatment of the patient at an outpatient clinic due to exacerbation of the condition, and assignment of responsibility from the hospital doctor to the general practitioner. The scenarios did not cover all possible uses of the PCM but represented different points of impact focusing on core functionalities and the assignments from one healthcare professional to another, since these aspects were the main topics for the assessment. Issues such as user interface colors, buttons and minor functionalities were not as such part of the assessment.

The scenarios were composed in a way which made it possible to assess the nine leading simulation questions. The same general tasks were performed by the participants during the tests: (1) read relevant information in the system, (2) document relevant actions, (3) adjust the plan for the patient. The scenarios were tested and adjusted at a rehearsal one week before the actual test. To illustrate step no. 7 in our running example, test data and scenario description were adjusted after the rehearsals. In the case study concerning procurement of an EHR-platform [28,40] several rehearsals were conducted. The different rehearsals concerned test data and scenarios, role descriptions and questionnaires.

Before an actual simulation takes place it is important to introduce the participants to the purpose and the concept of the test e.g. that it is the system that is being tested and not the participants’ performance. It is also important to introduce the system and all relevant functionalities of the system needed in the scenarios. Opportunity and time spent on hands-on tasks should reflect the purpose of the evaluation. In evaluation of the intuitiveness of a system, users might not be offered the opportunity of getting highly acquainted with the system beforehand. In some studies, more extensive training on the system might be provided before the evaluation (this will depend on the purpose of the evaluation).

After the introduction and training, the healthcare professional, who is performing the simulation, is briefed to both the environment and the scenarios. This includes the locations, the patients and possible colleagues who are part of the scenario from the beginning, and the part of the clinical work practice the scenario is covering. Depending on the purpose of the evaluation, there might be simulated disturbances incorporated in the scenario, which the healthcare professional should not know of beforehand [26]. It is however important that the participant should be able to feel comfortable about the simulation in order to focus on the scenario and technology instead of the simulation [30].

A facilitator may be located in the simulation room in order to support the clinician in the use of the technology and during the simulation of the scenario. Depending on the purpose the facilitator may stay as a “fly on the wall” and remain unobtrusive or alternatively actively engage with the clinician. If a high degree of fidelity is required the facilitator should engage as little as possible, in order to make the simulation flow naturally. All interruption will interrupt the cognitive processing of the clinician and the acceptance of the simulation, and lower the perceived realism [30].

If possible the participant may be asked to “think-aloud” during the simulation in order for the observers to gain a deeper understanding of the human task-behavior [46]. This method helps reveal the more cognitive aspects of the interaction between users and technology and is useful when analyzing user requirements. Depending on the purpose of the test, the “think-aloud” method can be supplemented with obser-view, where a facilitator asks more exhaustive questions about the system use and requirements [25,47]. It is also possible to make the participant describe the system and the functionalities in a fairly natural setting by letting a “patient” or a “colleague” ask questions about the system and the use of it during the simulation [22]. In order to create a high degree of fidelity it is important that the participating clinicians have great familiarity with real work practice. Often clinical and quality managers are offered to be the participating clinicians but they are not always familiar with the work processes in real life. Their knowledge is more focused on how work should be done instead of how work is actually done. If the participants are not familiar with work practice the simulations are conducted under false pretense and the outcome may not be valid. Clinicians with extensive experience in testing and evaluation of health IT may also think of themselves as testers instead of clinicians [40].
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   No. 8: Real clinicians should be used as participants
                                                

To illustrate step no. 8 in our running example one of the team members in the PCM project, who had previously been working as a hospital doctor, replaced one of the hospital doctors who should have participated in the simulation, but during the de-briefing interview it was difficult for him to not be biased by his earlier involvement in the development of the PCM.

If the simulation room has an adjoining control room the simulation instructor and observers may follow the simulation through a one-way mirror. The role of the instructor is to instruct the facilitator and the patient during the simulation. The test instructor has the overall responsibility for the test, and makes sure, that the purpose of the simulation is fulfilled. During the simulation the instructor is in radio contact with the facilitator and the person(s) acting as patient(s) or colleague(s). The instructor is thereby able to steer the simulation in any direction necessary to attain the objectives of the test. The observers monitor the simulation and makes notes of their observations. Semi structured observation guides may be used for observations. The observations are later used in the debriefing-interview, and in the evaluation report.

In our running case study example the participants had only short time with hands-on access to the prototype to be used in the simulation. Table 2
                            shows the schedule for one of the three days. Each day was partitioned into two parts with three clinicians coming in the morning and three new clinicians coming in at noon. The first scenario was performed by the general practitioner, the next two scenarios were performed end to end by the community nurse, the fourth scenario was performed by the hospital physician and the fifth and last scenario was performed by the general practitioner.

During the clinical simulation the participants performed the tasks associated with the scenarios. As part of the scenarios a patient was seeking the health care professionals. The role of the patient was played by a health informatics expert with special knowledge concerning clinical simulation. In all scenarios the healthcare professionals were asked to revise and modify the plans for the patient. This was done in cooperation with the patient and on the basis of the existing findings and plans. The prototype included simulated integration with other hospital information systems in order to replicate the intended integration with legacy information systems.

As shown in Fig. 5
                            a facilitator sat next to the participating clinician during the scenario, facilitating the simulation and helping the clinician in case problems arose using the system. This was due to the rather immature prototype, the short usage of the system, and furthermore the purpose of the test was to assess efficiency and to a lesser degree satisfaction (since the prototype was meant as a demonstration of the concept). Ease of use was therefore not the main focus of this simulation, although it has been the focus of other studies we have conducted. During the simulation the participant was asked to “think-aloud”.

The simulation room had adjoining control rooms as shown at Fig. 6
                           . In the control room the simulation instructor was located together with two observers. The observers were representatives from the different stakeholder groups. Furthermore the two clinicians, who were not doing simulation at the time, were able to follow the simulation from the control room. This helped them to understand the use of the system and the potential use across the three sectors.

Clinical simulation evaluation may be carried out by use of qualitative and quantitative methods [48]. After each set of simulation scenarios are completed the participating clinicians are asked to fill out a questionnaire and a debriefing-interview is held with the clinicians and the observers. The questionnaires must reflect the purpose and may contain questions or statements concerning efficiency and satisfaction, as well as questions or statements concerning the simulations and the realism of the scenarios.

The interview guide may be composed of open-ended questions starting with a couple of overall questions concerning positive and negative features of the system [49]. Afterwards more specific questions can be asked in order to let the healthcare professionals clarify and elaborate on both the statements or questions from the questionnaires and other subjects that came into their mind. The composition of questions or statements should reflect the purpose of the test. The interviews may be held individually or in focus groups. At the end of each day the data from the interviews may be analyzed using the Instant Data Analysis method (IDA) [50]. IDA is a cost-saving analysis technique which allows usability evaluations to be conducted, analyzed and documented in just one day. In a case study from Aalborg University, Denmark it was discovered that in only 10% of the time required to do video data analysis, IDA identified 85% of the critical usability problems in the evaluated system. IDA is conducted right after the evaluation has taken place and observers and facilitators from the usability evaluation participate in it. On basis of observations and notes from the simulations and debriefing interviews, usability problems are identified, described and categorized. The IDA facilitator subsequently types up the findings.
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   No. 9: Cost saving analysis methods like IDA are very useable and can be practically applied to analyze the resultant data
                                                

In some simulation studies it may be necessary to do the analysis in a more traditional manner such as using video data analysis or Grounded Theory. However, these methods are very resource intensive, and choice of data collection and analysis should recommendable reflect the purpose of the evaluation. Observations from simulations, results from IDA and notes from observations and interviews may be analyzed using analyzing tools such as e.g. Nvivo [51]. The results from the evaluation are gathered in a report describing the duration of the clinical simulation and evaluation.

To illustrate, in our running example we conducted a one-hour analysis of the resultant data in the end of each of the three days. These analyses were gathered in an evaluation report at the end of the study.
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
                                             
                                                
                                                   No. 10: It should be made clear what the mandate of the clinicians and the observers is and how the results will be used, reported and implemented
                                                

It must be clarified for whom the results should be presented and the results and recommendations are to be used and implemented. It must also be clear what the mandate of the clinicians and observers are.

In our running example the questionnaire was composed of nine statements concerning the leading questions, two statements concerning quality management, four statements concerning overview of the plan for the patient, two statements concerning the division of responsibilities, four statements concerning work practice and efficiency, and three statements about the simulation and the realism in the scenarios. The questionnaire answers were given using a five point Likert agree/disagree scale. The interviews were held in focus groups at the end of each day with semi-structured questions concerning possibilities and challenges of the concept, quality, coordination and planning, overview, functionalities and tasks, acceptance, responsibility and work practice. In our running example the purpose was to assess the potential benefits of a PCM for healthcare professionals involved in planning and coordination of patients with COPD and DM2, and the prototype was only a representation of what such a system may look like. The focus was therefore not on the more specific usability problems, hence IDA was considered a sufficient method of analysis.

The case study described in this paper involved giving the participants of the simulation a questionnaire as well as conducting a semi-structured interview with them after the Performing stage was completed. The results from the questionnaire given participants are shown in Fig. 7
                     .

The vertical scale shows to what extent the healthcare professionals agreed to the statement (1 correspond to totally disagree and 5 corresponds to totally agree). The horizontal scale depicts the median of the respondents’ answers on a five point Likert agree/disagree scale to the 24 statements on the vertical axis. The leading simulation questions evaluated in statements 1–9 were all confirmed with a score at 4 or higher. Statements 13 and 21 concerning quality management had a mean score of 4. Statements 11, 12, 17 and 18 concerning overview of the plan for the patient scored 4 on average. Statements 16 and 19 concerning the division of responsibilities scored 4 on average. Statements 10, 14 and 15 concerning work practice and efficiency scored 4 on average. Statements 22, 23 and 24 about the simulation and the realism of the scenarios scored 4 or higher. The only statements that obtained a lower score than 4 (3.5) was question 20, concerning the statements of whether the PCM would release up more time to be spend with the patients or not. This result was not however consistent with the interview. In the interviews the general opinion was that the PCM would reduce the time spent on the planning and coordination, but it remains unresolved whether the time would be spent with the patients. This result was the only discrepancy between the interview and questionnaire results.

During the interviews the core concept of the PCM was assessed as being very useful and as creating many benefits. New ideas were brought up during the interviews. For example ideas were presented by participants such as using the PCM as a coaching tool for senior doctors and as an instrument for communication among colleagues or between other groups of healthcare professionals.

New possible users of a PCM were also identified during the interviews. Nurses in primary care were not part of the original scope of the testing, but one general practitioner saw the PCM as a very valuable tool for the nurses in primary care. In particular, as a tool for quality assessment, this was previously done manually looking into all patient records one at a time. A PCM would be able to do the same task automatically across all patients. Quality management in general was perceived to be enhanced by almost all clinicians, and two doctors suggested that the content of referrals and discharge letters could possibly be reduced with the implementation of PCM, since much of information concerning the patient would be known by all parts.

Although the concept of the PCM was found to be innovative and made the healthcare professionals see the planning and coordination of for patients in a new way, most of the healthcare professionals had difficulties in understanding the concept of a PCM in the beginning. Its purpose had been explained in advance of the clinical simulation, but it turned out that the introduction and training was not quite sufficient. However, the simulations and observations of clinicians from the other sectors using the system helped them to understand the concept.

Several issues of concern were brought up during the simulations. Firstly, the healthcare professionals found that the PCM module gave them a good overview of the patients, but at the same time they wanted the opportunity to look into details about the patient. They recommended that this should be looked into when specifying requirements. The same applied to the use of terminology. The test showed that the terminology used in the three sectors differed for several central terms such as “referred to” and “deselected”. An alignment of terminology would be a positive side effect of implementing PCM.

Another issue to be addressed was the sharing of responsibility. With PCM all healthcare professionals have the same access to all data, but should it be possible for a physician at the hospital to overrule a prescription from the general practitioner – or vice versa? As it is today, the area between primary and secondary care in Denmark is distinctly separated, but with a PCM the division is not unambiguous. This is something that has to be addressed before implementing a PCM. As mentioned there was no real integration with existing information systems. Several users stressed that the implementation of such integration would be of vital significance if the PCM should be used. The alternative would be to enter the data by hand and no participants saw this as a realistic scenario. The overall answer to the leading simulation questions was that the PCM would improve quality and compliance of the existing continuity programs and clinical guidelines, and would increase clinical utility by supporting work practice and decision making [25]. Furthermore technical and organizational challenges were identified which lead to changes in the user requirements specification (e.g. optimization of user interface and overviews and inclusion of medication and referral notes in the patient status) as well as specification of organizational requirements (e.g. new users, new work flows and new purposes for using the system) [25].

The healthcare professionals who participated in the simulations were asked (1) whether the simulations were realistic, (2) whether the simulation helped them gain insight in possible use of the PCM, and (3) whether they would recommend simulation study as a future method for this kind of test. The average scores were 3.6, 4.0 and 4.4 on a Likert scale between 1 and 5 in response to each of these statements respectively. Furthermore the project members subsequently expressed that the results would not have been the same using traditional low fidelity studies, even though they had doubts about the usefulness of using clinical simulation with high fidelity.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

In this paper we have described a method for conducting clinical simulations during the life cycle of a clinical information system, and used a specific case study as a running example. In the case study the results from a questionnaire survey given after clinical participants interacted with the system confirmed the nine leading simulation questions. The healthcare professionals found potential clinical benefit in using the PCM, which would improve quality and patient safety. Furthermore new future users were discovered and new potential ways of using the PCM were also uncovered. Project team members expressed that opinion the results would not have been the same if the evaluation had not been conducted using high fidelity clinical simulation.

Actual patients were not part of the clinical simulation, but during the evaluation, several potential benefits for patients were mentioned by the HI experts. An additional clinical simulation with actual patients is therefore recommended in future work with the PCM.

The degree of realism reflected the purpose of the evaluation, hence the evaluation was semi-experimental with obser-view during the test as the system was a prototype and was not meant to be implemented in its present form.

As mentioned the scenarios did not cover all possible use of the PCM but were designed to enable assessment of nine leading simulation questions. Furthermore the simulation does not fully resemble the use of an information system in a real clinical ward, but offers a high degree of realism and clinical context. Clinical simulations should therefore not be a substitute for evaluation conducted during a pilot implementation, but instead regarded as a complementary way of testing without the risk of injuring real patients. It should also be noted that 18 questionnaires is a very small sample, and the results cannot be generalized to all hospital settings. However, the quantitative data, with a single exception, are consistent with the qualitative data from the results obtained from the interviews and the observations. The use of triangulation strengthens the validity of the results in such studies [48].

Several unintended consequences were uncovered. These unintended consequences did not directly concern the PCM, but were organizational issues that had to be addressed before implementing a PCM. Unintended consequences such as issues concerning terminology and responsibility had not been apparent before the simulation test. However, they were most relevant and needed to be addressed before a final implementation of the PCM. Furthermore it was found that a new and innovative concept such as a PCM needs to be explained thoroughly for all users and stakeholders before it is implemented. Clinical simulation includes the clinical context by viewing clinicians, technology, and work practices together and thereby facilitates findings regarding impact on clinical activities not possible using traditional low fidelity evaluation methods.

The scenarios used in the study covered only fraction of the clinical work practice. The selection of the scenarios was based on their relevance with regards to frequency and complexity of work practice and organization. The effort spent should also reflect these considerations [26]. Time elements are not well-matched with clinical simulation, with the time health professionals spend with a system during a test not reflecting the social–technical impact over time. As mentioned in the case study it took some time before the participants became acquainted with the system. Clinical simulation should therefore not be a substitute for pilot implementations where an IT-system is implemented in a small and controlled environment for a shorter or longer period. This is consistent with our experiences from other clinical simulation studies in the ITX-lab.

Clinical simulation is especially suitable when technology affects the clinical work practice and there is a need for recreation of the clinical context; e.g. complex situations and hand-overs. Clinical simulation is less suited for evaluation of technology where the technology only affects the relation between a single user and the technology and the environments are of no consequence. This could be a nurse preparing a pump for medication before the patient arrives or a medical secretary doing administrative tasks without interruptions from colleagues or patients.

Regarding the general methodological approach described in this paper, key points that have become apparent from following 10 steps for clinical simulations are the following:
                        
                           1.
                           The purpose of the clinical simulation must be focused and anchored in the organization.

Choice of scenarios is crucial and must reflect the purpose of clinical simulation.

Choice and profile of clinicians must reflect the purpose of the clinical simulation.

Complexity in scenarios and patient records must be carefully considered.

Planning and preparing clinical simulation is resource demanding in order to make it time effective for clinicians.

The degree of fidelity must reflect the purpose of the clinical simulation and the maturity of the technology.

Rehearsals and pilot studies are important and well worth the effort.

Real clinicians should be used as participants.

Cost saving analysis methods like IDA are very useable and can be practically applied to analyze the resultant data.

It should be made clear what the mandate of the clinicians and the observers is and how the results will be used, reported and implemented.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

In this paper we described a method for conducting clinical simulations highlighting 10 steps to a successful simulation. The results from the simulation case study about the PCM indicate that HC professionals from primary care, community nursing and the hospitals will benefit from an implementation of such a module. The benefits concern primarily communication issues, planning and coordination, work practice enhancements, and quality management. Several organizational issues have to be addressed, including use of terminology and delegation of responsibilities before an information system as PCM can be implemented.

Furthermore the results from this, and additional simulation studies, show that full scale simulation studies are a useful method for testing the feasibility of information systems especially when taking into account the resources spent. Not only were the leading simulation questions confirmed in this study but new unintended potential benefits were identified during the simulation test. Clinical simulation covers only part of the range of tests which should be conducted, and it should not be a substitute for a pilot implementation test in real settings. However it is possible to use clinical simulations to gain important knowledge concerning work practices, usability and human factors prior to widespread system release, and they can thereby contribute greatly to ensuring patient safety.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

We gratefully acknowledge the support from the ITX-lab; especially Stine Loft Rasmussen and Kitta Lawton for fruitful discussion during the many simulation studies, and in connection with the C5 project; especially Bo L. Hejl, Peter Schultz-Larsen, Søren Vingtoft, Jette Kidholm, Anders Skovbo Christensen, Birthe Hermansen and Charlotte Hedels, who helped prepare and conduct the test.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

