@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Uncovering influence links in molecular knowledge networks to streamline personalized medicine

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           RIIG infers influence relations among biomarker proteins and biological pathways.


                        
                        
                           
                           RIIG uncovers patient-specific complex relationships among biological entities.


                        
                        
                           
                           RIIG facilitates finding effective drug targets in a personalized medicine setting.


                        
                        
                           
                           RIIG bridges curated biomedical knowledge and causal reasoning with clinical data.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

RDF inference

Morphoproteomics

Systems pathology

Theranostics

Personalized medicine

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Objectives
                  We developed Resource Description Framework (RDF)-induced InfluGrams (RIIG) – an informatics formalism to uncover complex relationships among biomarker proteins and biological pathways using the biomedical knowledge bases. We demonstrate an application of RIIG in morphoproteomics, a theranostic technique aimed at comprehensive analysis of protein circuitries to design effective therapeutic strategies in personalized medicine setting.
               
               
                  Methods
                  RIIG uses an RDF “mashup” knowledge base that integrates publicly available pathway and protein data with ontologies. To mine for RDF-induced Influence Links, RIIG introduces notions of RDF relevancy and RDF collider, which mimic conditional independence and “explaining away” mechanism in probabilistic systems. Using these notions and constraint-based structure learning algorithms, the formalism generates the morphoproteomic diagrams, which we call InfluGrams, for further analysis by experts.
               
               
                  Results
                  RIIG was able to recover up to 90% of predefined influence links in a simulated environment using synthetic data and outperformed a naïve Monte Carlo sampling of random links. In clinical cases of Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL) and Mesenchymal Chondrosarcoma, a significant level of concordance between the RIIG-generated and expert-built morphoproteomic diagrams was observed. In a clinical case of Squamous Cell Carcinoma, RIIG allowed selection of alternative therapeutic targets, the validity of which was supported by a systematic literature review. We have also illustrated an ability of RIIG to discover novel influence links in the general case of the ALL.
               
               
                  Conclusions
                  Applications of the RIIG formalism demonstrated its potential to uncover patient-specific complex relationships among biological entities to find effective drug targets in a personalized medicine setting. We conclude that RIIG provides an effective means not only to streamline morphoproteomic studies, but also to bridge curated biomedical knowledge and causal reasoning with the clinical data in general.
               
            

Recent advances in “omics” technologies and decades of omics-based research have resulted in generation of vast amounts of biomedical knowledge. This knowledge is expected to greatly improve patient care by addressing disease complexity and heterogeneity in the personalized medicine setting [1]. However, the complexity and fast growth of such knowledge make it intractable for the majority of medical practitioners, thus undermining its practical utility in medicine. Mental retention of large number of up-to-date facts, ability to quickly retrieve the most relevant to the case information and interpret inconsistencies of reported basic sciences discoveries are big stumbling blocks on the way of effective utilization of omics-derived knowledge at the bedside 
                     [2].

This phenomenon can be illustrated by an example from medical fields of diagnostics and therapeutics, jointly known as theranostics 
                     [3]. Over the last several decades, pathologists have been using immunohistochemistry (IHC) [4] to identify expression of aberrantly expressed disease-associated genes [4–8]. These proteomic biomarkers have served as valuable diagnostic cues: from confirming the presence of certain cell types to staging and grading tumors and elucidating cancer phenotypes. Recently, it was proposed to exploit IHC protein expression patterns on histopathological slides to infer activation of molecular pathways and to guide individual therapies [9]. The technique, termed as morphoproteomics, provides a more systemic picture of involved biological mechanisms than traditional approaches. It can identify patient-specific drug target candidates, predict susceptibility to small-molecule inhibitors and explain resistance to conventional drug treatments. The potential of morphoproteomics to improve therapeutics in a personalized medicine setting has been demonstrated in a number of studies [9–27]. This method can now be viewed as an implementation of the new medical paradigm of theranostics, where approaches from diagnostics and therapeutics are merged to produce better clinical outcomes.

There are, however, several obstacles in the way of widespread acceptance of morphoproteomics. First, the current set of antibody reagents routinely employed for IHC studies in the usual surgical pathology laboratory to identify the presence of proteins and other biomarkers in intra- and inter-cellular space is quite large. The classic reference textbook, “Rosai and Ackerman’s Surgical Pathology”, briefly describes the significance of over 250 antigens useful in general pathology and an additional 30 for hematopoietic diseases. They recommend that the standard surgical pathology laboratory be able to provide staining with approximately 90 antibody reagents in house [28]. Assuming only two states of protein expression regardless of its cellular location, the expert analysis of all possible combinations for even a half dozen of such proteins can be very challenging (2^6=64 combinations). Second, as discussed in [29], if one takes into account the cellular location of protein expression (e.g. nuclear expression of phosphorylated NF-kappa-B vs cytoplasmic) and consider more than just two states of its expression, even a small increase in the number of proteins in the study quickly would result in a combinatorial explosion of the data that is hard to overcome. Reliable identification of the relevant pathways in this scenario is challenging because each such protein expression pattern can manifest a different activation pattern of biological pathways. This all creates a significant barrier for pathologists to use morphoproteomics. A comprehensive theranostic study in many cases is infeasible due to limitations of individual practitioners’ knowledge of biological processes. An inter-expert collaboration, while being able to expand the knowledge space to a certain extent, is still not an effective way to overcome this challenge. It is difficult even for a group of pathologists to recreate a more or less holistic picture of activated pathways based on the clinical data.

One of the ways to overcoming the above-discussed problems is to leverage biomedical knowledge stored in “omics” knowledge bases (KB), a variety of which has been generated and made publicly available. Data from the well-known sources of biological information including pathways data from Reactome [30], BioCarta [31], BioCyc [32], NCI PID [33], protein data from UniProt [34], HPRD [35] can be obtained in Resource Description Framework (RDF) format [36] directly from vendors’ website. In other cases, data are available in XML format but can be readily transformed into RDF using custom ontologies as it was done in [37]. There have been a number of works showing the benefits of Semantic Web technologies to translational science and personalized medicine [38–48] such as, for instance, logical language of RDF/N3 extension [49–51].

Moreover, the development of comprehensive biomedical ontologies made it possible to combine RDF data into so-called integrated “mashup” knowledge bases. RDF-based query languages such as SPARQL [52] together with description logic and rule-based languages such as OWL [53] and SWRL [54] have been shown to utilize the RDF “mashup” KBs to uncover complex relations among different types of biological entities to generate novel hypotheses (for an example see [55]).

However, it might be challenging to use the “mashup” KBs directly in personalized medicine setting and particularly in morphoproteomics. While it is relatively trivial to utilize SPARQL queries for retrieval of relevant biological facts, the results of such one-at-a-time queries may still lack sufficient explanatory power for clinical decision-making. There is a need for a methodology that will allow generation of a mechanistic picture of biological processes that explains clinical findings and fits all pieces of the puzzle together. To address these challenges, we have developed RDF-induced InfluGrams (RIIG), a novel informatics formalism that generates morphoproteomics diagrams by mining an RDF “mashup” knowledge base of curated biological knowledge constructed from publicly available online KBs (e.g. Reactome [56]). RIIG formalism treats active state of biomarker proteins as manifestation of related biological mechanisms and recreates a holistic view of their influence inter-relationships for theranostic purposes. The Methods section provides a description of the key elements of RIIG formalism and its implementation (more details of the RIIG formalism are available in Supplementary Materials (SM)).

@&#METHODS@&#

RIIG takes advantage of the vast amounts of curated biomedical knowledge from publicly available online KBs. First, it turns these KBs into application-specific RDF knowledge networks 
                        [57] (Fig. 1
                         Phase 1). In context of morphoproteomics, descriptions of entities or their interactions (e.g. structure of a small molecule, constants/coefficients/statistical measures of biochemical reactions), and auxiliary constructs such as evidence type, data source, and publication cross-references are filtered out during the process of transformation KBs into KNs (for further explanation see Section 2.2). Additionally, knowledge from the original KBs is extended through description logic inference [57] For instance, Resource Description Framework Schema level inference [58] is used to resolve aliases of the same biological entity present in different component-KBs under different names or identifiers (for details see Section 2.4).

Second, RIIG introduces an informatics formalism that borrows ideas from probabilistic causal theory (PCT) [59] and probabilistic graphical models (PGMs) [60] to infer influence diagrams (Fig. 1 Phase 2).

Unlike PCT and PGMs, RIIG does not process any probabilistic data to generate graphical representation of relationships in the data (e.g. Bayesian Networks). Instead, RIIG formalism establishes a notion of conditional relevance of nodes representing biological entities in the RDF knowledge networks. It identifies such relevancies by traversing the paths between the nodes and analyzing the type of the edges. Essentially, two RDF nodes are considered to be RDF relevant if a biologically meaningful connection can be established between these nodes based on the semantic meaning of the RDF predicates in the path between the nodes. More specifically, if a path between two nodes a and b is active in regard to a set S of some other nodes, then nodes a and b are considered to be conditionally RDF relevant in regard to the set S. The active status of the path (a, b) is defined by the “flow of information”. This in turn is dependent on the presence of so-called collider nodes. A collider node has two adjacent directional RDF predicates (see Definition 18 in Appendix B of SM) pointing to this node. If no collider node is present in the path (a, b), then the path (a, b) is active in regard to S if and only if it contains no nodes from S. In case there are collider nodes in the path (a, b), the path is considered active if and only if all such collider nodes or their descendants (see Definition 17 in Appendix B of SM) are in S. In-depth description of the concept of RDF relevance is provided in Sections 2.3, 2.4, and Definitions 14, 15, 16, 18, 19 and 21 in Appendix B of SM, which also provides biological interpretation of RIIG RDF graph patterns. The details of RDF relevance computation algorithm are provided on Fig. 4.

Based on the computed conditional relevancies, RIIG leverages probabilistic constrained-based structure learning algorithms [61], to generate an influence diagram. The overall algorithmic roadmap of the RIIG formalism is presented in Fig. 2
                        .

In the following sections, we discuss basic aspects of the RIIG formalism, including notions of RDF knowledge network, collider, active path and relevance. A complete and formal description of RIIG is included in SM.

An elementary piece of information in an RDF KB is an RDF triple (Definition 6 in SM) of the form <subject, predicate, object>. RDF resources are used as subjects and objects, and RDF properties are used as predicates of an RDF triple. The RIIG’s definition of an RDF KB is stated as a set of RDF triples (Definition 7 in SM). Since the object of an RDF triple can be the subject or the object of another RDF triple, the set of RDF triples of RDF KB forms a graph. In context of RIIG the notion of a transformed RDF graph that we call RDF knowledge network (KN), is given below:
                           Definition
                           RDF knowledge network


                           Given an RDF knowledge base KBRDF
                               and isomorphic mapping functions fn(⋅) and fe(⋅), an RDF knowledge network is a graph GRDF
                              
                              =(NRDF
                              , ERDF
                              ) with a set of nodes NRDF
                               and a set of edges ERDF
                              , for which the following holds:

RDF relevance in RIIG formalism is based on the following concepts: (i) i-directional RDF predicates and paths, (ii) RDF collider and non-collider nodes, and (iii) active RDF paths.

An i-directional RDF predicate (Definition 14 in SM) is an RDF object property that semantically expresses the influence of one biological entity on the active state (Definition 13 in SM) of another. For example, for an enzyme E and a biochemical reaction BR (RDF protein and RDF interaction respectively in RIIG terminology, see Definitions 9–12 in SM), the “CONTROLLER” RDF object property of the Biopax 2 ontology [62] can be used to express the influence of E on active state of BR using an RDF triple t
                        =〈E, CONTROLLER, BR〉. The RDF graph of a knowledge base that contains the RDF triple t will have a corresponding directed edge. Letter “i” in the word “i-directional” signifies the fact of passing directed influence by an i-directional RDF predicate. A path pathRDF
                        (nk
                        , nm
                        ) between RDF nodes nk
                         and nm
                         is called an i-directional RDF path if it has at least one i-directional predicate and whose all i–directional predicates point to the direction to the node nm
                         (Definition 15 in SM).

RDF collider node is another important concept of the RIIG formalism. If an RDF node has two i-directed RDF paths pointing to it, it is called an RDF collider node. An RDF path that has at least one collider node is called RDF collider path (Definition 18 in SM).

RDF collider paths are used by RIIG formalism define the notion of active RDF path, which is formulated as follows (for formal definition of active RDF path see Definition 17 in SM):
                           Definition
                           active RDF path


                           An RDF path RP is considered active in relation to a set of RDF nodes S if any of the following two conditions hold: (i) RP is a non-collider path and no nodes of RP in are in S; (ii) RP is a collider path and for each collider node in RP either the collider node is in S or any of its descendants is in S.

For example, on left side of Fig. 3
                        , a non-collider RDF path from node A to node E is active in relation to an empty set of RDF nodes and is inactive in relation to any set consisting of nodes B, C, and/or D. The collider RDF path from node A to node E on the right side of Fig. 3 is active only in relation to a set that includes nodes B or C (C being a descendant of B) or both. The path from A to E is considered to be inactive in relation to any other set of RDF nodes that does not include B and/or C.

Using the notion of RDF active paths we can now formulate the concept of RDF relevance as follows (for formal definition of RDF relevance see Definition 21 in SM):
                           Definition
                           RDF relevance


                           Any two RDF nodes are said to be conditionally RDF relevant in relation to S, expressed as R(na
                              , nb
                              |S), if and only if there exists an active path between these two nodes in relation to S.

The notion of RDF relevance mimics conditional independencies in probabilistic systems and is used to generate graphical representation of relationships among biological entities (see Conjectures 1 and 2 in SM). In the current RIIG implementation, we used constraint-based structure learning PC algorithm [61] that we adapted from TETRAD package [63].

To infer RDF-induced influence links from the RDF KN of Semantic Mashup KB (SMKB) (see SM) we utilize probabilistic structure learning algorithms PC (named after Peter Spirtes and Clark Glymour) [61] implemented in TETRAD package [63] and Inferred-Causation ICS [64] implemented in Weka [65]. In all cases we replace the function in these libraries that tests for conditional independence with RIIG’s IsRDFIrrelevant() function, the algorithm flow of which is presented in Fig. 4
                        .

The IsRDFRelevant() function determines RDF relevance between any two RDF nodes x and y in relation to a set Z of some other RDF nodes by analyzing RDF paths between these nodes. If it finds at least one active RDF path (see Definition 19 in SM), the corresponding RDF nodes are considered to be RDF relevant. The RDF relevance information is then used to induce the structure of relations among EOIs.

Another key part of the RIIG formalism is a function that finds a path between two RDF nodes. We extend the RDF path search function of the Jena framework [66]. The Jena’s path search function implements a Breadth First Search (BFS) algorithm. However, it searches for possible paths between nodes only in the direction from subject to object. To understand that let us look at RDF paths in Fig. 5
                        .

In the RDF path B1–B2–B3–B4–B5, the object of each triple is the subject of the next adjacent triple. For example node B2 is the object of the triple B1–B2 and the subject of the triple B2–B3 and so on. Note that direction of the edges in Fig. 5 neither corresponds to i-directionality of RDF predicates nor indicates the direction of inferred RDF influence links. It merely helps to determine subject and object of the triple (the subject is adjacent to the tail of the edge and object to its arrowhead). The Jena’s path search function was not designed to find paths where the object of a triple can serve as the object of adjacent triple (e.g. RDF Path 2 B1–B2–B7–B6–B5 in Fig. 5). We extend this function to accommodate search for such paths. It however dramatically increases complexity of the search, which is one of the directions of our future research. In this work we limit search space of the graph and demonstrate the utility of the proposed method on a subset of SMKB.

Different RDF nodes in the knowledge base can represent the same biological entity. When checking if an RDF node A is a member of the set S, we also need to check all other nodes that represent the same biological entity as the node A to see if any of them is in S. For instance, in Fig. 6
                         node B5 is not in S, but node B6 (let us call it alias of B5) that represents the same biological entity (through RDF predicate “XREF” of BioPAX 2 ontology) is in S. We will, therefore, consider that node B5 is a member of S.

Checking if an RDF node A is a member of the set S requires finding all aliases of the node A. To optimize SPARQL query operations, we use RDF/OWL level inference and pre-compute entailments of the set S to get an expanded set S∗. The entailments include all aliases of all nodes in S. We then check each RDF node against the expanded set S
                        *. Fig. 7
                         illustrates this process. The set S
                        * includes node B5 as an entailment. The entailments are structurally shown as a part of the “Dynamic KB and Rule bases” components of (see SM).

Here, we illustrate the RIIG formalism’s workflow using a toy example. Panel A in Fig. 8
                         presents a hypothetical RDF KB. The KB consists of ontology and instance data, which are both stored as RDF triples. The ontology specifies biological meaning of the entities of the KB. For instance, RDF object resources “PROTEIN” and “PATHWAY” correspond to biological entities of a protein and a pathway, and RDF predicates “COMPONENTS” and “CONTROLLER” represent biological relationship of a component of a protein complex with the protein complex and controlling entity of a biochemical reaction with the biochemical reaction, respectively. Names of the RDF instance entities are composed from the prefixes and literals. For example, “PrA” reads as “PROTEIN A”, and “CT3” reads as “CONTROL 3”. The proteins, protein complexes and pathways of a morphoproteomic study are represented by RDF Entities of Interest (EOI). In this toy example we have protein “PrB”, protein complex “PcA” and pathways “PaC”, “PaD”, and “PaE”.

The first step in RIIG method is induction of an RDF KN from the RDF KB (Panel B in Fig. 8). In the current RIIG implementation, RDF KNs are mere logical constructs and do not have a persistent form. They are generated on-the-fly by: (i) filtering out RDF KB elements that do not carry any biological meaning, (ii) resolving aliases, and (iii) expanding knowledge base through description logic inference (see more in SM). We have to note here that the resulting RDF KN represents a completely new source of knowledge that has two properties that make it significantly different from the original RDF KN, namely: (i) absence of biologically irrelevant entities and (ii) augmentation of the original body of knowledge. Such RDF KN aggregates, unifies and augments biologically relevant information from multiple KBs. RIIG uses this RDF KN to mine relationships between biomarkers proteins and biological pathways.

RDF KN allows application of graph algorithms for path traversal among RDF object resources, which is used by RIIG to extract RDF relevance statements among EOIs (Panel C in Fig. 8). RDF relevance relations are formalized by RIIG method and model conditional independence relationships of probabilistic systems (Conjecture 1 in Appendix B of SM). For instance, the statement “R(PcA, PaC)” means that the protein complex “PcA” is unconditionally RDF relevant to the RDF pathway “PaC”. That means that the biological activities of these two entities are “related” regardless of the active state (see Definition 13 in SM) of all other elements in the RDF KN. Another example is the RDF relevance statement “R(PrB, PaE|PaC)”. This statement says that the protein “PrB” is RDF irrelevant to the pathway “PaE” given that we know the active state of the pathway “PaC”. In other words, it means that if we know the biological status of the pathway “PaC”, the knowledge about the status of the pathway “PaE” becomes irrelevant to infer the status of the protein “PrB”.

One of the central ideas in RIIG formalism is that we can use probabilistic constraint-based structure learning algorithms where conditional independence statements are replaced by RDF relevance statements (Conjecture 2 in Appendix B of SM) to induce a set of RDF influence links. Such links model causal links in a probabilistic setting 
                        [59]. Panel D in Fig. 8 shows three steps of this process. In Step 1 a fully connected graph with EOIs as its nodes is generated. Step 2 eliminates edges using RDF relevance statements. In Step 3 the direction of relationships are determined. Steps 1, 2 and 3 are essential parts of structure-learning algorithms such as PC algorithm [61]. In RIIG formalism, RDF influence links are marked with double arrows in an RDF-induced InfluGram. Such diagram can be used for morphoproteomic analysis.

@&#RESULTS AND DISCUSSION@&#

The goal of the RIIG method assessment was twofold: (i) validate the ability of RIIG framework to recover a set of predefined influence links from a “synthetic” data set, and (ii) compare the performance of RIIG method implementation with a naïve Monte Carlo process. Details on RIIG assessment protocols can be found in SM.

In the first case, we simulated a hypothetical clinical case where we predefined a priori influence relations between biomarker proteins and biological pathways. These relations were encoded into a synthetic RDF knowledge base according to the BioPAX 2 ontology (for details see SM). We ran RIIG algorithm implementation multiple times and noted the percentage of recovered links as well as the number of any new links that may arise due to the inter-relationships established among the entities of the synthetic KB. In 50 runs of RIIG, we could recover anywhere from 60% to 90% of the number of predefined links and could get 5–10% of new influence links. We noted that when the ratio of predefined links to the overall number of EOIs became smaller, RIIG could recover more predefined links and get fewer new links. This could be readily explained as follows. When the ratio is small, the probability of two or more predefined links to “disrupt” corresponding RDF colliders due to random adjacency is lower. That enables RIIG to recover more predefined links. But at the same time, the chance of spontaneous appearance of new RDF colliders is also lower, which results in a lower number of non-predefined, new links.

In the second case, we compared the performance of RIIG to infer links with a Naïve Monte Carlo sampling. We used RIIG on a set of EOIs to infer the RIIG links. For each pair of these EOIs we computed joint frequency of their appearance in PubMed abstracts followed by counting the matches and mismatches of RIIG and PubMed-derived links. The process was repeated 50 times. We then compared these numbers with the counts of matches and mismatches of PubMed pairs with uniformly randomly sampled links from the set of EOIs. The mean values of matches between RIIG and PubMed and between Naïve Monte Carlo were 14.22 and 7.61 respectively. Levene’s tests showed that the data fail to satisfy homoscedasticity requirement with P-value of 0.04559 with for alpha confidence level of 0.05. The normality assumption violation was demonstrated by Shapiro–Wilk test with p-Values of 0.02016 and 0.00044 for matches between RIIG and PubMed and between Naïve Monte Carlo and PubMed respectively. We have therefore decided to use non-parametric tests. Kruskal–Wallis rank sum test was significant with p-Value<0.001, which allowed us to conclude that RIIG inferred links statistically better match findings from PubMed abstracts.

We have run experiments with the proteins and pathways from two morphoproteomic cases reported by pathologists in [20,67,18] to see if RIIG can reveal the same morphoproteomic portraits.

In the first case, the pathologists used morphoproteomics to find alternate drug targets for a patient who did not respond to a conventional chemotherapy. They opted to use a Bortezomib drug, a proteasome inhibitor, in a combination with another drug Dexamethasone, to treat relapsed Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL). The goal was to construct a morphoproteomic diagram related to the case’s biochemical processes in such a way that appropriate drug target can be identified. After conducting IHC tests for paraffin-embedded tissue, correlative expression of AKT, NF-kappa-B and BCL-2 proteins was revealed. The next task was to infer the biological circuitries that were manifested by the expression of these proteins. After analysis of several signal transduction pathways, the pathologists [17,20] came to the conclusion that an anti-apoptotic mechanism had been activated in this case, which led to the disruption of programmed cell death and therefore abnormal cell proliferation. Specifically, the activation of AKT pathway led to the activation of the of NF-kappa-B protein that in turn resulted in up-regulation of BCL-2 protein, which is known to be an anti-apoptotic agent. To test our approach, we ran the RIIG implementation for BCL-2, AKT and NF-kappa-B proteins and a set of signal transduction pathways that included AKT and NF-kappa-B pathways. The resulted diagram of inferred influence links is presented in Fig. 9
                        A).

As it can be seen from Fig. 9A), the algorithm has identified influence of the AKT pathway to the expression of RELA protein, which is a subunit of NF-kappa-B protein. Our method has also correctly positioned BCL-2 downstream from NF-kappa-B signaling pathway, which explains the expression of its main effector RELA (NF-kappa-B) protein.

The second morphoproteomic case [17,18] involved a study of Rapamycin drug as a potential treatment for Mesenchymal Chondrosarcoma. In this case IHC studies revealed cytoplasmic expression of phosphorylated AKT (p-AKT) and mTOR (p-mTOR) proteins as well as nuclear expression of phosphorylated p70 S6 kinase (p-p70S6K). After morphoproteomic analysis the conclusion was that p-AKT causes an activation of p-mTOR, which in turn phosphorylates p-p70S6K. Since mTOR is a molecular target of Rapamycin, it was suggested this drug be used to inhibit mTOR activity and therefore disrupt activation of p70S6K and consequent G1 cell cycle progression in malignant Mesenchymal Chondroblasts. To check RIIG inference in this case we ran the algorithm for AKT1, FRAP1 (alias for mTOR) and RPS6KB1(alias for p70S6K) proteins and AKT and mTOR pathways. The morphoproteomic diagram with inferred influence links is presented in Fig. 9 B). AKT protein is known to be a key modulator of AKT pathway whose activity is closely related to mTOR pathway [68–70]. This fact is shown by an influence link on our diagram in Fig. 9B). The second molecular mechanism is represented by an influence link from FRAP1 to RPS6KB1 proteins. It was reported in the literature that mTOR signaling pathway regulates FRAP1 (mTOR) protein kinase [16,27,67,71–76], which makes these two entities “interchangeable” in the context of the overall workflow of involved proteins and pathways. This demonstrates that revealed by RIIG relationships confirm the findings described in [18,70,77–81].

Next, we tested RIIG application to facilitate the development of novel means of treating malignancies that are advanced and resistant to the usual therapeutic modalities. Generally, these patients have already undergone treatment with multiple standard drug regimens and perhaps even experimental drug trials. It is in such cases that morphoproteomics provides essential information for personalized medical care based on the interpretation of findings in the biopsies of the patients own tumors in contrast to basing therapy on that general class of tumors. However, the linkage of visually observable tumor features to potentially effective chemotherapy requires a deep, as well as broad, knowledge of both cancer genomics and pharmacogenomics, which is well beyond the capability of most pathologists. Nonetheless, when provided with access to an extensive genomics database and a rational approach to information retrieval based on cellular pathways and protein interactions, a pathologist or oncologist can leverage his/her basic knowledge of disease to obtain more specific and relevant data through their own iterative interactions with the knowledge base.

For example, we consider the treatment of squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) which is a very common malignancy affecting an extensive variety of tissues. Feng et al. [17,71,73,75,82–85] have described their experience in marshalling proteomic evidence for the unconventional treatment of cervical squamous cell carcinoma by identifying over-expression of proteins within the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling pathways. These pathways were evaluated in view of their known frequent involvement in malignancies as well as their susceptibility to pharmacologic inhibition. The EGFR pathway may be down regulated with erlotinib and mTOR with an analogue of rapamycin, temsirolimus. The authors conclude that such a regimen would be reasonable for the treatment of early stage cervical SCC. In order to investigate the potential for RIIG to contribute new knowledge relevant to the treatment of SCC in general, we used RIIG to infer other possible protein interactions in the EGFR signaling pathway that were not investigated by Feng et al. [17,86].

Starting with a simplified role of the EGFR pathway in the original Feng’s morphoproteomic diagram we used RIIG to explore alternative therapeutic venues. Several proteins were queried leading to the identification of interactions between JAK1, RASA1, STAT1 and STAT3 (signal transducers and activators of transcription 3), which are components of the JAK-STAT signaling pathway. To check protein and pathway relationships discovered by our method, a systematic literature review was conducted using a set of queries for PubMed searches (see SM). The interactions that have been revealed by our approach are shown Fig. 9C. Some of the important points derived from RIIG that can lead to a new drug therapy are as follows: (i) the activation and over-expression of the transcription factor STAT3 plays an important role in the SCC genomic apparatus, (ii) the activation of this protein may be identified by the presence of the phosphorylated form and its translocation from the cytoplasm to the nucleus, (iii) STAT3 expression has been demonstrated to be down regulated by several pharmacologic agents. These agents have shown some experimental effectiveness in other malignancies including breast carcinoma and chronic myeloid leukemia.

A hypothetical medical setting considered here is a situation of attempting to devise new therapeutic options for patients with a malignant disease refractory to conventional chemotherapy. Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL) was chosen as a representative disease. Based on practical knowledge obtained through practice in the subspecialty of hematopathology, the medical researcher selected 29 pathways and 22 proteins, which have been generally related to ALL in the medical literature.

The researcher had no specific knowledge of these genes/pathways in regard to treatment of ALL. The proteins/pathways were then processed by RIIG and a network of influence links between these entities was generated. Only directed links were retained. Influence links were identified between 28 of the 29 pathways (p-53 was the exception), but only 6 of the 22 proteins. We then conducted a systematic literature review to retrieve information related to potential new treatments. It was done through PubMed search queries based on terms derived from the interactions of proteins and pathways as generated by RIIG.

The RIIG-generated diagrams allow the identification of upstream and downstream pathways, that is to say, pathways that activate other pathways versus those that are activated by other pathways. This provides a good perspective for identifying pathways that might be blocked through the manipulation of other effector pathways. For example, the caspase pathway is seen to be activated by 7 of the pathways while activating none itself (Fig. 10
                        a). Thus, this provides an accurate representation of the caspase pathway’s role as the final-end stage effector of cell death as initiated by multiple other pathways. Similarly, the TGF-beta signaling pathway is also activated through 7 upstream pathways while not activating any pathways in our schema (Fig. 10b). This is consistent with the signaling function of this pathway that leads more or less directly to the activation of transcription factors rather than other pathways. Similar observations may be made for the IL-7 and EIF2 pathways (Fig. 10c and d).

On the other hand, the platelet-derived growth factor pathway is known to support a variety of cellular mechanisms including cell proliferation and survival, deposition of extracellular matrix and tissue remodeling. This is reflected in our model by a graph showing the activation of 7 other pathways by the PDGF pathway (Fig. 10e). The ability of PDGF ligands to activate JAK1/2 through tyrosine phophosphorylation was shown in an older paper by Vignais et al. [87] thus confirming the interaction of the PDGF pathway with JAK2 as identified in our graph of the JAK network (Fig. 10d).

RIIG serves as an effective filter for literature information extraction by focusing attention on specific interactions of proteins and pathways. This preprocessing step saves investigational time by limiting the search to interactions known by the knowledge base although perhaps not known to the investigator. This helps to identify new, or recently reported, knowledge in a medical setting. For example, a sub-network involving JAK1/2 and CD79a along with several upstream pathways was generated by RIIG. Literature searches base on this sub-network yielded several potential therapeutic agents as well as several recently reported protein interactions not yet contained within reference protein interaction databases.

Using RIIG we could also identify some interesting protein interactions involved in ALL. AKT1 is shown to interact with CD79a in our network, but this interaction is not reported in the NCBI Gene database. Nonetheless, a recent article in Blood reports the recruitment of AKT1 to B-cell receptor activation complexes (CD79a) in chronic lymphocytic leukemia 
                        [88].

Next, we looked into the identification of potential therapeutic interventions. A number of therapeutic agents potentially effective against ALL were readily identified by focusing the literature search on the proteins JAK1 and JAK2. Bellucci et al. [89] found that gene silencing of JAK1/2 and the use of the small molecule inhibitors JAK inhibitor 1 and AG-490 against these proteins resulted in increased natural-killer cell mediated lysis of a variety of tumor types. Another article in Neoplasia [90] showed that the JAK1/2 inhibitor INCB16562 is effective against multiple myeloma.

Another drug potentially effective against ALL was identified through the interaction of the IL7 pathway with JAK1/2. In this instance, an article in Blood [91] showed that a BET bromodomain inhibitor, JQ1 which down regulates IL7, was potentially effective in certain high risk types of ALL with CLRF2 rearrangements. Maude et al. [92] studied xenograft models of ALL cases with the CLRF2 rearrangement as well as JAK1/2 point mutations and JAK2 fusion genes which resulted in hyperactive JAK/STAT signaling. Their data demonstrated in vivo efficacy of ruxolitinib in these cases.

Basic science discoveries coupled with tremendous advances in “omics” technologies have triggered a paradigm shift in today’s biomedicine. The ideas of translational and personalized medicine are viewed as solutions to improve patient care by bringing state-of-the-art biomedical knowledge into clinical setting to combat disease complexity and heterogeneity [3]. However, as it was pointed out a decade ago by Sung et al. [2] the two major challenges of clinical translation enterprise are translation of basic sciences discoveries into clinical research and translation from outcomes of clinical research to the bedside. In this context RIIG provides a solution to overcome the roadblocks of translational science by: (i) utilizing “confirmed”, curated knowledge of relevant biological processes, (ii) recreating a mechanistic schema of influence relationships between disease-associated genes and molecular pathways based on clinical data (biomarker proteins), and (iii) presenting the results in a fashion that allows quick interpretation by clinicians. Moreover, knowledge exploration through RIIG may effectively lead to the discovery of clinically useful information in regard to treatment of disease of all forms. Furthermore, RIIG can potentially be used to generate new hypotheses that will need to be confirmed by experimental studies. In this regard, RIIG closes the loop from bedside to basic science research.

In context of morphoproteomics, RIIG provides a solution to the limitation of individual expert’s knowledge of biochemical processes by leveraging computerized knowledge bases. For instance, a pathologist may have knowledge only about limited number anti-apoptotic mechanisms to make therapeutic recommendation in a particular patient case. Such knowledge may not match the real biological mechanisms of anti-apoptosis taking place in the case, leading to complications and adverse side effects in terms of clinical outcomes. RIIG allows searching against any number of anti-apoptotic pathways known so far to biomedical science. But unlike traditional retrieval methods, RIIG rearranges the facts into the coherent flow of events through directed influence relations, which helps to pinpoint effective drug targets with the minimal number of known side effects.

Experiments with the RIIG implementation showed its great potential not only for the morphoproteomics area but also for the biomedical field in general. However, at present, it is possible to run RIIG only on a limited subset of SMKB due to the performance issue of graph traversal algorithms. To overcome this and to explore other venues for the improvement, we have identified the following future research directions: (i) improving influence-induction algorithm (e.g. test other structure learning algorithms), (ii) implementing RIIG on high-performance parallel computing platform, (iii) conducting extensive experiments with clinical cases, (iv) expanding therapeutic part of SMKB by including additional drug information and incorporate small molecule inhibitors and protein-therapy agents data, (v) designing human-in-the-loop computational framework for generating effective combinatorial therapeutic strategies.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

We would like to thank Dr. Douglas Anthony, MD, PhD, Dr. Charles Caldwell, MD, PhD from University of Missouri for providing the infrastructure and resources to run experiments and facilitating the discussion of the results with pathologists of the Department of Pathology, MU School of Medicine. We are also grateful to Dr. Robert Brown, MD, Professor and Vice-Chair of Pathology in University of Texas, Medical School, who introduced the field of morphoproteomics and allowed us to use elements of his articles for our scientific publications and the work that led to the development of the RIIG formalism.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2014.08.003.


                     
                        
                           Supplementary data 1
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

