@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Using personas to tailor educational messages to the preferences of coronary heart disease patients

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Patient education is crucial for self-management.


                        
                        
                           
                           A method to tailor health educational messages to patients’ preferences is proposed.


                        
                        
                           
                           Personas can aid in developing patient-centered tailored health educational messages.


                        
                        
                           
                           Personas also show potential in assessing patients’ preferences for message features.


                        
                        
                           
                           The method was, in general, positively assessed by coronary heart disease patients.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Health education

Cluster analysis

Persuasive communication

Personas

Message features

Tailoring

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Purpose
                  Although tailoring health education messages to individual characteristics of patients has shown promising results, most patient education materials still take a one-size-fits-all approach. The aim of this study was to develop a method for tailoring health education messages to patients’ preferences for various message features, using the concept of personas. This is a preliminary study focused on education for coronary heart disease (CHD) patients.
               
               
                  Methods
                  This study used a three-step approach. First, we created personas by (i) performing k-means cluster analysis on data from an online survey that assessed the preferences of 213 CHD patients for various message features and, (ii) creating a vivid description of the preferences per patient cluster in an iterative process with the research team. Second, we developed adaptation rules to tailor existing educational messages to the resulting personas. Third, we conducted a pilot validation by adapting nine existing educational messages to each of the personas. These messages and the resulting personas were then presented to a separate group of 38 CHD patients who visited the cardiology outpatient clinic. They were first asked to choose their most preferred, second most preferred, and least preferred persona. Subsequently, they were asked to rate three of the adapted messages; one for every of the persona choices.
               
               
                  Results
                  We created five personas that pertained to five patient clusters. Personas varied mainly on preferences for medical or lay language, current or future temporal perspective, and including or excluding explicit health risks. Fifty-five different adaptation rules were developed, primarily describing adaptations to the message’s perspective, level of detail, sentence structure, and terminology. Most participants in the validation study could identify with one of the five personas, although some of them found it hard to choose. On average, 68.5% of all participants rated the messages that matched their most preferred persona more positively than, or in the same way as, the messages that matched their least preferred persona.
               
               
                  Conclusions
                  The persona-based method developed in this study can be used to create a manageable set of patient-centered tailored messages, while additionally using the developed personas to assess patients’ preferences.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Patient education is a key component in many self-management interventions, including those for patients with coronary heart disease (CHD). Self-management has become a major point of interest within CHD care contexts. This is due to the growing number of people living with CHD, and there is increasing evidence that highlights the negative influence of risk behavior on disease progression (e.g., physical activity and regular medication intake). When patients self-manage their illness, they make decisions every day on such things as whether to continue with the medication regime and what to eat. Patient education is crucial to making well-informed decisions. Therefore, patient education is a key component in many disease management guidelines, including those for patients with CHD [1].

In the Netherlands, health professionals usually provide self-management education to CHD patients. As part of this, patients are often provided with written information in the form of leaflets. The emotional shock and speed of events surrounding and during patient-doctor encounters influence patients’ ability to process information, and supplementary material they can refer to at their own pace at home is particularly valuable to them [2]. Current information provision practices regarding cardiovascular medication do not meet patients’ information needs sufficiently [3]. Information leaflets are often difficult to understand, can cause anxiety in some patients, and many patients find them unsatisfactory [4]. Various researchers have postulated a need for tailoring information to patients’ individual needs [2–6]. Currently, however, most patient education materials take a one-size-fits-all approach. The increasing use of health information technology offers prospects for providing patients with education materials that accommodate their information needs.

While tailoring health communication materials to specific types of pathology, therapies, behaviors, or psychological characteristics of patients has been found to be beneficial [6–17], individual differences in patients’ preferences for message features are rarely considered. Studies that do explore various message features (i.e., aspects of the message’s style, structure, or content) mainly investigate how messages can be designed to make them more salient to readers [18]. For example, studies have shown that message features can influence reactions to HIV disclosure [19] and the perceived credibility of health messages (e.g., [20,21]). However, research has shown that effectiveness of health education increases if the information provided matches patient preferences [22]. In a previous study, we found considerable variation in the preferences of CHD patients for nine different message features; these preferences appeared to be related to socio-demographic and psychological characteristics [23]. For example, more highly educated patients preferred messages written in medical language, while less educated patients, and those lacking social support, preferred messages written in lay language.

Although an extensive number of studies describe the effectiveness of tailoring messages according to patients’ behavior and how information is received (e.g., [17,24–26]), studies describing structured methods for constructing such tailored messages are scarce [27]. Kukafka summarized tailoring techniques currently used in the health communication domain [28], concluding that new, innovative adaptation methods are needed. This conclusion is based mainly on the challenge of assembling pieces of text or sentences to produce a coherent, understandable health message without losing its potential persuasiveness [28]. In the present study, we explore the use of personas as an intermediate construct in the task of tailoring health education materials for CHD patients. Personas stem from the field of product marketing, and are generally used to represent different user types within a target population, and are typically captured in short descriptions that include the behavioral patterns, goals, skills, and attitudes of these user types [29].

The aim of this study was to develop a method for tailoring health education messages to patients’ preferences for message features using the concept of personas. This is a preliminary study focused on education for CHD patients.

@&#BACKGROUND@&#

Tailoring can be defined as “any combination of information or change strategies intended to reach one specific person, based on characteristics that are unique to that person, related to the outcome of interest, and have been derived from an individual assessment” [30]. Tailoring has been broadly discussed and applied in recent years. It has been described as a complex process aimed at increasing the attractiveness of the message [31,32], enhancing the level of meeting the receiver’s needs, and positively affecting cognitive behavioral responses [32]. Current tailoring literature primarily describes which individual characteristics one should tailor to, and the effectiveness of tailoring messages to these characteristics [25,33]. In health care, characteristics that have been frequently used for tailoring health education messages are derived from behavioral theories (e.g., stages of change, trans theoretical model), individual behavioral patterns (e.g., smoking, diet), socio-demographic variables, and targeted health goals (e.g., screening, prevention) [14,33]. In general, most tailoring literature focuses on adapting the content of information [25,26]. However, in the fields of psychology and communication, the relative persuasiveness of alternative message formulations with similar content has been studied extensively (e.g., [34,35]). In these fields, a message’s features are adapted to an individual’s particular psychological or other characteristics to persuade him or her to adopt a particular behavior. Concordant with studies concerning content tailoring, these studies often focused on the effects of tailoring (e.g., a person’s attitudes, intentions, and behaviors [34]) to psychological characteristics (e.g., monitor-blunter coping style [8,9] regulatory focus [9,11]), but not to patients’ needs or preferences. There are various strategies for assessing these characteristics, but questionnaires, telephone interviews, or data obtained from existing sources such as medical records [25,36] are often used.

Although some studies have described approaches for developing tailored materials, they often merely set out the generic steps that make up the method (e.g., [31,36]). For example, Dijkstra [31] describes three general steps for composing tailored messages: (1) assess information about the individual, (2) compose the message using decision rules, and (3) disseminate the computer-tailored information to the individual through various channels. However, no details are provided about the execution of each step. A recently published article concerning reporting standards for tailored interventions [37] postulated a need for more detailed instructions on how to conduct each step in the tailoring process in order to disentangle the “black box” of tailoring. Others have also suggested this [17]. Harrington and Noar [37] propose doing this by describing how assessment data provided by participants can be used as input to construct particular messages. Kukafka [28] has described techniques that have been used to tailor messages to the individual characteristics of patients. She suggests that particularly these techniques use simple decision rules (e.g., if-then rules) and/or tailor to factual information and a patient’s medical history only (i.e., not to determinants of behavior), mainly because of two challenges that need to be tackled during the tailoring process. The first challenge is to acquire the expert knowledge needed to author the text the system uses to generate the tailored communication. The second challenge is to assemble the pieces of text to produce a health message that is coherent and understandable. Considering these challenges, she concludes that new techniques are needed that combine knowledge about the specific health domain, individual behavior, and argumentation techniques into a readable text [28].

It might be possible to use design techniques such as the development of personas to tailor health education messages to patients’ preferences and to assess these preferences. A persona is a narrative and an explicit, vivid description of a fictitious user who represents a group of users [38]. Personas are used in various design disciplines (such as software engineering), and have their origin in marketing [39]. In the marketing field they are used to provide abstract representations of users within a market segment [39]. In the design field they are used to help designers focus on a particular target population, and to help them establish the user group they are designing for. They are also used as a medium for communication within companies [39]. Personas make use of the fact that people are accustomed to using partial knowledge to make predictions, form expectations about other people, and anticipate their reactions [39]. Providing individuals with a short, vivid persona description therefore allows the reader to identify with and feel empathy for the individuals they represent [29]. With these personas in mind, specific strategies or tools can be created that fit the needs, goals, and tasks of these individuals [40]. This approach might ultimately increase users’ engagement with and the usability of the products provided.

@&#METHODS@&#


                        Fig. 1
                         describes the development process of the personas and the adaptation rules used to tailor health education messages to the preferences of CHD patients for various message features used in our study. Our study consisted of three main steps.

First, we created personas in the form of “physicians” from qualitative data that had been previously collected through a patient survey [23] and through interviews and focus groups among CHD patients [41]. The data of the patient survey included patients’ characteristics and their preferences for message features. These preferences for message features were segmented by means of a cluster analysis. Persona identification was based on an analysis of the differences between the resulting clusters, reflecting differences in patient preferences for message features. Personas were further defined by use of a corpus of quotes from a qualitative focus group and interview study that is done before.

Second, we developed adaptation rules with these personas as an intermediate construct to create education messages in a persona preferred language style.

The third step is displayed in Fig. 2
                         and represents the pilot validation of the constructed personas and health education messages by means of a short interview and a survey given to CHD patients.

The online survey that was used in the first step of this study was distributed among CHD patients in the Netherlands via an online market research company. Participants were recruited from the company’s panel if they had previously indicated they have, or have had, heart disease. Patients younger than 18 or those who indicated they have a congenital heart disease were excluded from the analysis. The survey included questions on socio-demographics, disease history, social support, health literacy [42], the psychological construct monitor-blunter coping style [43], explicit preferences for information type (i.e., what they want to know about their disease), explicit preferences for information source (i.e., a physician’s experience, a patient’s experience, or scientific research), and preferences for various message features. In this paper, we focus on the questions concerning preferences for the various message features; the results of the other part of the survey can be found in [23].

Preferences for the various message features were assessed by presenting nine sets of messages that differed with respect to (1) language style, (2) level of abstraction, (3) actionability of the advice, (4) source of information, (5) temporal perspective (present or future), (6) level of disease-specific information provided (7) level of treatment-specific information provided, (8) explicit health risks, and (9) behavioral cues (positive or negative). For each set of messages, participants were asked to state which text they preferred or whether they had “no preference”. Little research has previously been performed on patient preferences for message features. In a previous patient survey, nine message features were used, derived from the literature on health literacy and monitor-blunter coping style. In this patient survey, four message features were based on the health literacy literature, five on monitor-blunter coping style [23]. The message tailoring process used was particularly focused on patients’ preferences for message features and not on the other patient characteristics. In this study the focus is on the method that can be used to select message features.

Persona development was divided into two phases: segmentation and persona identification. These phases were derived from the procedure for developing personas described by Haas and Kunz [38]. They divided the persona creation procedure in two main stages: persona creation and persona implementation. This article only describes the persona creation process, because of its methodological focus. The persona creation process described by Haas and Kunz consists of three steps; goal setting, segmentation and persona identification. In the goal setting step, all relevant stakeholders goals are considered. Market research is performed in the segmentation step. Segments are detected and the segment needs are identified. In the last phase, personas are identified to construct a role model for personas by doing interviews or focus groups and letting them explain how, when and where they work with the product. We used this procedure in an adapted form. In this study, the focus is on the second and third step: segmentation and persona identification. The goal of constructing our personas was to develop a method for tailoring educational health messages to patients’ preferences for various message features. Because our goal for developing personas was different than that of Haas & Kunz, their process was used as a guideline. Therefore, it was adapted slightly. The adaptations concerned the following. First, Haas and Kunz describe a process in which the qualitative data collection is part of the persona identification phase. We performed the qualitative study beforehand and used it for both the purpose of goal setting and persona identification. Also, Haas and Kunz describe that “classic data analysis tools of market research for segmentation are used” (p. 17) [38]. In our case we did a patient survey to gain insight into patients’ preferences for message features, as this was the goal of persona creation. Finally, because our goal was not to develop personas based on individual patients, role models were not identified. We used the data from various individual patients collected in a patient survey instead. In our study segmentation was achieved by means of a cluster analysis of the previously collected survey data mentioned in Section 3.1.1 
                        [23]. In the persona identification phase, we used the preferences for certain message features within clusters, and differences found between the clusters, to create vivid descriptions of the various patient profiles. These descriptions were complemented with data from a previously performed qualitative study that explored patients’ needs and experiences with CHD [41].

We used k-means cluster analysis to partition the dataset by patients’ preferences for various message features. Prior to the analysis, preferences were coded as numerical features. For each pair of messages, we used the values 0 and 1 for stated preferences, and 0.5 to encode absence of preference (i.e., the “no preference” option). For “source of information” (where survey participants could choose between three messages instead of two), two separate numerical features were created. The first of these encoded a preference for “patient’s experience” versus the other two options (i.e., “scientific research” and “physician’s experience”) and the second encoded a preference for “scientific research” versus the other two options (the scale of both of these features was reduced to 0–0.5 to avoid domination). The cluster analysis was performed with a maximum of five clusters, which number was chosen for two reasons. First, for every persona a text needs to be adapted with different rules for every persona. Therefore, to keep the tailoring process manageable, the number of clusters needed to be small. Second, we aimed to use the personas as an aid for patients to express their preferences for message features. To do so, again the number of alternatives patients would have to choose from needed to be small. To derive the appropriate number of clusters (k), the analysis was performed four times (with k
                           =2, …, 5) and the resulting clusters were appraised by the researchers with respect to their suitability for persona creation. After determining the value of k, each of the resulting clusters was prepared for persona creation by limiting the participants’ preferences to those that had pronounced values in the cluster centre (smaller than 0.2 or larger than 0.8).

All statistical analyses were performed using the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS 19.0 for Windows, Chicago, IL, USA).

In the persona identification phase, personas were developed by taking the preferences for certain message features within a cluster as a starting point and describing these preferences in a more personal and vivid way. These descriptions were complemented with quotes from the qualitative study described in Section 3.2 
                           [41].

First, for each cluster a vivid description was made of the preferences for certain message features derived from that cluster, and differences that stood out between clusters. During a brainstorm with four researchers (SV, JMRMW, NP, MWMJ), an iterative process was used in which a concept version of the personas was developed by one researcher (SV) was taken as a starting point. After such a meeting, a new version was developed, which was again adapted during a meeting with five researchers (SV, JMRMW, JPL, MWMJ, NP). The personas were constantly appraised on vividness, contrast between personas and humanity during the development.

Second, the quotes that were used to complement the personas with were derived from a previous study [41]. In this study interviews and focus groups were held to gain insight into disease experiences of CHD patients. As a results quotes on six core themes were yielded: (1) the emotional impact of CHD, (2) experiences with professional care during recovery and follow-up treatment, (3) perceived inability to prevent progression of the disease, (4) experiences with the impact of having CHD on daily life, (5) the social environment as potential barrier or facilitator in managing the disease and (6) information needs. The last category, information needs, was extracted from the transcripts of the patient study which were analyzed again particularly for our study. A sample of the quotes in the other categories were also appraised by one researcher (SV), to make sure no interesting quotes were missed. No new quotes were added based on this exploration. Then, from the quotes related to information needs, all those related to preferences for message features were selected by two researchers (JMRMW, SV). After a consensus meeting of this selection, an iterative qualitative coding process was started with the remaining quotes. These quotes were linked to the message features listed above by the same two researchers individually, followed by a consensus meeting. If there was a disagreement, a third researcher (NP) was consulted. Every consensus meeting was followed by a reappraisal of the data to make sure the data was coded according to the new coding scheme. This process repeated itself several times. The same two researchers then independently determined the best quotes per message feature; in cases of disagreement a third researcher (NP) was consulted. In a similar manner, these quotes were assigned to a persona if it fitted the persona’s distinguished preferences. The research team then used these personas to inspire the adaptation rules, and the messages that were needed for the purposes of the pilot validation. To be used as an assessment tool in the pilot validation, these personas were rewritten from the personal perspective (i.e., using the “I” form) to the perspective of a physician (i.e., the fictitious physician). This was done in an iterative process in which the creation, describing, and detailing of the personas by one researcher (SV) was alternated with various team meetings (SV, JMRMW, JPL, MWMJ, NP) in which these personas were discussed and revised. For every persona, we created a one-sentence motto that explained the most defining characteristic(s) of the persona, and a one-paragraph description.

To tailor health messages to the preferences of each persona, adaptation rules were developed, described in Fig. 3
                        . For each preference, adaptation rules were constructed to adapt the message to this feature (e.g., rules defining the adaptations needed to construct the messages that fit the preference “actionable advice”). To define the rules, we first consulted the literature that describes how messages should be constructed or how they were constructed with regard to the message features included [8,9,44,45]. For every message feature, one researcher (SV) drew up detailed adaptation rules to describe the adaptations found in this literature. Subsequently, the implicit rules used previously to adapt the messages for the survey [23] were added to these rules. Afterwards, as a pilot study, one researcher (SV) applied the adaptation rules to existing health information from www.apotheek.nl. Apotheek.nl is a website developed by the Dutch professional organization for pharmacists, and contains information on a large number of diseases, treatment modalities, all commonly used medication, and opportunities for self-management (such as lifestyle changes). The site includes extensive information on CHD. This step was aimed at exploring the applicability of the rules, their level of detail, and the discriminating value of the resulting messages. Further detail was added to the adaptation rules in two steps: (1) while considering the personas, three researchers independently assessed the various messages that had been adapted as a pilot to get a feel for the adaptation process, and (2) a team meeting was organized with five researchers (SV, JMRMW, MWMJ, JPL, NP) to discuss the independent assessments and to add further detail to the adaptation rules. In all of the previously described steps, the researcher(s) continuously considered the personas when reflecting on their approach. Two researchers implemented the decisions made during this meeting: first, one researcher (JMRMW) adapted the rules, and then another researcher (SV) assessed and then readapted the rules. This was followed by a consensus meeting in which disagreements were resolved by a third researcher (NP).

The above steps resulted in a different set of adaptation rules for each persona. For reasons of efficiency, an “ideal route” (describing the order in which the set of rules relevant to a particular persona should be applied to construct a tailored message) was assessed. For example, if two message features apply to a persona (such as a preference for concrete advice that does not elaborate on treatment details), it would be best to first apply the rules that describe how to exclude treatment details before applying the rules that make a message more concrete. Doing this the other way around would mean extra work, as text would be adapted only to be removed again later on.


                           Fig. 2 describes the study design of the pilot validation for the proposed method. A pilot validation (consisting of an interview and short questionnaire) was conducted at the cardiology outpatient clinic of the Máxima Medical Centre in Veldhoven in May and June of 2013. The aim was to recruit a sample of approximately 30 people with CHD for this pilot validation. We presumed that, since this is a pilot validation, 30 patients would be sufficient to give a first indication of the potential of the developed method. Patients were invited to participate in the study immediately after they visited one of two treating cardiologists. Patients were only invited if the cardiologist had determined that the patient was 18years or older and had a history of one or more of the following diseases or interventions: heart failure, angina pectoris, hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, cardiac arrhythmia, acute myocardial infarction, coronary artery bypass grafting, percutaneous coronary intervention, a pacemaker, or an implantable cardioverter defibrillator. All participants gave oral consent to participate in the study. When a significant other of the patient was present during the visit to the cardiologist, this person was also present during the validation study. Formal approval for the study was waived by the Institutional Review Board of the Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

To perform the pilot validation study, nine available health education messages covering differing topics were adapted to each of the personas according to the adaptation rules created. One researcher (JMRMW) adapted the messages in the pilot materials described in Section 3.3, which were reviewed independently by another researcher (SV); this was followed by a consensus meeting with the two researchers to resolve disagreements. If a disagreement could not be resolved, a third researcher (NP) was consulted. Finally, a fourth researcher (MWMJ) checked the tailored messages, and a cardiologist (HMCK) checked the accuracy of the medical content. Two researchers (SV, JMRMW) independently checked the adaptations made by the cardiologist for consistency with the adaptation rules.

The data collection consisted of two phases: a brief interview and a short questionnaire. In the brief interview, participants were first asked whether they would prefer a female or a male physician. Subsequently, they were provided with text descriptions of the developed personas in their gender of choice (i.e., there was a male and a female version for every persona). They were asked to read all of these persona descriptions and to indicate which persona they preferred most, which was their second most preferred choice, and which persona they preferred least. Participants were then asked (1) what had determined their choice, (2) their thoughts about having to choose a “fictitious physician” and being provided with information tailored to their preferences, and (3) whether they found it easy to choose. Audio recordings of all interviews were made after the participants’ oral consent.

Participants were then given a short questionnaire along with three of the messages that were tailored particularly for this study, in a random order: one message that matched their most preferred persona, one that matched their second most preferred persona, and one that matched their least preferred persona. The particular messages for each of these personas (i.e., one of nine messages) were provided randomly to patients. The short questionnaire was filled in immediately after the interview in the waiting area of the outpatient clinic. In the short questionnaire, participants were asked to consider the styles in which the messages were written (i.e., not the content) and to rate the messages. They were informed that the messages were given in a random order and could either fit their preference or not, that we were merely interested in their personal opinions, and that there were no right or wrong answers. The short questionnaire consisted of seven items per message (i.e., a total of 21 items). Per message, participants were asked to indicate on a 5-point Likert scale whether they thought the text (1) was written in a pleasant style, (2) presented the information in a way that was easy to understand, (3) was interesting, (4) seemed reliable, and (5) was persuasive. They were also asked whether they (6) were familiar with the information given beforehand, and (7) would recommend the text to patients like them.

Finally, to explore whether the treating cardiologist could predict which features of the information a patient would prefer, he was asked to indicate (on a separate form) which persona would best fit that patient.

Descriptive statistics were used to examine participants’ demographics, their persona choice, and physicians’ prediction of their patients’ persona choice. The pilot validation was not powered to test for significance. Therefore, we explored differences in participants’ assessment of the messages in two steps. First, the participants’ assessment score of the message that matched the least preferred persona (the “mismatch”) was subtracted from the one that matched the most preferred persona (the “match”), and we subsequently assessed the number of participants who assessed the match more positively than, in the same way as, or less positively than the mismatch. This was done for every item in the short questionnaire independently and for the average assessment of all the items, excluding the item inquiring about their familiarity with the messages.

We then performed two kinds of sensitivity analyses. First, differences between the assessment of the message that matched their most preferred and second most preferred persona, and between their second most preferred and least preferred persona, were explored in the same way for the average assessment of all of the items. Second, the influence of familiarity with the information provided was explored by excluding all participants who stated they were very familiar (i.e., a score of 5 on “familiarity”) with the text that matched their most or least preferred persona and then repeating the analysis.

Qualitative data analysis was aimed at exploring participants’ choice process. To do so a research team was composed. Members of the research team were an industrial designer with experience in qualitative user research (SV), a health scientist (JMRMW) and a researcher with a background in medical informatics and computer science (NP). Members of this team cooperated in 5 (SV), 1 (JMRMW) and 6 (NP) published qualitative studies. Also, members of the team (SV and JMRMW) followed several courses related to qualitative research. All audio recordings that were related to one of the three questions in the interview were transcribed verbatim by one researcher (SV). Hereafter, three researchers (SV, JMRMW, NP) independently conducted iterative content analysis of the transcripts from the first nine interviews to identify common themes. We used an iterative content analysis with a data-driven approach [46]. First, the raw data of the transcripts was read and divided into text fragments. Three researchers independently labelled all the text fragments. A consensus meeting was organized in which the different labels were discussed. Out of the different labels, codes were created and a coding tree was developed. This was followed by a consensus meeting in which differing themes were discussed and a coding tree was created that described the themes identified for every interview question. Because we used an iterative content analysis it was not possible to use an inter-rater reliability measure of this iterative coding process. To achieve sufficient reliability, an iterative coding, grouping and comparison process was applied. During the consensus meeting, consensus was sought by comparing and discussing the individual codes assigned to every interview transcripts until all discrepancies were solved and the categorizations and interpretation of the codebook were exactly the same. Two researchers (SV, JMRMW) used this coding tree to independently code all transcripts. A third researcher (NP) was consulted if there was a disagreement. After every change in interpretation of the codebook or in categorization of the interviews all previously categorized data was checked for consistency with the decisions made during the consensus meeting.

@&#RESULTS@&#

In total, 213 patients participated in the online survey. Of these patients, 199 were included in the cluster analysis; 14 were excluded because of missing values. Patients were on average 55.6years of age (standard deviation (SD): 14.0) and mostly male (64.8%). Table 1
                         describes patients’ preferences for the message features. More information on participants’ characteristics can be found in [23]. In this patient survey we assessed patient preferences for nine message features: language style, level of abstraction, actionability, information source, temporal perspective, amount of disease-specific and treatment-specific information provided, use of explicitly threatening content, and positive or negative cues. We confronted patients with text sets differing in one of these message features. We found that patients varied considerably in their preferences and that these preferences were related to different patient characteristics. For example, patients with low health literacy preferred texts based on patient experience. Also marital status, social support, disease history and age showed a strong association with preferences for texts based on patient experiences.


                        Table 2
                         describes the values of the message features in the cluster centroid, and thus the preferences with pronounced values per cluster of patients. Five clusters were identified. Exploration of the clusters showed that the cluster characteristics and the differences between the clusters became more evident with larger k-values; the differences between the clusters were most evident with k
                        =5. Also, patients were distributed more evenly when k
                        =5. Clusters varied mainly on patients’ preferences for language style (medical or lay), temporal perspective (current or future), and explicit health risks (including or excluding them). The most similarity between the clusters was found for patients’ preferences for elaborate details regarding their disease and treatment and for actionable messages. Table 3
                         describes the personas that were developed from the preference for various message features found in the clusters.

To tailor messages to patients’ preferences for various message features, we developed 55 adaptation rules. These rules primarily described adaptations to the message’s perspective, level of detail, sentence structure, and terminology. For example, to adapt a message to the preference “concrete advice”, one of the rules stated: “Make abstract terminology concrete with a specific description. For example, add the dose of medication, and add which dose should be taken when, and until what time a person can take the medication when forgotten. This information can generally be found on apotheek.nl, or can be derived from apotheek.nl.” Another example: an adaptation rule for the preference “lay language” is “Use the following terminology for drugs: medicine, aspirin, blood thinner, cholesterol-lowering medicine, blood-pressure-lowering medicine, beta blocker, ACE inhibitor, calcium blocker.”

The number of adaptation rules developed to tailor health education messages to personas’ preferences varied between personas: 19 rules needed to be applied for Persona 1, four for Persona 2, 22 for Persona 3, 21 for Persona 4, and 20 for Persona 5. Thus, the number of rules varied from between four for Persona 2 to 22 for Persona 3, resulting in a total of 86 separate adaptation rules that need to be applied to tailor messages to every persona. The rules for Persona 2 primarily describe the deletion of information and avoidance of terminology; the rules for Persona 3 are quite diverse, and include rules that describe the use of terminology, sentence structure, and adding information. A complete overview of the adaptation rules per message feature can be found in Table A.1 of Appendix A.

In total, 38 CHD patients participated in the pilot validation study. These participants were on average 71.9years old (SD: 9.6) and 25 of them (65.8%) were male. Of these participants, 17 had cardiac arrhythmia, 13 had had a cardiac intervention or a cardiac event, two had angina pectoris, three had heart failure, one had a pacemaker, and two had hypertension. Thirteen of the participants (34.2%) were accompanied by a significant other; in some cases, this significant other took the lead in choosing between the personas, dominated the interview, and/or filled in the questionnaire (e.g., because the patient had difficulty reading). In the interview, 21 participants (55.3%) indicated a preference for Persona 1, two (5.3%) for Persona 2, seven (18.4%) for Persona 3, one (2.6%) for Persona 4, and seven (18.4%) for Persona 5. This distribution over the personas is quite different from that of the initial cluster analysis shown in Table 4
                        . Two participants did not choose a second most preferred persona; one participant did not choose a least preferred persona. For seven participants (18.4%), their treating cardiologist’s prediction matched the participant’s most preferred persona; for another seven participants (18.4%), the treating cardiologist’s prediction matched their second most preferred persona.


                        Table 5
                         shows the number of participants who rated the message that matched their most preferred persona more positively than, in the same way as, or less positively than the message that matched their least preferred persona. On average, 18 participants (47.4%) were more positive about, eight participants (21.1%) rated it in the same way as, and nine participants (23.7%) were less positive about the message that matched their most preferred persona than about the message that matched their least preferred persona. Per item, participants generally rated the message that matched their preference in the same way as, or more positively than, the message that did not match their preference. Exploration of the differences in the evaluation of the messages that corresponded to participants’ most and second most preferred persona showed that 15 participants (39.5%) were more positive, nine (23.7%) rated them in the same way, and ten (26.7%) were less positive (data not shown). Comparing the evaluation of messages that corresponded to participants’ second most preferred persona with that of their least preferred persona showed that 14 participants (36.8%) were more positive, five (13.2%) rated them in the same way, and 14 (36.8%) were less positive (data not shown). The average score on the item inquiring about participants’ familiarity with the message was 3.2 (SD=1.0). Participants indicated six different times that they were very familiar with the message that matched their most or least preferred persona; when these cases were excluded, 14 participants (43.8%) were more positive about, six participants (18.8%) rated it in the same way, and nine participants (28.1%) were less positive about the message that matched their most preferred persona than the one that matched their least preferred persona (data not shown).

Fourteen participants found it easy, 17 participants found it difficult, and four participants found it neither difficult nor easy to choose between the five personas. Fourteen participants indicated they found some or all of the personas to be rather similar, six of them said that all of the personas had one or more aspects that fit their preferences, and seven felt they had not been given enough time to make a “good” decision. They also reported having difficulties with processing the amount of information or text and/or with remembering all of the personas (N
                           =6). Some noted that they might have chosen differently if they had made the choice at home or if they had read the persona descriptions again, and more thoroughly (N
                           =3). However, the answers to the question about what had determined their choice indicated that participants did not find it difficult to explain why they preferred a particular persona. Most participants reported they preferred a straightforward approach when being provided with information (N
                           =19) and that they preferred receiving detailed information on the risks and details concerning their treatment and disease (N
                           =14). Some, however, said they did not need to know everything, as certain information would just make them anxious or worried (N
                           =6).

The majority of the participants (N
                           =24) thought that being able to choose how to be informed was positive and/or useful; five thought that having this choice would not make a difference to them. Nine participants made remarks that indicated they were satisfied with what their physician told them, because they considered him to be the expert. A third of the participants made remarks that indicated they had initially thought the personas would be used to choose their treating cardiologist. Although most of these participants understood the actual approach after some additional explanation, some still found it difficult to imagine how this method could be used for anything but choosing a physician.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

To our knowledge, this is the first study to describe how personas can be used to tailor educational messages for chronically ill patients. The method described uses personas as a tool in user-centered development of tailored health messages and is preliminary. In addition, the developed personas are used as a method to elicit patients’ preferences. Five physician personas were developed for presentation to CHD patients with different preferences for message features. These personas can be used to create a manageable set of tailored messages. This is done in a step-by-step approach, with steps that include creating adaptation rules for every message feature and applying these adaptation rules to existing health education messages for every persona.

The use of personas has not received much attention in the medical informatics field, particularly not when it comes to developing consumer health technologies [47]. In this field, the few studies that did use personas used them – like we did – as a design tool in user-centered development of health information technologies (e.g., [47–49]). They were used as a component of the user-centered design process [48–50], or focused particularly on persona development to generate one or more user models of the target group [47,48,51]. Similar to our study, these studies developed personas with a mixed methods approach [51]. Following Creswell and Plano Clark [52], we define mixed methods research as research which collects and analyses persuasively and rigorously both qualitative and quantitative data, and mixes the two forms of data concurrently by combining them, in a single study. Other studies used qualitative research methods (i.e., mainly interviews) only [47,48,50]. The personas were used to guide designers and computer scientists in the design of health information technology, and to consider the user groups’ attitudes, needs, and characteristics [47–51], or used directly to represent user preferences [53,54]. Concordant with our results, the results of these studies suggest that personas aid in creating vivid, understandable representations of user groups. These representations can be used as a tool for engagement (e.g., [48–50]), to communicate the needs and characteristics of these groups within research or design teams (e.g., [47]), and as a basis for user-centered design decisions [47,49,53,54]. However, none of these studies developed personas to use them as an elicitation method for persons’ preferences.

When compared with previous tailoring studies and studies that have adopted persona-based approaches, our study incorporates several novelties. To our knowledge, no other studies have described explicit, structured methods for tailoring educational messages to multiple message features at the same time. It has been suggested that the time and expense involved in customization threatens the feasibility of tailored interventions [55]. Although manual steps are currently a necessary part of this kind of text message tailoring, this may change in future when natural language generation (NLP) methods [56,57] become more sophisticated. These methods may support the application of the adaptation rules developed in this study. This can lead to a more manageable process or to the possibility to develop more personas. Also, if no manual steps are needed at all, NLP methods might eliminate the need for personas and provide the opportunity to develop completely individualized messages.

With varying preferences for nine message features, tailoring messages for individual patients would indeed require an enormous effort. The method proposed in this study describes a manageable process to keep the number of message versions (i.e., tailored versions) small. In this process, personas were used as an aid to condense patients’ preferences for nine different message features and to develop concrete representations of these preferences. The vivid descriptions used to represent a target population through personas make complex data much easier to grasp [38].

Although personas are increasingly being used to customize, incorporate, and share research about product users [47], to our knowledge, personas have never been used in the health care or other domains as a method for presenting a choice to individuals. Our study shows that personas have the potential to be used as a means to elicit patients’ preferences. Compared to frequently used assessment methods like surveys and interviews, this method is more efficient (e.g., patients do not have to fill in long forms, and no interviewer is needed), and the data collected do not have to be converted to provide patients with the message that matches their preferences.

@&#LIMITATIONS@&#

We present here our first experiences with using personas as an aid in developing tailored health education messages and assessing patients’ preferences for multiple message features. Many challenges remain in tailoring educational messages to the needs and preferences of CHD patients.

The method we used in this study has some inherent limitations. Although the method creates a manageable tailoring process, when adapting the messages to the personas, much of the work has to be done manually. This is unavoidable due to the current state of sophistication of natural language generation methods.

Furthermore, the use of personas to elicit patients’ preferences assumes that individuals are able to express and reflect on their explicit preferences. While our results indicated that patients were able to do so with the aid of personas, some caution is advised in presuming that this is correct under all conditions and for all individuals.

Finally, we did not use an objective criterion to choose the number of clusters (k) in the first step of persona development. This number was chosen by exploring different partitional clusterings (with varying k) with the research team. However, various data-driven methods exist to determine the optimal number of clusters in a given dataset [58–60], and one of these methods could be used as an objective criterion instead.

The pilot validation showed that, in general, participants were more positive about a message when that message was congruent with their preferences than when the message did not match their preferences. In general, participants rated the message that matched their most preferred persona more positively than, or in the same way as, the one that matched their least preferred persona. In a similar fashion, but to a lesser degree, this also applied to the message congruent with their most preferred persona versus their second most preferred persona. The pilot validation showed that most participants rated messages corresponding to their most preferred persona as equally preferred. The cluster analysis already showed a weak correlation between certain message features. Therefore some of the differences of the message features within the clusters might not be very distinctive, which might explain why patients did not have a preference for certain messages corresponding to their persona chosen. It also might not generalize well to this new application.

Most of the participants were positive about the idea of receiving tailored health education messages based on their persona choice. The interview indicated that they were able to choose between the personas, and that they could explain their preference quite easily.

However, the distribution over the personas was unbalanced: some personas were rarely chosen, and the distribution of patients over the personas in the pilot validation was dissimilar to the distribution of clusters in the online survey. This difference might be explained by the differences in the two patient populations (e.g., participants in the pilot validation were older, and had a different disease history), or by the fact that participants might have chosen differently at home (where they are less inclined to give socially desirable answers or where they have more time). This could mean that either these two personas fit better with another population or another setting, or that these personas should be combined or omitted. Also, many participants indicated it was not easy to choose, mainly because participants thought that some or all of the personas were rather similar. Another reason for this unbalanced distribution of patients over the personas might be the small sample size used in the pilot validation. Thirty patients might not be sufficient to result in an equal distribution over the five personas. Cardiologists were generally unable to predict their patients’ preferences for message features.

So, overall, the approach we developed showed potential for providing patients with messages tailored to their preferences, and our findings suggest that messages that match preferences for message features will be assessed more positively than those that do not match these preferences.

@&#LIMITATIONS@&#

The validation performed in this study was only a preliminary indication of the potential of the method developed, and was subject to various limitations.

First, our pilot validation was not powered for making statistical comparisons, and yielded little information for two of the personas. To assess broader generalizability, the validation should be repeated in a larger population.

Second, most participants were familiar with the messages they were provided with; providing patients with messages less familiar to them might show different results. The sensitivity analysis suggested that this would provide similar, but less pronounced, results.

Third, we did not gather any measures of choice certainty or decision-making self-efficacy (efficacy in making either decisions or choices) of the participants. The difficulties some participants had choosing between the personas and imagining how the method would be used indicated to us that this could have yielded interesting views on our results. Participants’ uncertainty about their choice might have affected how differently or how similarly they assessed the messages that matched their choices. Participants’ decision-making self-efficacy might have affected their assessment of the usefulness of this approach: higher levels of decision-making self-efficacy have been found to influence individuals’ preferences for more choice [61].

Fourth, only two cardiologists assessed participants’ preferences. Therefore, their assessments provide only a very weak indication of the validity of cardiologists’ assessments in general. However, the mismatches found between clinicians’ assessments and patients’ preferences have likewise been revealed in previous studies concerning patients’ preferences for participation in decision making on cancer treatment [62–64], and the patients’ information needs after a percutaneous coronary intervention [65].

Fifth, various aspects might have influenced participants’ choice of personas. The interview setting itself clearly influenced their choice, as some of them indicated they felt they had too little time and/or might have chosen differently at home. Other participants may have given socially desirable answers because of the presence of the researcher. It is conceivable that patients would have chosen differently when they would have been at home, because of the presence of the researcher. For example, patients might believe that the general opinion of health researchers is that everyone should be well informed about one’s own health. Participants would probably have been less likely to give socially desirable answers and would have felt less rushed at home in front of their computers, and this might have resulted in a different distribution over the personas, and thus in different results. Also, significant others who were present during the pilot validation may have influenced participants’ choices or may even have chosen for them. However, we feel this is not a genuine limitation, because the same thing would probably have occurred in actual practice.

Sixth, we used an iterative coding process for the qualitative data analysis but could not measure an inter-rater reliability because we used several consensus meetings to discuss the new coding scheme. After these meetings all transcripts were reviewed again and adapted to the new coding scheme.

Seventh, we cannot be sure that the nine message features included the most salient features. We aimed at developing a method to tailor health messages on patient preferences, but how the method can be adapted to select the most salient features need to be studied more.

Finally, we did not assess cognitive health of the participants, which is a weakness of our study given average participant age and the fact that some participants had family members present during their clinical visits. A patient’s cognitive health status may be associated with a person’s health literacy, that may have confounded the study results.

Although this study focused on providing CHD patients with educational materials on self-management, we believe that this approach to developing the personas and adaptation rules could be applied to other problems as well. For example, constructing and using personas could also be helpful in other areas of patient education, such as assessing patient preferences for shared decision making during medical visits. Patients who were confronted with a decision-making style consistent with their preferences have previously been found to experience less anxiety during medical consultations compared with those who were confronted with a decision-making style different from what they preferred [66]. The need for better survey measures of patients’ preferences for participation in decision making has previously been postulated [67], and various studies regarding patients’ participation in decision making concerning their treatment have reported that physicians have difficulties assessing patients’ preferences [61–63,67]. Personas might aid in this assessment. Further research is needed to verify this, and should provide both more quantitative and more qualitative data from different patient groups.

The approach proposed in this study could also be used in other novel ways, either in its entirety or in part. For example, the approach could be used to develop social agents or interactive self-management coaches tailored to patients’ preferences for message features. An example of a social agent is described in the study by Rosis et al. [68]. They developed a system that dynamically modelled an agent and a user, and adapted the agent’s health-promotion counselling dialogue accordingly. Developing social agents that also adapt to patients’ preferences for message features might be a step toward more interactive health education.

In this study nine message features were used, based on a previous patient survey [23] and interviews and focus groups among CHD patients. However, whether these message features are the most salient ones to achieve the effects that health messages aim to realize, i.e., promoting healthy behavior and reducing risky health behavior, is unknown. Our study described mainly a methodology for tailoring health messages to patients’ preferences with these message features as an example, but can also be used to tailor messages to other message features. Future studies should first explore those preferences for health messages that achieve the greatest positive effects on health behaviors and could then use the proposed messages to tailor these to patients’ preferences in a more manageable process.

Five personas were developed in our study. The increasing number of personas makes it more difficult for a patient to identify themselves with a particular persona and increases the effort of tailoring the messages to personas. Future studies should investigate the potential benefits against the potential efforts to find the perfect balance in the number of personas to be created. Preferably also the level of distinctiveness between the personas should be taken into account.

A potential advantage of using personas, relative to answering survey or interview questions, is that the personas make it clear that patients have a choice. This choice can have an effect on persuasiveness or on the satisfaction with the educational messages. Various studies have shown that personal choices, as opposed to those made by others or by fate, lead to positive consequences like improved task enjoyment, affect, and outcome evaluation [69–72]. However, future research will need to show whether this also applies for this approach. Also, future research should focus on further demonstrating the usefulness of this method by studying the satisfaction with the elicitation method and resulting messages in larger, or other, patient populations. In future, the method will be integrated into a web-based system for CHD patients to provide them with health education messages tailored to their preferences. This will make it easier to validate the personas in this population, and to study the messages’ effectiveness on intention to comply with the recommendations and on patients’ satisfaction with the elicitation method and messages.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

The persona-based method described in this study provides a methodology for developing a manageable set of patient-centered tailored messages, while simultaneously using the developed personas as a way to assess patients’ preferences. The method proposed in this study shows potential in (a) making a complex process manageable and understandable, (b) forcing researchers and designers to consider patients’ preferences during the entire message-tailoring process, and (c) aiding in the assessment of patients’ preferences for message features. Participants were generally positive about the idea of receiving tailored information by choosing a persona, and were able to choose between them. On average, messages that matched the persona chosen by patients were rated more positively than, or in the same way as, those that did not match the chosen persona. However, issues addressed by participants in the interview indicated that the personas need to differ more, and that five personas in text form might be too much to process and choose from.

It has been suggested that patient-centeredness is crucial to self-management, and the proposed method is a step in the direction of more patient-centered health education. Ultimately, this method might be helpful in composing health messages that better fit patients’ needs and preferences, which might lead to an increase in their engagement in and processing of the message content. In turn, this might contribute to improvements in patient self-management and health outcomes.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

We would like to thank the staff of the Department of Cardiology at the Máxima Medical Centre, especially Robert Verbunt and the secretaries, for their help during the data collection phase of the validation study. We would also like to thank our participants for their time and for taking part in the study. This study was funded by The Netherlands Organisation for Health Research and Development (ZonMw), Disease Management Programme for the Chonically Ill, under project no. 300020008. The funding source was not involved in any part of this article.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2014.09.004.


                     
                        
                           Supplementary data 1
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Supplementary data 2
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

