@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Evaluation of an Enhanced Role-Based Access Control model to manage information access in collaborative processes for a statewide clinical education program

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We designed a cross-sectional study to assess the effectiveness of EnhancedRBAC model.


                        
                        
                           
                           EnhancedRBAC demonstrated a high level of agreement with a control system CEIAdmin.


                        
                        
                           
                           EnhancedRBAC achieved high performance in sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy.


                        
                        
                           
                           EnhancedRBAC can effectively manage information in collaborative workflow.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Access control

Information management

Computer supported cooperative work

Workflow

Medical education

Knowledge representation

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Background
                  Managing information access in collaborative processes is a critical requirement to team-based biomedical research, clinical education, and patient care. We have previously developed a computation model, Enhanced Role-Based Access Control (EnhancedRBAC), and applied it to coordinate information access in the combined context of team collaboration and workflow for the New York State HIV Clinical Education Initiative (CEI) program. We report in this paper an evaluation study to assess the effectiveness of the EnhancedRBAC model for information access management in collaborative processes when applied to CEI.
               
               
                  Methods
                  We designed a cross-sectional study and performed two sets of measurement: (1) degree of agreement between EnhancedRBAC and a control system CEIAdmin based on 9152 study cases, and (2) effectiveness of EnhancedRBAC in terms of sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy based on a gold-standard with 512 sample cases developed by a human expert panel. We applied stratified random sampling, partial factorial design, and blocked randomization to ensure a representative case sample and a high-quality gold-standard.
               
               
                  Results
                  With the kappa statistics of four comparisons in the range of 0.80–0.89, EnhancedRBAC has demonstrated a high level of agreement with CEIAdmin. When evaluated against the gold-standard, EnhancedRBAC has achieved sensitivities in the range of 97–100%, specificities at the level of 100%, and accuracies in the range of 98–100%.
               
               
                  Conclusions
                  The initial results have shown that the EnhancedRBAC model can be effectively used to manage information access in the combined context of team collaboration and workflow for coordination of clinical education programs. Future research is required to perform longitudinal evaluation studies and to assess the effectiveness of EnhancedRBAC in other applications.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Managing information access is a critical requirement to team-based biomedical research, clinical education, and patient care [1–7]. Effective information access depends on specific context of workflow and particular requirements of team collaboration [8–19]. We have developed a computation model through enhancement of Role-Based Access Control (RBAC) to support information access management in collaborative processes [20,21]. This model (hereafter referred to as EnhancedRBAC) can facilitate definition and enforcement of detailed, precise policies for data access, such that specific information can be shared among the members of a collaborative team in particular contexts of workflow and meanwhile its access by other irrelevant parties is restricted. In papers published previously, we described the EnhancedRBAC model and its implementation [20,21]. To examine the effectiveness of this approach to managing information access, here we report the details of an evaluation study to apply EnhancedRBAC to New York State (NYS) HIV Clinical Education Initiative (CEI) [22]. This evaluation study provides a first set of quantitative measures on effectiveness of the EnhancedRBAC model, using the CEI application as a specific example. In addition to these quantitative measures, we discuss qualitative evaluation metrics related to this case study based on guidelines proposed by others [23,24]. Although this particular research was driven by clinical education, our broader goal is to incrementally develop a generalizable system framework for information access management in collaborative processes such that we can apply this system framework to various applications for biomedical research, clinical education, and patient care.

Access to the right information in specific context is an essential requirement to biomedical research [3,5,8,12,14], patient care [1,2,4,7,9–11,17–19], and clinical education [6,22]. Various information systems have been developed and utilized in different scenarios to support information access management. For their optimal use, these systems need to be carefully designed to integrate with the application context [8–19]. Facilitation of information management in such context is a key element to provide appropriate level of information access, to improve team collaboration, and to enhance process management through the underlying information systems.

Previous research has proposed various information access control models [25–29]. These models can provide a general structure to define access policies and to enforce such policies in specific scenarios of information access. Yet few of these models have addressed information access management in the combined context of team collaboration and workflow. With regard to specific applications supporting access control, many have been developed for patient care [1,2,9–11,18,30–40] and biomedical research [8,12,14,15,41,42], but none of the previous works have been utilized to coordinate clinical education programs in collaborative workflow. To address these specific needs, we have proposed the EnhancedRBAC model to support information access management in collaborative processes [20,21]. For this purpose, we have: (1) formulated universal constraints to bind on user-role assignments, role-permission assignments, and access permissions, (2) defined bridging entities and contributing attributes to support access management in collaborative environment, (3) extended access permissions to include workflow context, and (4) synthesized a role-based access delegation model targeting on specific objects to balance between flexibility and need-based access. These constructs can be utilized to define policies for information access in specific domains and applications. Using the policies defined in the EnhancedRBAC model and the tools developed to interpret them, this system framework can be used: (1) to evaluate individual cases and scenarios of information access against the policies, and (2) to decide whether to grant or to deny access to specific information resources in collaborative workflow. We have developed formal representations of EnhancedRBAC in first order predicate logic and eXtensible Access Control Markup Language (XACML) [43]. We have implemented and adopted tools to encode and to interpret access control policies based on EnhancedRBAC [21]. Additional technical details of the EnhancedRBAC model and the associated tools for implementation can be found in previous papers [20,21].

With regard to evaluation of access control systems for biomedical applications, few studies have been reported in the literature. Fernandez-Aleman et al. reviewed the security and privacy mechanisms used in electronic health records, including features such as access control models, general approaches for access management, and emergency access [44]. Nevertheless, few details were available on evaluation of these systems. Hu et al. proposed guidelines for evaluation of access control systems with a set of evaluation metrics, concentrating mainly on qualitative measures [23,24]. In addition to these qualitative measures, the widely accepted metrics for evaluation of biomedical information systems are quantitative measures on system effectiveness, such as accuracy of diagnoses or correctness of clinical decisions generated by systems when compared with the ground truth [45]. For the study reported in this paper, our primary focus is the quantitative measures on effectiveness of EnhancedRBAC when applied to CEI (see details in Section 2). In Section 4.3, we select a set of qualitative metrics proposed by Hu et al. [23,24] and discuss the specific features related to EnhancedRBAC.

Development of EnhancedRBAC was driven by the NYS HIV CEI program [22]. CEI is sponsored by the NYS Department of Health AIDS Institute. It has been engaging in HIV clinical education for two decades to address the education needs of community healthcare providers, aiming to disseminate the latest clinical knowledge and to improve HIV patient care. The CEI program has created multiple training centers, including: (1) Mental Health Center (MHC); (2) Prevention and Substance Use Center (PSUC); (3) Testing, Post-Exposure Prophylaxis, and Diagnosis Center (TPDC); and (4) Clinical Education Center for Upstate Providers (CECUP), which can be further segmented into Albany Medical Center (AMC), University of Rochester Medical Center (URMC), and Erie County Medical Center (ECMC) catchment areas. Each of these centers is in charge of a range of educational activities based on the training topics, training formats, and geographical locations (see Fig. 1
                        ). In every day operation, a specific CEI training session may require expertise and resources from multiple CEI Centers. Thus, coordination and collaboration among the CEI Centers is critical. In terms of information access, the CEI project requires to grant access permissions to staff from specific CEI Centers collaborating on a particular training session, such that they can review the relevant data and to coordinate the training activities. For staff from the other CEI Centers not directly involved in the collaboration, access permissions should be denied to ensure data confidentiality and to reduce information overload. With regard to workflow, a specific training session typically consists of several stages that progress forward in a sequence: training requested by an agency (request-received), CEI staff calling back and training arrangement pending (arrangement-pending), scheduling of training (training-scheduled), and completion of training (training-completed). In certain scenarios, for example, when the target audiences are not clinicians, CEI will not directly provide training (unable-to-arrange) but instead refer those requests to other training programs. From the perspective of information access management, CEI posits a set of complex requirements. For example, if ‘Catholic Health Systems’, a healthcare organization located in Buffalo area, has just requested (workflow status ‘request-received’) an onsite training on topic ‘HIV testing’, both ‘Mary’, a staff from ‘CECUP-ECMC’, and ‘Paul’, a staff from ‘TPDC’, should be granted access to this request such that they can review the request details (‘read’ access) and document communications for training arrangement (‘write’ access); and meanwhile access to this request by ‘David’, a staff from ‘PSUC’, should be denied. This is because: (1) according to the access policies based on training formats, topics, and geographical locations, CECUP-ECMC and TPDC are the two collaborating CEI Centers for this training request while PSUC has no responsibility to participate; and (2) according to another policy (Policy-3b), any collaborating CEI Center can document the communications related to a newly-received training request.

To manage training information and to support collaboration among CEI Centers in specific context of workflow, we have developed the CEIAdmin system. Information access management in CEIAdmin is implemented in an ad hoc approach with hard-coded logic, which cannot be easily changed (need to rewrite the code that will likely interfere with other functions of the system) and consistently managed (the logic may scatter around in different places of the system). In contrast, information access management in EnhancedRBAC is based on standard, centralized access policies that can be flexibly defined, updated, and enforced by specific application requirements. For this evaluation study, we defined access policies for the CEI project with the EnhancedRBAC model (see Fig. 2
                         for a specific example to encode Policy-3b as a universal constraint) [20]. We then implemented these policies through the EnhancedRBAC system framework (see Fig. 2 for application of Policy-3b to a specific case scenario to determine ‘write’ access) [21]. Here EnhancedRBAC and CEIAdmin could provide the same function to determine whether to grant or to deny access permission for a specific situation, but they were implemented in two very different approaches (see Fig. 2). Thus, we could use CEIAdmin as a control to measure the performance of EnhancedRBAC. Additional details of the CEI program and the CEIAdmin system can be found in previous papers [20,21].

@&#METHODS@&#

We selected to use the CEI project as the application domain to evaluate the EnhancedRBAC model for three key reasons: (1) the CEI project had complex requirements for information access management involving both team collaboration and workflow; (2) this project had a rich set of real-world study cases that could be used for the evaluation; and (3) the project already had in place a system (CEIAdmin) to manage information access in an ad hoc approach that could be used as a control.

The study design consisted of two sets of comparisons: (1) the access permissions generated by EnhancedRBAC vs. those generated by CEIAdmin, and (2) the access permissions generated by EnhancedRBAC vs. a gold-standard. By performing the comparison in (1), we measured the degree of agreement between these two systems. For comparison (2), we first built a gold-standard through organizing an expert panel to manually review a selected set of study cases to determine the ideal access permissions (the ground truth) for each of them. Using these sample cases with the gold-standard access permissions, we then measured the effectiveness of EnhancedRBAC (as well as CEIAdmin). The overall design of the evaluation study is shown in Fig. 3
                        .

To select study cases, we queried the CEI database on July 1, 2011 and obtained all onsite training sessions requested between April 1, 2011 and June 30, 2011. As the CEI project had a quarterly schedule for system upgrades, selection of study cases from this time period ensured a large enough sample size and meanwhile reduced potential biases due to the different versions of the CEIAdmin system. The query generated a total of 104 training sessions requested by 38 healthcare organizations on 27 training topics in 5 workflow statuses. At the time when the query was made, CEIAdmin had 17 users, 6 roles, and a total of 44 user-role assignments (see Fig. 1). For each training session, we defined 2 types of operations, i.e., ‘read’ (review training data) and ‘write’ (document training information and/or invite other CEI Centers for collaboration) [20]. By combining these 104 training sessions, 44 user-role assignments, and 2 operations, we created a total of 9152 (104×44×2) study cases. The profile of these study cases is shown in Table 1
                        . It is important to note that this is a cross-sectional study, as the study cases were obtained through a system query at a specific time point.

To compute access permissions with EnhancedRBAC, we first used the Protégé tool [46] to encode the model, with the universal constraints defined in Semantic Web Rule Language (SWRL) [47]. We then imported the 9152 study cases as ontology instances. We leveraged an existing Protégé add-on with an external Jess package [48] to interpret the encoded constraints and to determine whether access permissions should be granted to specific study cases. By the end of this process, we were able to make a decision based on EnhancedRBAC with each study case either to grant or to deny access. The technical details of the implementation can be found in a previous paper [21].

For the CEIAdmin system, if a specific user in a particular role logged in, the hard-coded logic would be triggered and the training sessions to which this user had access should be presented on the screen [20]. Thus, by capturing the data on the screen for each user-role assignment, we were able to obtain all the study cases with which access were granted to this specific user-role pair. Once these positive cases (access granted) were identified, we sifted them out from the entire case pool to identify the remaining (negative) cases with which access permissions were denied by CEIAdmin.

Since the CEIAdmin system has already been in production use, we can assume it is reasonably good to determine access permissions for specific training sessions. Thus, by comparing the results computed from EnhancedRBAC and CEIAdmin, we can indirectly measure the effectiveness of EnhancedRBAC using CEIAdmin as a benchmark. For this purpose, we compared the two systems based on: (1) only the ‘read’ operation, (2) only the ‘write’ operation, and (3) both the ‘read’ and ‘write’ operations. For each comparison, we calculated the kappa value to measure the degree of agreement [45]. An interesting phenomenon for the CEI project is that the ‘write’ permission is embedded within the ‘read’ permission (i.e., a role always has the ‘read’ permission if it already has the ‘write’ permission). Therefore, the access permission for a specific training session can be redefined as three mutually exclusive outcomes: ‘no’ access, ‘read-only’ access, and ‘read+write’ access. To measure the degree of agreement based on this formulation of outcomes, we transformed the results from the previous computation and recalculated the kappa value. This analysis with the triple outcomes provided a more accurate comparison between EnhancedRBAC and CEIAdmin.

Simply comparing EnhancedRBAC with CEIAdmin cannot provide a complete measurement on its effectiveness. For example, even if the two systems agree with each other on a specific case, it is still possible that both systems are wrong (although this chance is low if we assume that the effectiveness of CEIAdmin is reasonably good). In order to have an objective measurement on system effectiveness, we need to have a gold-standard with correct answers on access permissions for a specific study case. Following the common practice in developing gold-standards for evaluation of information systems [45], we organized a panel with four domain experts (co-authors XHL, TD, MB, and DW, who participated in design of the CEIAdmin system and directly involved in daily management of the CEI project) to review study cases and to develop standard (correct) answers. We then used the standard answer for each case as the reference to measure the effectiveness of EnhancedRBAC and CEIAdmin.

Since it was impractical to manually review all the 9152 study cases, we decided to first obtain a representative sample from the case pool and then to build the gold-standard based on this sample. The results from the previous comparisons between EnhancedRBAC and CEIAdmin provided important information to guide the sampling process. Specifically, for those ‘matched’ study cases (i.e., EnhancedRBAC and CEIAdmin had a consistent decision on granting or denying access), the chances that both systems were wrong should be relatively low; for those ‘unmatched’ study cases (i.e., EnhancedRBAC and CEIAdmin had different decisions on granting or denying access), at least one of the systems should be wrong. Therefore, we would need to pay more attentions to those ‘unmatched’ cases when performing manual review to build the gold-standard. For this reason, we decided to divide the study cases into the ‘matched’ stratum and the ‘unmatched’ stratum. We then used a stratified random sampling technique to sample the two strata separately, with a higher sampling rate for the ‘unmatched’ stratum such that a larger proportion of the ‘unmatched’ cases could be manually reviewed. We determined a sampling rate of 5% for the ‘matched’ stratum and a sampling rate of 20% for the ‘unmatched’ stratum, with a total of 278 study cases obtained. In this way we mitigated the imbalance between the two strata, and meanwhile controlled the total number of sample cases so to ensure the feasibility to manually review all of them.

As we planned to use an expert panel to review the sample cases and to develop the gold-standard, it would be more intuitive and efficient for the expert judges to review the ‘read’ and ‘write’ permissions together for a specific training request, rather than asking them to check only the ‘read’ or only the ‘write’ access (we called the two study cases ‘complementary’ to each other if they had the same user, role, training session, and workflow status but different access operations). Thus, we decided to include into the sample additional study cases if their complementary cases had already been selected. By the end of the sampling process, we had a total of 512 study cases. The profile of this sample is shown in Table 1.

To control potential biases, we used a partial factorial design and a blocked randomization technique to assign study cases to each judge such that: (1) a study case was randomly assigned to a judge, (2) each case was reviewed by two judges, and (3) each judge reviewed half of the sample cases. For each study case in the sample, a judge first determined whether access should be granted; if so, he/she needed to decide whether it should be a ‘read-only’ access or a ‘read+write’ access. Each judge independently made these decisions for all study cases assigned to him/her. During this process, all judges except the one who managed the study data (XHL) were blinded to the execution results generated by EnhancedRBAC and CEIAdmin. Out of the 1024 (512×2) cases, the judges had achieved initial consensus on 974 (95%). For the remaining 50 cases with discrepancy in judge opinions, the related judges sit down together, reviewed the cases, and made new decisions until consensus were reached. The assignment of sample cases to judges and the results from the first round review are shown in Table 2
                        . Fig. 4
                         is a screenshot of the online tool used by the judges to make decisions on specific study cases to build the gold-standard.

To measure the effectiveness of EnhancedRBAC when applied to the sample cases, we first formulated a 3×3 table to compare EnhancedRBAC with the gold-standard based on the previously described three outcomes (‘no’ access, ‘read-only’ access, and ‘read+write’ access). By cutting the results between the ‘no’ access and the other two outcomes, we were able to evaluate the effectiveness of EnhancedRBAC based on the ‘read’ operation; by cutting the results between the ‘read+write’ access and the other two outcomes, we were able to evaluate the effectiveness of EnhancedRBAC based on the ‘write’ operation. By adding up the outcomes for both the ‘read’ and ‘write’ operations, we were able to evaluate the overall effectiveness of EnhancedRBAC. For each comparison, we calculated sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy as the specific measures. As a comparison, we performed the same set of measurements on CEIAdmin. For all analyses in this study, we used the SPSS statistical package [49]. We report the detailed results in the next section.

@&#RESULTS@&#

When formulated with three outcomes (‘no’ access, ‘read-only’ access, and ‘read+write’ access), EnhancedRBAC and CEIAdmin agreed on 4230 out of the 4576 study cases. With a kappa value of 0.80 (95% CI: 0.78–0.82), these two systems demonstrated a high level of agreement. When formulated with two outcomes (granting or denying access), the two systems agreed on 4399 cases for the ‘read’ operation (kappa=0.89, 95% CI: 0.88–0.91) and 4400 cases for the ‘write’ operation (kappa=0.88, 95% CI: 0.86–0.90). Combining both, the two systems agreed on 8799 out of the total 9152 cases (kappa=0.89, 95% CI: 0.88–0.90). These comparisons have shown that EnhancedRBAC has achieved a high level of agreement with CEIAdmin. The detailed results are reported in Table 3
                     .

When evaluated against the gold-standard, EnhancedRBAC had a correct answer for 251 out of the 256 cases when the results were formulated with three outcomes (accuracy=98%, 95% CI: 97–100%). When transformed into two outcomes and measured by the ‘read’ operation, EnhancedRBAC achieved a sensitivity of 97% (95% CI: 94–99%), a specificity of 100% (95% CI: 100–100%), and an accuracy of 98% (95% CI: 96–100%). Based on two outcomes and measured by the ‘write’ operation, EnhancedRBAC achieved a sensitivity of 100% (95% CI: 100–100%), a specificity of 100% (95% CI: 100–100%), and an accuracy of 100% (95% CI: 100–100%). Combining both, EnhancedRBAC achieved a sensitivity of 98% (95% CI: 96–100%), a specificity of 100% (95% CI: 100–100%), and an accuracy of 99% (95% CI: 98–100%). As a comparison, we performed the same set of measurements on CEIAdmin. The results have shown that CEIAdmin had an overall accuracy of 76% (95% CI: 70–81%) when the results were formulated with three outcomes. It achieved sensitivities at the level of 100%, specificities in the range of 61–97%, and accuracies in the range of 76–99% when the results were formulated with two outcomes. A complete report of the results is shown in Table 4
                     .

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The overall strategy of this evaluation study was situated on two sets of measurement: (1) agreement between EnhancedRBAC and CEIAdmin, and (2) effectiveness of EnhancedRBAC when evaluated against a gold-standard. For the first set of measurement, since they could be performed on results automatically generated by systems, we could afford to use a very large sample. In this study, we used all 9152 study cases obtained from a period of three months. For the second set of measurement, we were limited by the capacity to build a gold-standard (usually through expert panel review [45]) and therefore the sample size had to be smaller. In this study, we selected a sample of 512 cases, which was sufficient but the statistical power was not at the same level as the first set comparisons. In terms of the potential issues identified from these measurements, the first set of comparisons could find out the differences between the two systems, while the second set of measurements could pinpoint the specific causes of these differences and recognize the problems that were common to both systems. By combining these two sets of measures, we were able to perform an effective and powerful evaluation. To our knowledge, this is the first evaluation study that has provided empirical evidence on effectiveness of an access control system through benchmark measures of sensitivity and specificity and degree of agreements with a control system. We have used a similar strategy in study design for other projects and successfully performed evaluations on different information models [50,51]. We believe this method can be generalized to additional domains and applications.

As shown in Table 4, neither EnhancedRBAC nor CEIAdmin was perfect when evaluated against the gold-standard. To assess the problems identified from the evaluation, we performed error analyses on the cases in Category A, B, and C (see Table 4). Here Category A was the false negative of EnhancedRBAC (access wrongly denied when ‘read’ should be granted); Category B was the false positive of CEIAdmin (‘read+write’ wrongly granted when access should be denied); and Category C was another type of error of CEIAdmin (‘read+write’ access wrongly granted when ‘read only’ should be granted). The results have shown: (1) the error for the 5 cases in Category A was caused by a mistake in preparing invitation data for the study cases to feed EnhancedRBAC; (2) the error for the 3 cases in Category B was caused by adding/deleting data directly by a system administrator to/from the CEIAdmin database, which interfered with CEIAdmin’s hard-coded logic for access management; and (3) the error for the 59 cases in Category C was caused by an administrative decision in developing CEIAdmin to allow a CEI Center staff to retrospectively document call-back information in an earlier workflow status of a training session, which led to two different workflow statuses for the same training session under specific scenarios. In addition to error analyses, we reviewed the discrepancies between EnhancedRBAC and CEIAdmin (see Table 3) and identified another system error from the 170 cases in Category D different from any of the previous situations. This error was caused by a minor inconsistency in definition of objects (training requests) between EnhancedRBAC and CEIAdmin. Specifically, when a healthcare organization requested multiple training sessions at the same time, CEIAdmin allowed staff from a specific CEI Center to have access to all related training sessions as long as this CEI Center was involved in collaborative training for one of them (Policy #5 in Fig. 4). When specifying the access policies for EnhancedRBAC, however, we only defined a single training session as the basic unit of an access object, and thus the encoded policies did not cover the situation when multiple training sessions were bundled together.

As shown in the results, there were 62 error cases for CEIAdmin (3 in Category B and 59 in Category C) but only 5 for EnhancedRBAC (in Category A). Therefore, the overall accuracy of EnhancedRBAC was much higher than CEIAdmin (98% vs. 76%). It was interesting to note that a simple administrative decision (leading to Category C error of CEIAdmin) and a walk-around solution to address data issues (leading to Category B error of CEIAdmin) could significantly impact the effectiveness in access management. Here the error in Category A could be corrected through data reformulation. The error in Category B was a rare (but possible) situation of a real world application (such as CEIAdmin), which we would not be able to prevent completely. The error in Category C could be addressed by disallowing retrospective documentation or through a refinement of access object. The error in Category D could be resolved by including additional access policies into EnhancedRBAC.

Beyond the quantitative measures on effectiveness, there are many other aspects in evaluation of an access control system. Here we discuss EnhancedRBAC with regard to a selected set of related qualitative measures based on the guidelines proposed by Hu et al. [23,24].

Specifically, EnhancedRBAC supports the following features: (1) auditing of access through logs of all granted and denied requests [20,21]; (2) easy discovery of access privileges and capabilities with any combination of users, roles, objects, and workflow statuses through a demonstration tool [21]; (3) easy privilege assignments with the Protégé tool through policy encoding and role definition [20,21,46]; (4) syntactic and semantic specification of access control rules through SWRL [21,47]; (5) enforcement of least privilege principle through precisely defined access rights in collaborative workflow [20]; (6) separation of duty through roles, workflow contexts, and universal constraints [20]; (7) resolving conflict of access policies through the external Jess package [21,48]; (8) awareness of situation through workflow status and enforcement of access policies in these situations [20]; (9) standard expression of access policies through XACML [20]; (10) good system performance on response time, policy deposit/retrieval, and integration with user authentication [21]; (11) capacity of policy import and export through Protégé [20,21,46]; (12) availability of graphical user interface and system APIs for both the Protégé and the demonstration tool [21,46]; and (13) verification of compliance with access policies in specific scenarios through the EnhancedRBAC system framework and the associated tools [20,21]. Currently, EnhancedRBAC does not support multiple granularities in definition of objects. This is an area we would like to explore for the next step.

@&#LIMITATIONS@&#

There were a few limitations in this study. First, the evaluation was based on a cross-sectional design and we did not follow up individual training sessions through the training process. Performing such a longitudinal study would require integration of EnhancedRBAC with a workflow engine, which could be a future direction for our research. Nevertheless, our cross-sectional study included cases in all five workflow statuses (see Table 1). We therefore believe that EnhancedRBAC should still be valid for the entire training process if we perform a longitudinal study, although specific measurements are required to confirm this projection. Second, when developing the gold-standard the investigators served as the judges, which might introduce potential assessment bias [45]. Since the judges should be the domain experts who understand the information resources under evaluation [45], we could not completely prevent this possibility. To reduce potential assessment bias, we blinded the system execution results from three of the four judges, and required each study case to be independently reviewed by two judges until a consensus was reached. In addition, we used CEIAdmin, which was also developed by the same group of investigators, as a control in the evaluation. We therefore believe that the potential assessment bias was, if not completely prevented, well under control. Third, we performed the evaluation in a single domain application of CEI. The generalizability of the EnhancedRBAC model needs to be further examined. Our future work includes applying EnhancedRBAC to coordinate other clinical education programs and managing information access in collaborative processes for biomedical research and patient care. Successful information management in such contexts will have the potentials to improve patient care quality and to streamline biomedical research.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

We have successfully performed a cross-sectional evaluation study to assess the effectiveness of the EnhancedRBAC model for coordination of a statewide clinical education program. The results have shown that EnhancedRBAC has a high level of agreement with a control system. When evaluated against a gold-standard, EnhancedRBAC has achieved a very good measure on sensitivity and a perfect score on specificity. These initial results indicate that the EnhancedRBAC model can be effectively used to manage information access in the combined context of team collaboration and workflow for coordination of clinical education programs. Future research is required to perform longitudinal evaluation studies on EnhancedRBAC and to assess its effectiveness in other applications and domains.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

The HIV CEI project is sponsored by New York State Department of Health AIDS Institute through Contracts #C024882 and #C023557. We would like to thank Thomas Della Porta, Matthew Bernhardt, and Michael Hazard for their contributions to the CEI project. We would also like to thank CEI program staff Howard Lavigne, Dr. Cheryl Smith, Lyn Stevens, Dr. Bruce Agins and the colleagues from the other CEI Centers for their support and help.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

