@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#The use of fault reporting of medical equipment to identify latent design flaws

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Human factors methods were used to investigate No Fault Found (NFF) incidents.


                        
                        
                           
                           Medical equipment maintenance data was used to identify devices with high NFF rates.


                        
                        
                           
                           Interviews and heuristic analyses revealed usability issues cause NFF incidents.


                        
                        
                           
                           Usability testing validated the results.


                        
                        
                           
                           Our methodology can be used to identify devices with usability related design flaws.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

No Fault Found

No problem found

No trouble found

Clinical engineering

Human factors

Medical device design

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Background and purpose
                  Poor device design that fails to adequately account for user needs, cognition, and behavior is often responsible for use errors resulting in adverse events. This poor device design is also often latent, and could be responsible for “No Fault Found” (NFF) reporting, in which medical devices sent for repair by clinical users are found to be operating as intended. Unresolved NFF reports may contribute to incident under reporting, clinical user frustration, and biomedical engineering technologist inefficacy. This study uses human factors engineering methods to investigate the relationship between NFF reporting frequency and device usability.
               
               
                  Material and methods
                  An analysis of medical equipment maintenance data was conducted to identify devices with a high NFF reporting frequency. Subsequently, semi-structured interviews and heuristic evaluations were performed in order to identify potential usability issues. Finally, usability testing was conducted in order to validate that latent usability related design faults result in a higher frequency of NFF reporting.
               
               
                  Results
                  The analysis of medical equipment maintenance data identified six devices with a high NFF reporting frequency. Semi-structured interviews, heuristic evaluations and usability testing revealed that usability issues caused a significant portion of the NFF reports. Other factors suspected to contribute to increased NFF reporting include accessory issues, intermittent faults and environmental issues. Usability testing conducted on three of the devices revealed 23 latent usability related design faults.
               
               
                  Conclusions
                  These findings demonstrate that latent usability related design faults manifest themselves as an increase in NFF reporting and that devices containing usability related design faults can be identified through an analysis of medical equipment maintenance data.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Evidence suggests that adverse events associated with medical devices are more often the result of use error than device malfunction [1]. One study found that 82% of all preventable errors involving anaesthesia devices were due to use error [2], while a study of infusion pump errors found that use errors were the most frequent cause of patient harm [3]. In some cases medical devices have poorly designed and difficult to use human system interfaces [4]. As a result, there is an increasing interest in incorporating human factors engineering (HFE) principles in the design and evaluation of medical devices. However, the use of HFE principles within healthcare is still not widespread [5]. There remain instances in which usability related design flaws are identified by users as a device malfunction. When investigated, conclusions of “No Fault Found” or “cannot replicate problem” are often reached. These outcomes cannot be used to mitigate the situation and may contribute to user frustration and incident under-reporting. In this study, we sought to identify devices that contain latent usability related design flaws using medical equipment maintenance data and human factors techniques.

@&#BACKGROUND@&#

Medical devices that are suspected by clinical users to be defective are typically sent to a hospital’s biomedical engineering service department for troubleshooting and repair by biomedical engineering technologists and technicians (BMETs). Maintenance reports are routinely completed before returning the device back into service. The maintenance reporting data allow BMETs to categorize the device failure mode(s) and specify what repair actions were taken. One of the failure mode categories BMETs have the option of selecting is “No Fault Found” (NFF). The NFF category is used when a device sent for repair is found to be operating as intended. Usually in these instances the device is placed back into service without detailed investigation into the root cause [6]. Explanations for users believing devices to be defective include the failure of device designs to adequately account for user needs, cognition, and behavior, environmental factors, and intermittent faults.

Draper [7] provides a case study in which a usability related design flaw in a medical device was uncovered by an investigation initiated as a result of recurrent NFF reporting. An incident occurred at a hospital in which a syringe pump delivered a drug dose in half the anticipated time. When the nursing staff could not reproduce the error, the pump was sent to Biomedical Engineering where no problem was found. After recalling several similar NFF reports, BMETs subsequently performed a more detailed analysis. The analysis revealed that the user may have overridden the standard syringe size, instead programming the pump to expect a syringe size numerically equivalent to the dosage rate. It was demonstrated that this change results in an over infusion. The technologist concluded that this error could occur either through incorrect understanding of the difference between the dosage and syringe size or by accidentally pressing the up/down arrows on the pump thereby inadvertently changing the syringe size. While the design flaw was uncovered as a result of recurrent NFF reporting, the investigation was only initiated as a result of a technologist remembering previous incidents.

In this study we aimed to build on the premise of the case study by utilizing medical equipment maintenance data in order to proactively identify devices which may contain latent usability related design flaws that could lead to adverse events.

In order to identify the devices most frequently associated with NFF reporting, a quantitative analysis of medical equipment maintenance data from University Health Network (UHN, Toronto, Canada), Nova Scotia Association of Health Organizations (NSAHO), Winnipeg Regional Health Authority (WRHA), and Vancouver Island Health Authority (VIHA) was conducted. UHN, NSAHO, WRHA and VIHA own approximately 2500, 3500, 7000 and 4000 equipment models respectively. Medical equipment maintenance data from 2003 to 2011 was analyzed in order to identify all reports of unscheduled equipment repair in which the BMET responsible for repair could find no fault. NFF reports were identified based on data contained within the failure mode field and free text comment field. Reports that contained “problem not found”, “No Fault Found” (or variations thereof) as a fail mode were selected. Reports that contained free text comments indicating that no fault was found were also selected. Each NFF report was then associated with a particular equipment model so that the number of NFF reports per model could be determined.

The more frequently a device is used the greater the probability that it will be sent for repair. Therefore, in order to identify the devices with the greatest probability of containing latent usability related design flaws the NFF reporting rate was normalized in an attempt to account for frequency of device use. There are no hospital databases that outline the frequency of device use. As such, equipment inventory count was used in normalizing the reporting rate as there is presumed to be a correlation between frequency of device use and equipment inventory levels.

In order to contextualize and qualitatively confirm the results of the database analysis a series of semi-structured interviews with BMETs were conducted. Eight BMETs from UHN were recruited to participate in semi-structured interviews, which lasted between 30 and 60min each. Participants work experience ranged from 5 to 25years. BMETs were not made aware of the results of the database analysis. The interviews were recorded and transcribed by the investigator. The transcripts from each session were then thoroughly reviewed and initial specific low level codes were assigned to each word, phrase, or paragraph of text associated with an individual idea. The coded transcripts were then iteratively reread and reassessed allowing for codes to be combined, divided, added or removed. Inferences were then drawn about what the various codes might represent. Using these inferences, similar codes were grouped in order to form broad overarching thematic statements. Finally, each theme was compared to the original dataset in order to assess whether or not it appropriately described the data.

Next, heuristic evaluations were conducted in order to determine the likelihood that the devices identified as a result of the database analysis contain latent usability related design faults. The heuristic evaluations involved applying a set of usability principles to systematically evaluate each device. Two investigators, acting independently, evaluated each device, recording any heuristics violations. The usability heuristics used were: consistency and standards, visibility of system state, match between system and world, minimalism, minimizing memory load, informative feedback, flexibility and efficiency, good error messages, prevention of errors, clear closure, reversible actions, use of users’ language, users are in control, and help and documentation [8]. After each device was evaluated, the lists of heuristics violations were combined and each investigator independently assessed the severity of the identified violations.

Three devices (a defibrillator, a feeding pump, and a thermometer) were selected for usability testing based on the findings from the database analysis, BMET interviews, and heuristic evaluations. The testing involved clinical users performing representative tasks with the devices in a simulated environment in order to reveal usability design flaws. The usability testing approach is strongly rooted in theories and methods from the field of cognitive science [9] and is recognized by the FDA as a method that should be used in identifying potential use related hazards [10]. For the purpose of this investigation, usability tests were conducted in order to assess whether the proposed methodology was successful in identifying devices with latent usability related design flaws. Eleven registered nurses and ten medical doctors from UHN participated in the evaluation of the defibrillator. Ten registered nurses from UHN participated in the evaluation of feeding pump and thermometer. Testing was conducted in a high fidelity simulation lab set up to resemble an intensive care unit. The environment contained three mannequins to simulate patients. Hospital sound effects were played through overhead speakers during the testing sessions in order to simulate ambient hospital noise. A facilitator remained in the lab for the duration of the evaluation acting as the participant’s colleague and providing the participant with details regarding the testing scenarios. Video cameras were used to capture participants interacting with the devices. Additionally, a human factors specialist observed each session from behind a one-way mirror and documented details of the participants’ interaction with the devices. Scenarios included tasks frequently associated with use of each particular device as well as tasks that were suspected to be associated with NFF reporting. As the devices investigated are used by the testing participants on a regular basis no opportunity for additional training was provided.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Analysis of medical equipment maintenance data resulted in the identification of the ForceFx Electrosurgical Machine (Valleylab, Boulder, Colorado), Suretemp 678 Thermometer (Welch Allyn, Skaneatele Falls, New York), 52000 Vital Signs Monitor (Welch Allyn, Skaneatele Falls, New York), Heartstart XL Defibrillator (Philips, Andover, Massachusetts), Kangaroo Enteral Feeding Pump (Covidien, Dublin, Ireland) and 245 Blood Warmer (Arizant, St. Paul, Minnesota) as devices associated with a high NFF reporting rate. As illustrated in Table 1
                        , NFF reporting rates associated with the identified devices exceed organizational averages. This indicates that there is an increased potential that the devices contain latent design flaws.

Discussions with BMETS qualitatively confirmed the results of the database analysis. BMETs associated eleven devices with frequent NFF reporting. Of the eleven devices, eight were among the twenty devices most frequently associated with NFF reporting at UHN. Furthermore, of the six devices selected during the database analysis for further investigation, only the ForceFx Electrosurgical Machine was not identified by BMETs. BMETs were also able to provide context as to why NFF reporting may have occurred. Thematic analysis of the BMET interview data indicated nine perceived causes:
                           
                              1.
                              Use errors (unspecified).

Use errors (battery needs charging or incorrectly inserted).

Use errors (new staff unfamiliar with device).

Use errors (environmental).

Use errors (differences between models of similar devices).

Faults with a device accessory (e.g., faulty blood pressure cuff).

Device availability (it is suspected users spend more time troubleshooting devices for which a replacement is not readily available).

Intermittent faults.

Complacency (users assuming device is broken because it has a bad reputation of breaking down).

BMETs were also able to provide context on a device specific basis. For example, it was suggested that inadequately designed pacing and cardioversion synchronization features were responsible for NFF reporting associated with the Heartstart XL Defibrillator.

Heuristic evaluations of the selected devices by the two investigators revealed a total of 112 usability issues. The two investigators had an overall inter-rater reliability (weighted Cohen’s Kappa) of 0.77 indicating substantial agreement. Fig. 1
                         provides an overview of the violations by device and severity.

Violations identified during the heuristic evaluations of the ForceFx Electrosurgical Machine, 678 Suretemp Thermometer, 52000 Vital Signs Monitor, Heartstart XL Defibrillator, and Kangaroo Feeding Pump correlated well with the results of the database analysis and semi-structured interviews. For instance, database analysis and interviews with BMETs revealed that the pacing, synchronized cardioversion, and ECG display functions are features of the Heartstart XL Defibrillator often associated with NFF reporting. The heuristic evaluation revealed a number of potential usability issues associated with these features including low default ECG wave amplitude, lack of autogain, failure to notify the user that they must depress the shock button for an entire cycle to cardiovert, and failure to notify the user of potentially inverted leads.

Conversely, violations identified during the heuristic evaluation of the 245 Blood Warmer do not correspond well with the results of the database analysis and semi-structured interviews. Violations are primarily related to the lack of alert when a bag is incorrectly inserted or empty. Use errors associated with these violations would likely become apparent to a user prior to the device being sent for repair. As such, it is more likely that intermittent faults or environmental factors are the cause of the NFF reporting associated with the 245 Blood Warmer.

Usability testing of the Heartstart XL Defibrillator, Kangaroo Feeding Pump, and Suretemp 678 Thermometer revealed a total of 23 usability related design flaws. Tables 2–4
                        
                        
                         outline the design flaws identified for each device respectively.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Usability testing of the Heartstart XL Defibrillator, Kangaroo Feeding Pump, and Suretemp 678 Thermometer revealed a total of 23 design flaws. The usability testing results therefore confirm that medical equipment maintenance data can be used to identify devices that contain latent usability related design flaws. Furthermore, the semi-structured interviews and heuristic analyses results correlated closely with the usability testing results indicating that they provide an effective means of characterizing the possible nature of the design flaws. Based on the results of the investigation, the following methodology is recommended both for use in reducing the frequency of NFF reporting and for use in identifying devices that contain latent usability related design flaws.
                        
                           1.
                           
                              Ensure human factors principles are considered within the equipment procurement process.
                           

Healthcare organizations should consider augmenting their procurement processes with a comparative usability study in order to evaluate the safety and ease of use of devices they are considering purchasing [11]. By assessing how a new device or system might impact users and the use environment, organizations may be able to proactively implement mitigation strategies and develop training that effectively addresses known usability issues. Procuring devices that are intuitive to use and that are easily integrated into the current workflow of users should reduce device use errors and, by extension, NFF reporting frequency.
                        
                           2.
                           
                              Analyze medical equipment maintenance data for devices associated with a high NFF reporting rate.
                           

Ideally, every NFF report would be fully investigated until the cause, whether usability related or otherwise, was determined. Such an approach would however require significant resources. The results of this investigation indicate that database analysis provides an effective means of identifying NFF trends that may be of interest. Therefore, in order to focus resources, it is recommended that organizations analyze medical equipment maintenance data in order to identify devices for detailed investigation. While this step is essential to the proposed methodology, organizations are able to account for available resources by adjusting how often data is analyzed and how many of the identified devices are fully investigated.
                        
                           3.
                           
                              Validate the results of the database analysis with BMETs.
                           

The results indicate that BMETs are capable of providing valuable context to the database analysis. BMET discussions were demonstrated to be a fundamental part of the process of identifying why NFF reporting occurred. Therefore it is strongly recommended that BMETs participate in the process of selecting devices for further investigation.
                        
                           4.
                           
                              Conduct heuristic evaluations of devices associated with a high NFF rate in order to determine the most likely cause of the reporting.
                           

The database analysis and semi-structured interviews were shown to identify devices, such as the Heartstart Defibrillator and Kangaroo Pump, which contained usability related design faults. However, the database analysis and interviews also identified devices, such as the 245 blood warmer, which did not contain usability related design faults. As such, heuristic evaluations should be performed on all devices associated with a high NFF rate in order to determine if usability related design flaws are in fact the most likely cause of the frequent NFF reporting. Heuristic analysis is a technique that is relatively easy to learn and use proficiently. Therefore organizations without dedicated human factors staff should still be able to effectively assess whether specific NFF reports may be associated with latent usability related design flaws.
                        
                           5.
                           
                              If resources are available, usability testing should be conducted in order to validate results.
                           

Usability testing was a fundamental part of conclusively identifying the presence of latent usability related design faults in a number of the devices investigated. However, it is time consuming, and requires a testing environment that may not be available. Furthermore, usability testing results correlated well with the semi-structured interview and heuristic analyses results. Therefore, while it is desirable to conduct usability testing, it is nevertheless believed that a sufficient understanding of the cause of the NFF reporting can still be obtained even if it is not feasible to conduct usability testing.


                     If the most likely cause is usability related design flaws:
                     
                        
                           6.
                           
                              Ensure that device training covers the features associated with the NFF reporting (even if they are not the most commonly used features).
                           

Usability testing revealed that users often experienced increased difficulty when using less frequently used device features. For example, users had difficulty using the VTBD mode on the pump and axillary mode on the thermometer as they were more familiar with the rate and oral modes respectively. As such, it should be ensured that in service training covers all features users experience difficulty with.
                        
                           7.
                           
                              Consider redirecting training resources in order to retrain users on the identified devices.
                           

Higher NFF rates might reflect that a device is less intuitive to use. It may therefore be desirable to redirect limited training resources away from devices users are able to operate easily and effectively and instead focus training on devices that are more problematic. Healthcare organizations should however consider the risks associated with use of a given device prior to redirecting any resource in order to ensure that regular and adequate training is provided for higher risk devices.
                        
                           8.
                           
                              Provide feedback to the manufacturer in order to inform the design of future versions of the devices.
                           

User performance and behavior modifications that can be driven by increased training or modified policy may provide a basic mitigation to any identified usability related design flaws. Such modifications are however not guaranteed to be effective as staff may not attend or be fully engaged during training. Furthermore, the impact of even the most effective training will decay over time. Therefore, it is preferable to address the root cause of any design flaws through system based design modifications. Manufacturers are often open to feedback from healthcare organizations. As such, it is highly recommended that healthcare organizations inform manufacturers of any usability related design flaws they uncover.

Healthcare organizations should consider utilizing the proposed methodology on a regularly scheduled basis. The scheduling frequency and number of devices investigated in each instance should be based on each individual organization’s resource availability.

While it is preferable to employ all of the outlined steps, resources may not always be available. Incorporating Step 1 (human factors informed procurement) is highly recommended as it serves to proactively address many of the concerns that are otherwise only addressed in a reactive manner. A decision not to include Step 1 will not however impede incorporating the remaining steps of the methodology. Steps 2–4 (database analysis, BMET discussions, heuristic analyses) form the basis of the methodology, and as such it is expected that removing any of these steps would significantly impact the efficacy. Step 5 (usability testing) is a confirmatory step. Though it is desirable to conduct usability testing if resources permit, it is nevertheless believed that a sufficient understanding of the cause of NFF reports can still be obtained even if Step 5 is omitted. While it is not necessary to incorporate all of Steps 6 through 8 (targeted training, redirected training, informing manufacturer), in order to benefit from the methodology mitigating actions must be taken. Organizations should consider the preferred form of mitigation on a case-by-case basis. Steps 2 and 3 can be undertaken simultaneously as can Steps 6 though 8. All the other steps should be undertaken sequentially.

In order to assess whether the methodology improves BMET efficiency and reduces clinical user confusion, organizations may want to track whether its implementation has resulted in a reduction in NFF reporting rates. Organizations could also assess whether implementation has improved patient safety by tracking the number of usability related design flaws identified that could have contributed to use errors leading to harm.

@&#LIMITATIONS@&#

One significant limitation of the outlined methodology was the process used for normalization. The equipment inventory count was used in normalizing the reporting rate as there is presumed to be a correlation between frequency of device use and equipment inventory levels. However, a high inventory level might also be the result of other factors, such as a need for the device to be more readily available across multiple locations. Other factors for which data is not available could have also had an effect, such as whether devices are used repeatedly by the same user, and with what frequency. Therefore, the accuracy of the results could be improved if the data were normalized using a metric more closely resembling frequency of device use. Alternatively, it may be worth investigating not normalizing for frequency of use at all. While this would reduce the likelihood that a usability error was the cause of the NFF report, it would allow investigators to focus on those devices with the absolute highest number of NFF reports.

Another limitation was the presence of missing and contradictory data within the medical equipment maintenance data. In order to generate the list of all NFF reports the failure mode classification and free text comment fields were queried. In a number of cases one or both fields were left blank at the time of equipment repair. The number of reports with blank fields ranged from approximately 0% (NSAHO) to 2% (UHN) across the various hospitals from which data was collected. In the cases where both fields were left blank the report had to be ignored as it was unknown whether or not a fault had been identified. Furthermore, comments were occasionally included in the free text field that contradicted the fault selected in the failure mode field. Because there was no way to determine which field contains the accurate information, all reports containing contradictions had to be removed.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

Medical device designs are becoming more complex, incorporating diverse functions and connecting with increasingly more products and environments. As discussed at the beginning of this article, latent usability related design faults are often implicated in adverse events. Medical equipment maintenance data can be useful in helping to identify educational opportunities, problems with specific devices or other trends that may be of interest. Although the proposed methodology is limited by the quality of an organization’s medical equipment maintenance data, it does provide a relatively efficient, easy to implement and useful process for identifying devices with a high potential of containing latent usability related design faults. Once identified, mitigation strategies can be employed, such as additional targeted user training or abstaining from procuring additional units of the identified devices. It is therefore recommended that the proposed methodology be applied by healthcare organizations both to reduce the occurrence of use errors, and to reduce the frequency of NFF reporting.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

