@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Integrating electronic health record information to support integrated care: Practical application of ontologies to improve the accuracy of diabetes disease registers

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Multiple clinical perspectives must underpin a multi-attribute phenotyping ontology.


                        
                        
                           
                           Ontological integration of EHR data elements can compensate for deficiencies in data quality.


                        
                        
                           
                           Ontological approaches can improve accuracy of phenotyping algorithms.


                        
                        
                           
                           Ontologically integrated EHR data and best practice guidelines can support integrated care.


                        
                        
                           
                           An integrated ontological approach to “big clinical data” can render them more usable and useful.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Case finding

Integration

Patient register

EHR

Ontology

Knowledge engineering

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Background
                  Information in Electronic Health Records (EHRs) are being promoted for use in clinical decision support, patient registers, measurement and improvement of integration and quality of care, and translational research. To do this EHR-derived data product creators need to logically integrate patient data with information and knowledge from diverse sources and contexts.
               
               
                  Objective
                  To examine the accuracy of an ontological multi-attribute approach to create a Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus (T2DM) register to support integrated care.
               
               
                  Methods
                  Guided by Australian best practice guidelines, the T2DM diagnosis and management ontology was conceptualized, contextualized and validated by clinicians; it was then specified, formalized and implemented. The algorithm was standardized against the domain ontology in SNOMED CT-AU. Accuracy of the implementation was measured in 4 datasets of varying sizes (927–12,057 patients) and an integrated dataset (23,793 patients). Results were cross-checked with sensitivity and specificity calculated with 95% confidence intervals.
               
               
                  Results
                  Incrementally integrating Reason for Visit (RFV), medication (Rx), and pathology in the algorithm identified nearly100% of T2DM cases. Incrementally integrating the four datasets improved accuracy; controlling for sample size, data incompleteness and duplicates. Manual validation confirmed the accuracy of the algorithm.
               
               
                  Conclusion
                  Integrating multiple data elements within an EHR using ontology-based case-finding algorithms can improve the accuracy of the diagnosis and compensate for suboptimal data quality, and hence creating a dataset that is more fit-for-purpose. This clinical and pragmatic application of ontologies to EHR data improves the integration of data and the potential for better use of data to improve the quality of care.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Electronic Health Records (EHRs) and informatics-enabled integrated care can improve chronic disease management (CDM). There are benefits for health care providers and consumers through more accurate and timely information exchange, improved work efficiency by avoiding repetition of information collection and tests, and better decision-making [1]. A widely used CDM is the Chronic Care Model (CCM) [2,3]. The CCM has six dimensions: health care organization, delivery system design, decision support, clinical information systems, self-management support, and community resources/policies to optimize integrated CDM. The CCM describes an activated patient engaged with an activated health care team to optimize patient-centred care [4] and the activated patients involved in self-management.

Patient registers or lists derived from routinely collected data in EHRs may be developed through “phenotyping” [5] or “case-finding” algorithms to identify cases. The increasing use of health-related social media, particularly in socially shaped diseases such as obesity and depression, can and should be exploited to enhance traditional ways of using EHRs to support care and care delivery [6].

The limitations of traditional EHR-based registers have been reported in the USA [7], UK [8,9], Australia [10] and Canada [11]. The Canadian diabetes registry to support patient identification and disease tracking was scrapped due to cost overruns and failure to deliver to expectations. Basic questions about the accuracy and completeness of EHR-based registers were only partially answered. The sensitivity (extent to which all patients with the disease were included) and specificity (extent to which patients who do not have the disease were excluded) of these registers were often not recorded.

The STrengthening the Reporting of OBservational studies in Epidemiology (STROBE) and REporting of studies Conducted using Observational Routinely collected Data (RECORD) initiatives recognize this gap. However, RECORD and STROBE are in their infancy and, in our view, lack sufficient and necessary support of clinical informatics [12,13] and knowledge engineering communities. There is scope to make greater use of semantic web technologies to exploit propositional knowledge (http://www.phekb.org/) as well as other domain knowledge: about health professionals, patients’ health status, and the health system.

The design of many EHRs and EHR-based disease registers is not transparent [14], mostly to protect intellectual property. The quality of disease registers has been critiqued in the UK [9,14,15] and those within an electronic Practice Based Research Network (ePBRN) in Australia [16,17]. Whilst some progress has been made, the core outstanding issue is uncertainty about true negatives, namely people without diabetes who are identified as such.

Our theoretical approach combines ontological and realist perspectives. We use Gruber’s classic description of an ontology as the “specification of a conceptualization” [18]. We incorporate Carlsson’s work as the guiding principle within a critical realist approach; [19] whilst adopting the practicality of Pawson and Tilley’s method of conducting a realist evaluation. They describe this straightforwardly as: “What works for whom in what context” [20]. Pawson and Tilley also describe how: “Context+Mechanism=Impact/Outcome (CMIO).” [21]. Finally we take a knowledge engineering approach (KE) to linking key data, information and knowledge.

We develop a phenotype ontology for type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) with a focus on supporting multidisciplinary integrated care of patients with chronic diseases capable of supporting the implementation of the CCM. Our ontological approach recognizes that the quality of EHRs and EHR-derived utilities such as patient registers is influenced by the data, knowledge modeling, system architecture, implementation protocols, training and support and associated knowledge management and information governance processes. We adopt an ontological layered approach [22] that incorporated rule-based methods, clinical guidelines and data quality dimensions.

Ontologies can potentially support several categories of integration including:
                              
                                 •
                                 
                                    Data integration: from disparate clinical data sources within and across EHRs.


                                    Knowledge integration: from diverse health and social professionals’ knowledge.


                                    Clinical integration: linking clinical concepts to model the phenotype.


                                    Interdisciplinary integration: bringing together multiple disciplines to model and support multidisciplinary coordinated care and information exchange in CDM over the patient’s journey through a complex ecosystem of clinical and social factors and contexts such as co-morbidities, health risks, health financing and insurance.

We used the Australian extension to the Systematized Nomenclature Of Medicine Clinical Terms (SNOMED CT-AU®) as a standardized terminology for knowledge representation in multidisciplinary clinical practice. SNOMED CT-AU® is an ontology which formally defines classes of medical procedure, pharmaceutical or biologic product, and body structure (http://www.nehta.gov.au/our-work/clinical-terminology/snomed-clinical-terms). In Australia, SNOMED CT-AU® Ontology (SCAO) is available in Web Ontology Language (OWL) from the National E-Health Transition Authority (NEHTA). Preliminary tests of SNOMED CT-AU demonstrated its suitability for integration with our specified ontology to identify patients with T2DM.

Our realist CMIO framework is applied as follows:
                              
                                 •
                                 The context is the health system, including multidisciplinary teams, continuity and integration of care, quality improvement indicators, disease surveillance and population health. We emphasize a need to collect and manage complete, correct, consistent and timely information about the cycle of care, risk factors, disease indicators, quality of life and patient satisfaction.

The mechanism to meet this need are the informatics and knowledge engineering tools, including the EHR, its data and ontologies to conceptualize the concepts and relationships required to implement and evaluate evidence-based best practice guidelines for a range of contexts and purposes.

The outcome in this study is the accuracy of the disease register.

We aim to embed “ontological” thinking in clinical practice to facilitate more realistic and relevant translation of clinical practice into knowledge modeling to improve knowledge collection, management and use in practice as well as the design of relevant decision support systems. The congruence of clinical and technical ontologies is essential to facilitate semantic and syntactic integration to promote the development of more proactive and intelligent CDM systems to reduce the burden on providers while still integrating patient information to guide integrated multidisciplinary practice, research and policy.

A KE approach [23] has the potential to integrate knowledge with the complex processes, sophisticated functions and rich information inherent in CDM. Ontologies are especially important when dealing with people with multiple chronic diseases, whose health data are often distributed among different health and social care providers and in different formats.

The ePBRN in South West Sydney provided the dataset to create an EHR-based register of patients with diabetes, to assess the accuracy of the tools and ontology-specified algorithm, and to test the resulting informatics and KE infrastructure developed. The records were linked, using a probabilistic matching and record linkage tool [24], to assess the extent of duplicate patient records and to avoid double counting of patients who used multiple practices in the study area (medical neighborhood).

This paper describes the use of ontology and KE tools to design, develop, implement and validate the T2DM phenotyping algorithm component of a comprehensive ontological approach to identifying and managing patients with T2DM from primary care EHRs.

@&#METHODS@&#

We adopted an approach we had previously piloted [25]:

The diabetes conceptual framework and, subsequent, multi-attribute T2DM phenotyping algorithm was developed using existing clinical knowledge and best practice guidelines [26,27], and our research into guideline implementation research findings [17].

A unified context was specified to act in the presence of differences in terminology and semantics from different EHRs, support reusability and integration of data. This approach also supported the development of automated systems for data annotation, extraction and linkage, information retrieval, data quality management (DQM) and natural-language processing [28]. By incorporating defined rules, the ontology generated logical inferences and consequently controlled the inclusion/exclusion of relevant objects [29]. Examples of this include: the patient with T2DM-related Reason for Visit (RFV), medication (Rx), specific pathology test (e.g. glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c), plasma glucose), service (e.g. referral to a diabetologist), benefits paid (e.g. T2DM cycle of care), risk factors (e.g. body mass index (BMI)), and/or a Family History (FH) [30].

The conceptualization of the ontology was finalized through an iterative process with the clinicians participating in the electronic Practice Based Research Network (ePBRN).

The ePBRN pilot dataset is an aggregate of EHR data from four participating practices. These practices contain 93,000 pseudonymised patients, with over a 13year review period more than 1.6million consultation records, 690,000 diagnoses (including RFV where it implies a diagnosis), 1million prescription records, and 1.6million pathology records. We used Microsoft SQL Server (http://www.microsoft.com/en-us/sqlserver/default.aspx) to implement the algorithm. The repository for the ePBRN data was created with five indexed tables:
                           
                              •
                              Diagnosis_Table including RFV,

Prescription_Table for Rx,

Pathology_Table for laboratory test name and result,

Measures_Table provided additional information (e.g. BMI) and the

Family_History_Table.

We used these tables to support decisions about the patients who do not have a DM label but have some relevant information that suggest that they may have DM. This hybrid structure of relational and non-relational database attributes was developed to deliver maximum efficiency and flexibility. The significant computational cost of a query across a number of large tables is reduced by indexing and restricting the number of tables to those listed above. Retrieval time is proportional to log(n), where n is the number of records. A properly cached index meant that lookup from our 1.6million-row table was done in milliseconds. The algorithm was implemented in T-SQL (Transact-SQL) (http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/ms189826%28v=sql.90%29.aspx), an extension of SQL (Structured Query Language) supported by Microsoft. Fig. 1
                         summarizes the flow of the T2DM case finding algorithm.

Finally, we checked for and excluded duplicate or multiple records, to reduce the likelihood of double-counting in a geographical area where patients may use a number of general practices and hospital-based services. While the duplicate check can be done at every phase, we chose to check at the end to avoid excluding DM-related data that may exist separately in the duplicated records, either within a single practice or across a number of practices.

The architecture to facilitate the classification and retrieval of DM patients is shown in Fig. 2
                        .

Patient data were extracted and selected from individual participating general practice EHRs by GRHANITE™ (http://www.grhanite.com), which provides a user accessible data repository sitting over a secure server [24]. Patient data, associated with ontology classes or properties, are sorted using -ontopPro- (http://ontop.inf.unibz.it/), which is theoretically based on the Ontology-Based Data Access principles [31]. The knowledge component of the infrastructure, related to conceptual terminologies was defined by the specification ontology, and built using SNOMED CT-AU and Web Ontology Language (OWL) (http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-features/) using the Protege open source ontology editor (http://protege.stanford.edu/).

We used hierarchical conceptual modeling to create the T2DM phenotype ontology, guided by the Australian National Guidelines for T2DM and discussions with the research team and general practitioners participating in the ePBRN. The formalized T2DM phenotype ontology consists of 4 main classes: Actor, Content, Mechanism and Impact; and 68 subclasses with object or data properties specified for the study objective. We modeled the domain specific knowledge for T2DM identification in SNOMED CT-AU Ontology (SCAO), which has more than 300,000 concepts.

We used T-SQL™ to link the server objects in the SQL Server to the heterogeneous datasets. The SQL query results were mapped, using -ontopPro-, to the patient data in the T2DM phenotype ontology; these in turn were associated with relevant classes. This meant that the schematic or semantic heterogeneity challenges faced were solved at either data or ontology level. The mapping mechanism supplied by -ontopPro- enabled: the populating of class members, assigning of property values, and incorporation of schematic data in the ePBRN repository with semantic concepts provided by the ontologies. Finally, we used T-SQL™ to implement the phenotyping algorithm on the knowledge engineered ontology infrastructure to identify patients with T2DM.

We adopted the International Standard Organization (ISO) 5725-1 definition of accuracy as consisting of trueness (proximity of measurement results to the true value) and precision (repeatability or reproducibility of the measurement) (see Fig. 3
                           ). Cases of DM in medical records can be true or false positives (TP or FP), true or false negatives (TN, FN). Accuracy is the proportion of true results (TP+TN) in the population. Positive predictive value (PPV) is defined as all positive test results (both TP+FP) that are truly positive. Sensitivity (also called true positive rate) measures the proportion of actual positives that are correctly identified as such (TP/(TP+FP)). Specificity (also called true negative rate) measures the proportion of negatives that are correctly identified as such (TN/(TN+FN)). If prevalence is known, PPV may be determined from Sensitivity (Sn) and Specificity (Sp), using the equation:
                              
                                 
                                    PPV
                                    =
                                    Sn
                                    *
                                    prevalence
                                    /
                                    (
                                    Sn
                                    *
                                    prevalence
                                    +
                                    (
                                    1
                                    -
                                    Sp
                                    )
                                    *
                                    (
                                    1
                                    -
                                    prevalence
                                    )
                                    )
                                    .
                                 
                              
                           From the Sn, Sp and PPV (precision), we can compute the F-Measure, weighted harmonic mean that takes into account both the precision and recall of a test. The receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve is a graphical demonstration of the relationship between sensitivity and specificity. We are only using a binary classification algorithm and therefore not varying the decision threshold. In the case of a binary test, the area under the ROC curve can be shown, using simple geometry, to be [(Sn
                           +
                           Sp)/2].

Sample size: To achieve 95% confidence intervals (CI) for a conservative estimate of 0.5 (+/−0.025) for Sn/Sp, for single or multiple attributes, we calculated the sample size to be 5000 patients (Australian National Statistical Services online sample size calculator; http://www.nss.gov.au/nss/home.nsf/pages/Sample+size+calculator?OpenDocument).

The T2DM phenotyping algorithm was first tested in the smallest ePBRN practice (Practice #1), with the other practice datasets of increasing sizes added one at a time. This enabled an assessment of any effects of combining practice datasets of varying data quality [32], as well as addressing semantic and technical integration issues. Previous studies have found more than 300 terms which might be associated with a diagnosis of DM [16].

The first pass through the data sets used Reason for Visit (RFV) as the filter (Fig. 1).

In the second pass, a DM medication (Rx) filter was used on all FP (Diagnoses/RFV of DM). All FP cases with a DM medication (both oral and insulin) were re-categorized as TP (based on Diagnosis/RFV or Rx). Presence of insulin only meant that the case was T1DM and therefore not T2DM and therefore a TN. The Sn/Sp (for diagnosis RFV or Rx) was calculated (see Fig. 3).

The third pass identified diagnostic pathology (Path) tests for DM (HbA1c⩾6.5%, fasting plasma glucose⩾7, random plasma Glucose⩾11.1) as the filter. Abnormal DM specific tests meant re-categorization as TP (RFV or Rx or Path). The Sn/Sp (diagnosis, RFV or Rx or Path) was calculated.

The fourth pass used the presence of a DM-related diagnosis/RFV on at least two visits, a family history of diabetes and BMI⩾30 as filters to gain further information about patients who may be unrecognized diabetics or have pre-diabetes. We also calculated 95% confidence intervals for the Sn/Sp using the Wilson score method without continuity correction [33].

The accuracy (trueness+precision) was triangulated by feedback from clinicians at Practice 1 about the list of T2DM cases identified. We did not obtain feedback on the list of negatives.

@&#RESULTS@&#

T2DM patients identified at each stage of the algorithm for the ePBRN data repository (N
                     =23,793) were sorted into TP, TN, FP and FN groups (Fig. 4
                     ). Similar summary figures were created for each source practice datasets. We validated the accuracy of the T2DM cases identified in Practice #1.

The Sn/Sp of the algorithm and 95% confidence intervals (CI) and completeness of data in the patient record were calculated for each of the datasets and summarized in Tables 1 and 2
                     
                      respectively. Table 1 demonstrates that, when taken together, the RFV and Rx will accurately identify around 95% of the cases; when abnormal pathology was included, the accuracy was almost unity. Table 1 also shows the increasing precision (decreasing confidence intervals) as the size of the source practice data set increases down the table to the total of all 4 practices. The precision is adequate once the data set meets or exceeds a required sample size.

While we conservatively calculated the required sample size as 5000 patients, it is possible that 3500 would be adequate (Table 2). The size of the data set influenced the PPV of the algorithm, without appreciable depreciation in the Sp or Negative Predictive Value (NPV).

The result for Practice 1 (n
                     =927) reflected the participating GPs’ reports that they did not routinely record diabetes type in the RFV field, which affirmed the value of this approach as the cases would not be identified as T2DM if we relied on the diagnosis/RFV alone. The large 95% confidence intervals reflected the small size of Practice 1 and, perhaps, the completeness of the dataset (Table 3
                     ). The range of estimates of prevalence of T2DM ranged from 2.6% in Practice 1 to 9.3% in Practice 2; the pattern was not consistently related to the size of the data set, suggesting that data completeness was a factor. The prevalence of T2DM in the combined data set was 6.7%.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

By integrating diagnosis/RFV, Rx and pathology, this algorithm could identify T2DM cases with an accuracy of 99.9% and PPV of 96.4%. Using more than the three data elements did not improve the accuracy significantly. The 6.7% prevalence of T2DM calculated by the ontology-based “RFV or Rx or Pathology” algorithm was comparable with the prevalence of 6.5% reported by the local health authority. In comparison, the prevalence of the T2DM reported using RFV alone was only 5.8%. The 1:20 ratio of T1DM to T2DM in the ePBRN data set was consistent with prevalence estimates in the literature [27,34]. The size of the data repository (calculated practice list size of 5000) was adequate for phenotyping; although the actual requirement may be less. This confirms the importance of calculating and achieving an adequate sample size to answer specific questions.

The increasing yield of cases identified by using three attributes (diagnosis/RFV, medication and pathology), while maintaining the accuracy, suggested that this ontological multi-attribute approach was more accurate than just relying on single attributes such as disease codes. It provided some insight into the reliability and validity of routinely collected data in the source practice records, and likely degree of inter-practice variation. The method is transparent and can be built on, with feedback given to practices and practitioners to improve data recording and completeness. The other dimensions of data quality (DQ) that the ePBRN research is focused on – correctness and consistency [16,17] – have been addressed within the ontology.

The findings of this study can guide the development of thresholds for other possible associations and/or predictors of T2DM and for other chronic diseases or co-morbidity, BMI (obesity), ethnicity, and gender. The ontological approach has the potential to help preserve the fidelity of searches in the real world of clinical practice where the patient often requires multidisciplinary integrated care for multiple health issues related to multimordibity and polypharmacy. This study validates the ontology-based approach to integrate the attributes of a diabetic patient at the data (diagnosis/RFV) and knowledge (diagnosis/RFV, Rx and Path) levels. We have conducted but not reported on analyses on integration at the clinical (BMI+FH) and interdisciplinary (referrals and use of T2DM related services provided by other service providers) levels as they were superfluous to this exercise to examine the accuracy of the T2DM phenotyping algorithm. A substantive evaluation of the inter-disciplinary aspect of this approach is planned for future studies, using another clinical diagnosis.

The situation is similar in the authors’ countries – Australia, UK and Canada – where similar problems and issues are faced. In the UK the Royal College of General Practitioners (RCGP) and NHS Diabetes set up a classification group to create a pragmatic classification for use in clinical records; the motivation for this was that there were differences between prevalence in epidemiological studies and those found in disease registers, The underlying issue was errors in the coding and classification of diabetes [8,15,35]. This led to an educational initiative and the development of audit tools, made freely available online, customized for each different brand of computer system, to enable practices to improve their data quality (www.clininf.eu/cod/). Superficially, all UK brands of computer system use the same coding system; however, they use different versions, there is variation in the drug dictionary, local codes and how practitioners interface with those codes [36,37]. These are the same problems likely to be encountered in Australia and Canada; though a common data extraction tool usable across all brands of computer system simplifies, though does not solve, the challenge of how to reliably identify people with a specific phenotype [38].

Canada has had similar problems with developing diabetes and other CDM registers [11] despite evidence pointing to the need for one [39]. A foremost issue is that Canada has struggled with EHR design and implementation issues due to overemphasis on data collection and technology rather than meaningful application of EHR data to support essential tasks such as CDM [40].

The manual validation of the positive T2DM cases found in a small general practice may not address the accuracy measure adequately. A PhD project manually audited all the records in the practice and confirmed the accuracy (Sensitivity and Specificity>95%) in this practice; submitted elsewhere as a thesis paper. Finally, data integrity and fidelity issues have not been addressed.

The methodology is valid for quality improvement and research purposes. The integration of biostatistics and informatics methods, including KE, has triangulated and grounded the findings to increase our understanding of the impact of data completeness and dataset size on algorithm accuracy. The ePBRN research program aims to extend this integrative work with data-driven technical and semantic ontological methods. Ontology-based methods are essential to the automated integration and management of the increasing volumes of complex clinical information from disparate EHRs. Basic data quality (DQ) metrics are important and can be embedded in the ontology infrastructure to manage data repositories. We have selected completeness, correctness, consistency and duplication (C3D) as the core DQ metrics for demographic and clinical data collected, and to compare within and among EHRs. Both clinical data and professional knowledge changes over time and ontology-based KE tools are the most promising instruments to deal with this temporal dimension cost-effectively.

Potentially, the concept of ontologically-specified mapping, using -ontopPro- for instance, of relevant data/information may allow automated (intelligent) focused access to distributed EHRs, using only the required data and leaving the other data where they are. This is becoming increasingly necessary when clinical and social media data become so “big” that extracting, moving or copying the data becomes impractical.

Intelligent systems are needed to identify cases of a particular phenotype and integrate patient information to guide practice, research and policy. The ontology-based approach can address the integration of patient data within a single and across multiple EHRs to develop clinical phenotypes for CDM and integration of clinical concepts to model the phenotype (clinical integration) recognizing that CDM is non-linear, complex and operates in a context that includes clinical factors such as co-morbidities, risk factors and allergies and non-clinical factors such as health financing and insurance, to support tasks such as clinical care, practice organization, and quality improvement initiatives. Ontological methods also allow a clinician to look at many attributes of a single patient whilesimultaneously permitting analysts to look at a single attribute across many patients, within the same environment. Models, methodologies and tools to support EHR-driven phenotyping in multiple contexts are needed to support well-coordinated health promotion and prevention and management of chronic disease.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

We examined the accuracy of a T2DM phenotyping algorithm and its ontology infrastructure in finding cases of T2DM in individual EHRs and a multi-EHR data repository. Our clinical informatics program enables the reuse of the knowledge already represented in SNOMED CT-AU to perform semantic retrievals for different applications and clinical domains. The goal to create knowledge-driven models to integrate disparate datasets and knowledge bases to support the integrated care of patients with multiple chronic diseases and on multiple medications has been partially achieved. The ontologically driven approach can improve the accuracy of EHR-based disease registers and potentially lead to improved and coordinated chronic disease management, patient safety, and quality outcomes.

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial or not-for-profit sectors. It is part of the electronic Practice Based Research Network (ePBRN) research program which was/is funded in part by UNSW Medicine, School of Public Health & Community Medicine, Ingham Institute for Applied Medical Research and South West Sydney Local Health District.

Apart for STL having intellectual property in the GRHANITE™ tool, there are no known competing interests.

STL leads the ePBRN program and this research. HY conducted the infrastructure and technical work. JT conducted most of the clinical research activity for this paper. STL led the writing with conceptual input from SdeL and CZ and biostatistics advice from AH.

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2014.07.016.


                     
                        
                           Supplementary Figure 2
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Supplementary Figure 3
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Supplementary Figure 4
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Supplementary Figure 5
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

