@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#A machine-learned knowledge discovery method for associating complex phenotypes with complex genotypes. Application to pain

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           A machine-learned method was developed obtaining complex phenotypes.


                        
                        
                           
                           A composed genotype accurately predicted cluster membership.


                        
                        
                           
                           Cluster membership was predicted at ∼80% accuracy in a prospective test cohort.


                        
                        
                           
                           The developed methodology is suitable for complex genotype–phenotype associations.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Machine-learning

Knowledge-generation

Genetics

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Background
                  The association of genotyping information with common traits is not satisfactorily solved. One of the most complex traits is pain and association studies have failed so far to provide reproducible predictions of pain phenotypes from genotypes in the general population despite a well-established genetic basis of pain. We therefore aimed at developing a method able to prospectively and highly accurately predict pain phenotype from the underlying genotype.
               
               
                  Methods
                  Complex phenotypes and genotypes were obtained from experimental pain data including four different pain stimuli and genotypes with respect to 30 reportedly pain relevant variants in 10 genes. The training data set was obtained in 125 healthy volunteers and the independent prospective test data set was obtained in 89 subjects. The approach involved supervised machine learning.
               
               
                  Results
                  The phenotype–genotype association was reached in three major steps. First, the pain phenotype data was projected and clustered by means of emergent self-organizing map (ESOM) analysis and subsequent U-matrix visualization. Second, pain sub-phenotypes were identified by interpreting the cluster structure using classification and regression tree classifiers. Third, a supervised machine learning algorithm (Unweighted Label Rule generation) was applied to genetic markers reportedly modulating pain to obtain a complex genotype underlying the identified subgroups of subjects with homogenous pain response. This procedure correctly identified 80% of the subjects as belonging to an extreme pain phenotype in an independently and prospectively assessed cohort.
               
               
                  Conclusion
                  The developed methodology is a suitable basis for complex genotype–phenotype associations in pain. It may provide personalized treatments of complex traits. Due to its generality, this new method should also be applicable to other association tasks except pain.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Human genotyping information elucidates pathogenetic mechanisms and provides clinical guidance for disease management. However, the association of genotyping information with common traits is not resolved satisfactorily [1]. Especially in complex traits emerging from multifactorial mechanisms, single genetic variants often produce only small effect sizes [2]. This weakens the utility of genotyping information [1,3].

One of the most challenging traits is pain. It involves a complex pathophysiology [4] underlying its sensory, affective, motor, vegetative and emotional components [5] reflected in the large network of underlying molecular nociceptive pathways [6]. The genetic basis of pain has been well established [7–9]. However, so far, association studies largely failed to provide reproducible predictions of phenotypes from genotypes in the average population [10]. Roughly this is caused by common genetic factors reciprocally canceling out their phenotypic consequences [11] and usually exerting only small effects [12]. To these poor results probably adds that current analytical methods for genotype phenotype association in pain are often insufficient. While the complexity of pain is increasingly accepted [13], its high-dimensional phenotypes [14] and underlying genotypes [11] are mainly subjected to low-dimensional analyses. Indeed, it becomes clear that it is advantageous to view pain as a complex phenotype when clustering individuals for their responses to different pain tests [15–17]. However, approaches applied so far have failed to provide a conclusive solution to pain genotype–phenotype association problems. This is probably due to a number of methodological shortcomings. Firstly, theoretical reasons suggest that the presently used clustering techniques should be revised in favor of those that make no prior assumptions about the cluster structure, since the patterns of pain responses across different tests provide no indication of a particular cluster form. Secondly, clustering approaches used so far have been restricted to a mere description of the pattern of pain measures among individuals, without providing analyses of clinically relevant phenotypes that could be used for predictions by genotypes (for example, see [16], page 3, Table 1
                     ). Thirdly, genotype associations were mostly made in separate tests of single markers for phenotypic effects, without regard to the complexity of the genotypes [11].

Nowadays, more sophisticated bioinformatics tools are available to successfully approach this complex problem. Besides automated clustering of complex data, the bioinformatics toolbox also contains machine leaning methods for a subsequent knowledge-generation out of the clustering. In the present work, we aimed at developing a methodology that provides a basis for genotype–phenotype associations in complex traits. The methodology was developed to address several shortcomings of current approaches to genotype–phenotype associations and was presently applied to the complex trait of pain. It incorporates the complexity of both pain phenotypes and pain genotypes and is able to identify subgroups of individuals with similar pain phenotypes who share genotypic markers. We show that complex genotypes allow for correct prospective identification of up to 80% of the subjects who belong to a particular pain phenotype cluster. However, as a limited set of genotypes and phenotypes was used, the intention of this analysis rather was to pursue a clear methodological focus for the identification of complex genotypes and phenotypes and their associations than to identify new genotypes as a biological explanation of the observed pain phenotypes.

@&#METHODS@&#

The investigations followed the Declaration of Helsinki on Biomedical Research Involving Human Subjects and were approved by the Ethics Committee of the Medical Faculty of the Goethe – University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany. All subjects gave written informed consent. Exclusion criteria employed were: drug intake less than seven days previously (except oral contraceptives), actual clinical pain, and concurrent diseases, based on questioning and a short medical examination.

Available data consisted of two independent data sets obtained in two independent study cohorts. The first data set, the training data, had been previously acquired from a random sample of 125 unrelated healthy young Caucasians (69men, 56 women, mean age 25±4.4years) [12,14,18]. At this data set, the genotype–phenotype associations were established. To test their prediction, a new data set was acquired prospectively [19], the test data set, which was obtained in the same laboratory, from a random sample of 89 subjects of the same ethnicity and distribution (36 men, 53 women, mean age 25.6±3.9years).

Pain thresholds to four stimuli, including heat, cold, mechanical and electrical pain, were measured as described previously [14,18]. In brief, heat stimuli were applied using a 3×3cm thermode (Thermal Sensory Analyzer, Medoc, Ramat Yishai, Israel) placed onto the skin of the left volar forearm. While increasing temperature from 32°C by 0.3°C/s, the subject was requested to press a button when heat became painful, which was recorded as pain threshold and subsequently, the thermode was cooled down. Cold stimuli were applied similarly, however, with temperatures decreasing by 1°C/s from 32°C to 0°C. Blunt pressure was exerted perpendicularly onto the dorsal side of mid-phalanx of the right middle finger using a pressure algometer (JTECH Medical, Midvale, USA) with a circular flat probe of 1cm diameter. While increasing the pressure by 9N/cm2 per second, the threshold was reached when the subject indicated pain. Electrical stimuli employed were sine-wave stimuli at 5Hz, applied via two gold electrodes to the medial and lateral side of the mid-phalanx of the right middle finger (Neurometer® CPT, Neurotron Inc., Baltimore, MD). As the intensity of the electrical stimulus was increased from 0 to 20mA in 0.2mA/s steps, the subjects were requested to interrupt the current by releasing a button when perceiving pain. The current at which this interruption occurred was the pain threshold.

Genotyping was done for 20 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) [12]. These SNPs and resulting haplotypes, obtained in silico using PHASE software [20], have been reported previously to modulate pain [21]. The Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium was preserved in both cohorts (χ
                           2 goodness of fit tests); other details on SNPs and haplotypes have already been reported elsewhere [12] and are given in the Supplemental table to the present publication. Although restricted, in the light of the currently known >410 “pain genes” [22], the set nevertheless included some major players in nociception such as μ- and δ-opioid receptor genes (OPRM1 
                           [23] and OPRD1 
                           [24], respectively), transient receptor potential cation channel genes (TRPV1 
                           [25] and TRPA1 
                           [26]), catechol-O-methyl transferase (COMT 
                           [27,28]), fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH 
                           [27]), guanosine 5′-triphosphate cyclohydrolase 1 (GCH1 
                           [29]) and variants of the melanocortin-1 receptor gene (MC1R) associated with a red-head, -fair-skin phenotype [30,31]. Functional variants were diagnosed from genomic DNA by means of validated Pyrosequencing™ assays [12] on a PSQ 96 MA System (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany), with conventionally sequenced samples as controls.

Analyses were done using Matlab software (MathWorks, Natick, MS, USA) with functionality expanded by self-developed toolboxes (publicly available at http://www.uni-marburg.de/fb12/datenbionik/software). Besides automated clustering of complex data, the bioinformatics toolbox also contains machine learning methods for a subsequent knowledge-generation from the clustering. Data analysis started with the identification of subjects who shared similar pain sensitivities to different stimuli. Subsequently, extreme pain phenotype subgroups (clusters) were analyzed for the underlying complex genetic architecture. Finally, the complex genotype was used to identify those subjects from the test data set who had belonged to a similar pain subgroup.

Data was z-transformed and a combined “pain” variable, zTotalPain, was calculated as the sum of all rescaled pain measures to model the overall sensitivity to any type of pain stimulus [32]. This combined data was split into three classes of pain sensitivity (Fig. 1
                              ), i.e., “low pain” sensitivity (LPS; zTotalPain
                              ⩽−s), “average pain” (APS, zTotalPain in the interval [−s, s]) and “high pain” (HPS, zTotalPain
                              ⩾
                              s). This corresponds to a classification with thresholds±
                              s at 20% and 80% of the distribution and reflects the previous classifications of LPS, APS and HPS phenotypes by Diatchenko et al. [32].

This analysis focused on identifying subjects with similar pain phenotypes. The distributions of the phenotypical pain data turned out to be rather complex (Fig. 1). These distributions could be modeled with a mixture of three Gaussians N(mi
                              , si
                              ), i
                              =1, 2, 3. The theorem of Bayes allows to calculate posterior probabilities p(i|x), i.e., the probability that for a given pain value x the data belongs to Gaussian i. The value B
                              =
                              p(3|x)−
                              p(1|x) takes a value of 1 if x belongs to Gaussian 3, a value of 0, if x belongs to Gaussian 2 and −1 if x belongs to Gaussian 1. For the subsequent projection and clustering as measure of “similarity”, the Euclidian distance of the B values was used. Each person’s response to the pain stimuli (n
                              =4 dimensions), plus the overall sensitivity score (n
                              =1 dimension), was treated as a point in a five-dimensional Euclidean vector space (data space).

To obtain clusters in this vector space, the data was projected onto a two-dimensional plane. This space is called a map with a geographical interpretation in mind. As classical projection algorithms, such as principal component analysis or multidimensional scaling, cannot preserve complex cluster structures, the ESOM/U-matrix method was used [43]. ESOM clustering provides a number of advantages over alternative methods, such as K-means or Ward, the most relevant one being the lack of prior assumption about the cluster structure.

Using ESOM, data was projected onto a two-dimensional borderless grid (map space) of 50×82=4200 units (“neurons”; Fig. 2
                              ). The map space is toroid [33] and the projection is neighborhood preserving [34]. I.e., points that are neighbors in the high dimensional data space are also neighbors on the map space. Each neuron holds a vector of “weights” of the same dimension as the five input dimensions (four z-transformed pain thresholds plus the combined pain variable) in the input space. The weights initially were randomly drawn from the range of the data variables. In an adaptation process, (learning phase, 100 epochs) they were adapted to the data (training cohort, n
                              =125). As learning and test data had been obtained in the same laboratory with the same equipment, it was expected that test data could be included in the map, which was verified by constructing the ESOM with all the data. The Adjusted Rand Index (ARI) [35] of a clustering using only the training data set compared to a clustering of all data is 96%. For the test data set the ARI is 89%. This shows the similarity of the cluster structure in the training and the test data.

Data on the trained ESOM was presented on the two-dimensional toroid map where a cluster structure was to be visualized. This was obtained by adding a third dimension consisting of the average distance of the weight vector of a neuron to the weight vectors of its direct neighbors, which is known as the U-matrix [36]. Specifically, the U-matrix is a representation of the distances in data space on top of the map space (Fig. 2), with a geographical map analogy in mind. The watersheds of the U-matrix show borderlines of these pain clusters, i.e., high “walls” between data points indicate large distances between individual pain responses. By contrast, points lying together in a valley of the U-matrix represent persons who have a common pain response pattern with respect to the four stimuli and the overall sensitivity score. Cluster visualization was further enhanced by calculating the U* matrix, which results from the combination of the U-matrix distances with the P-matrix. The latter also uses the ESOM map as a floor space layout, however, instead of the local distances, density values in data space measured at the neuron’s weights are used as height values [33]. The process was performed using the ESOM toolbox [37], publicly available at http://www.uni-marburg.de/fb12/datenbionik/software (accessed on March 17, 2013).

The ESOM/U-matrix clustering identified the subjects who had similar pain sensitivities. However, the result was still a “black box” with respect to the pattern of particular pain thresholds shared by the cluster members. Therefore, the subsequent analysis aimed at obtaining clear descriptions, in terms of pain threshold markers, of the sensitivity patterns, thus obtaining pain phenotype groups (clusters) in the training data cohort. The cluster structure obtained with the U-matrix was interpreted by extracting the decision rules, in terms of measured stimulus intensities at the pain thresholds, from a classification and regression tree (CART) classifier that assigned each subject of the training set to a particular pain cluster (Table 1). A random sub-sampling validation with 125 data sets for the construction of a CART decision tree and 81 data sets for testing repeated 50 times resulted in a mean accuracy of 95.5% with a standard deviation of 1.4% of the classifier. This is consistent with the CART classification accuracy of 95% of the split into training and test data set as given above. CART provides a simple and easy understandable form of the classification rules and effectively uses the conditional information of the GINI index [38] to find optimal (local) dichotomic decisions. Furthermore, CART is invariant under transformations of the variables, robust with respect to outliers and allows estimation of the misclassification rate [38]. The requirements for this classifier are that it is sufficiently able to perform the classification task and that the classification is based on rules that a human reader can understand (knowledge). As shown below the decision rules can be used for a very precise definition of the cluster’s “meaning”.

Associations were sought that would identify a positive or negative combination (i.e., a rule) for the 29 genetic variables (labels) that described extreme pain phenotype clusters as well as possible. Specifically, the 29 genetic markers for each subject were labeled with a “Yes” (=1), “No” (=−1) or “Don’t care” (=0), modeling in the presence, absence or insignificance of the reportedly functional allele. In addition, sex was coded as +1, if female and −1 if male. To search for such rules in all variables means regarding a space of size R
                              =330
                              >2.0×1014. A complete search in this space is out of the processing time range of current personal computers. Therefore, the genotypes had to be preselected. This was achieved in a 100-fold repeated cross-validation experiment (80/20 split), on three blocks consisting of 10 genetic markers each. In these blocks those combination of markers were selected that were useful to predict the HPS/LPS dichotomy with an accuracy of at least 71%. This greedy search reduced the search space to 314
                              >4.7×106 potential candidates for rules, which is possible to explore in feasible computing time (ca. 2h on a typical PC). The reduced set of 14 genotype markers, thus identified, was subsequently used to construct predictive complex genotypes.

The preselected genetic markers and the subject’s gender were submitted to a machine learning procedure called “Unweighted Label Rule generation” (ULR) [39]. This tested all possible additive combinations of the 29 genetic markers and of gender for the best prediction of the membership of the extreme pain clusters in the training cohort. The possible sum of the markers consisted of the genetic markers (present, 1, absent, 0) multiplied by 1, −1 or 0. ULR first tested all single-label rules (R
                              =60) and measured the performance of the rule to predict the membership of the subject of the selected pain cluster as the area (AUC) under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve [40]. It then combined the best performing one-variable rules. All possible sums of variables were tested.

For all resulting ULR rules, AUC, sensitivity and specificity were calculated. The performance of each rule was compared with that of the best guessing rule, which means just assigning all cases to the larger class of the dichotomy. If a ULR provided at least 5% better prediction performance than the best guess, it was included as a candidate for a classification rule. Among candidates, the rule with the best AUC using the least number of labels was finally selected.

After having identified both pain phenotype clusters and the underlying genetics in the training data set, the obtained knowledge was applied to the test data set.

The decision rules obtained with the CART classifier (Table 1) provided characteristics of pain cluster membership of the training data. The rules were subsequently applied to the test data to assess their performance to assign an individual subject to a particular pain phenotype, based on the information of four individual pain thresholds and the overall pain sensitive score.

Pain phenotype groups of major interest for genetic predictions were considered to consist of those containing subjects at the extreme of the distribution, with either very high or very low pain sensitivity. The predicted genetic causes of high or low pain sensitivity can then be considered as reasonable drug targets for pain therapy. To emphasize extreme pain phenotypes, ESOM clusters were intersected with the HPS/APS/LPS providing groups which were homogeneous with respect to their sensitivity to single stimuli grouping, while at the same time sharing the same extreme overall pain sensitivity (Table 2
                              ).

Subsequently, the composed genotype obtained by means of ULR of the training data set was searched in the test data set. The performance assessed whether this correctly identified the subjects belonging to either the low or high pain threshold groups in the test data set.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The ESOM clustering of the pain data and subsequent visualizing provided a U-matrix (Fig. 2) in which eight pain phenotypes could be observed (Fig. 3
                        B), comprising individuals who shared complex pain threshold patterns across the four different noxious stimuli (i.e., heat, cold, electrical current and blunt pressure) and the combined pain score (average of the z-values). The specific properties characterizing each phenotype, as derived from the CART classifier (Table 1), could be interpreted clinically. For example, those belonging to cluster 7 and 8 were both stoical towards thermal pain. Individuals in cluster 7 were average sensitive to current pain stimuli while those belonging to cluster 8 were neither cold nor current sensitive. On the other side, subjects belonging to cluster 1 were generally highly temperature sensitive. Those in cluster 2 were also very pressure sensitive. The CART decision rules allowed for the prediction of the cluster membership in the test data set with an accuracy of 95%. The cluster structures were similar in the training and test data sets. Specifically, the CART classifier created from the training data predicted the cluster membership of the test data set with an accuracy of 95%.

ESOM clusters overlapped, although only incompletely (Table 2), with the classification into three major phenotypes [5], namely, “low pain sensitivity” LPS (n
                        =41), “average pain” (APS, n
                        =123) and “high pain” (HPS, n
                        =42). For example, the LPS group was formed mainly of subjects belonging to ESOM classes 7 and 8. However, while all subjects of classes 7 and 8 were stoical towards heat, only subjects of class 8 were also stoical towards cold (Table 1), emphasizing the greater complexity of ESOM clustering. Similarly, the HPS group consisted mainly of subjects belonging to ESOM classes 1 and 2. However, while all HPS subjects were sensitive to heat, those belonging to cluster 1 were also sensitive to cold, i.e., completely temperature sensitive, whereas those belonging to cluster 2 were pressure but not cold sensitive.

In a cross-validation experiment, repeated 100 times, 14 genetic variables including “gender” were identified that had sufficiently high accuracy (> 71%) for the training data set. These preselected genetic markers and the subject’s gender were submitted to a ULR machine learning procedure aimed at identifying the marker combinations that best predicted the subjects’ pain phenotype. Thus, a rule space of size R
                        =314
                        >4.7×106 was searched in order to predict membership of the low or high pain thresholds clusters, which were defined, respectively, as the intersections between (i) ESOM clusters 1/2 and the HPS phenotype, or (ii) ESOM clusters 7/8 and the LPS phenotype (Table 2).

ULR generated the following rule for membership of the low pain threshold clusters: If (+COMT rs6269G+
                        TRPA1 rs13255063A/rs11988795G+
                        TRPA1 rs13255063T/rs11988795G+
                        FAAH rs324419C/rs2295633A+Sex(+1) if female, (−1) if male
                        −
                        COMT rs6269A/rs4633T/4818C/rs4680A−
                        COMT rs4646312T/rs165722C/rs6269A/rs4633C/rs4818C/rs4680G−
                        OPRM1 rs1799971G−
                        FAAH rs324419T/rs2295633A−
                        GCH1
                        “pain protecting haplotype” rs8007267A/rs3783641T/rs10483639G
                           1
                           As discussed previously [29], although the pain protective haplotype originally comprised 15 GCH1 SNPS, it can be identified with 100% accuracy by genotyping only the three variant alleles rs8007267A, rs3783641T and rs104836c39G [41], at least in caucasian subjects with the present origin [29].
                        
                        
                           1
                        
                        −
                        MC1R
                        redhead genotype)>0.5 then the case belongs to the intersection of ESOM/U-matrix cluster 1 and 2 with the HPS phenotype, i.e. to the pain phenotype subgroup with a very high pain sensitivity and not to the opposite phenotype clusters. Each component of this rule denotes presence or absence of the respective functional genotypic markers (0, 1) carried by the subject. In the training data set, this rule predicted membership for an individual of either low or high pain threshold clusters with an accuracy of 78%. The rule uses – apart from gender-only eight genetic markers.

Subsequently, the combined genotype was identified in subjects belonging to the test cohort. It predicted membership for an individual of either low or high pain threshold clusters with an accuracy of 78%. For comparison, among single genetic markers and gender, only the latter provided a prediction better than guessing, i.e., assigning all subjects just to the larger group of two alternatives. However, gender provided only a predictive accuracy of 67%.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

In this study, we employed the whole cycle of machine-supported generation of presumably new knowledge (hypothesis generation) from complex high-dimensional data. Firstly, the inspection involved clustering of high dimensional phenotype data (ESOM/U-matrix). In a second step, this clustering of data was used to generate a (cross-validated) classifier (CART) which uses explicit rules for the classification. These rules are understandable and interpretable by humans. The rules were found to be consistent with previous work (LPS/APS/HPS [32]) and gave hints to a more complex structure of human pain sensation types (8 classes). This classification was used for the generation of a classifier of the genotype data. The methodology mapped the genetic architecture of subjects sharing a particular pain phenotype and predicted, on the basis of a complex genetic marker, their membership of this phenotype in an independent cohort with an accuracy of almost 80%. This indicates that ESOM/U-matrix-based clustering, with subsequent rule generation, is suitable to provide pain phenotypes that are carried by subjects sharing a common pain-relevant genetic background [11].

ESOM clustering makes no prior assumption about the cluster structure. This is a major advantage of the present method over previous attempts to cluster pain phenotypes [15–17] that may have missed relevant pain clusters or provided wrong individual cluster associations by superimposing a possibly inadequate cluster structure on the data. In addition, the proposed method exceeds previous approaches towards genotype–phenotype association in several further ways. Whereas other approaches stopped after the phenotype classification had been obtained, the present method continued at this stage with a machine learning algorithm that generated decision rules for each cluster, presently implemented using CART, C4.5 [42]. The aim of this approach was to gain a suiting ROC AUC (>0.8) and an understandable semantic description of a cluster. This provides a suitable basis for clinically relevant phenotype clustering and subsequent genotype associations. This was not included in previous approaches, even though, from a bird’s eye view of the comprehensive display of the cluster averages (Fig. 2 of [17]), it can be seen that cluster number 2 could possibly be determined by the single variable “high sensitivity to spontaneous pain attacks”. Similarly, five distinct clinical phenotypes of neuropathic pain [17] were obtained by means of hierarchical cluster analysis, in a classical approach from the patients’ self-estimations of spontaneous and evoked pain. None of the clusters was described in any way. The same applies to the findings of Hastie et al. [15] who found that pain has distinct dimensions, leading to complex phenotype clusters. Four principal factors were derived from heat, pressure, ischemic pain and temporal summations of pain stimuli. Using hierarchical cluster analysis of 188 cases, four distinct groups were found, based on patterns of responses across multiple pain stimuli [15]. Cluster (i), “high pain sensitivity”, partly coincides with the present ESOM clusters 1 and 2 [28].

Previous attempts to describe pain phenotypes that acknowledged the complexity of pain only incompletely extended this to genotyping information [43]. However, introducing complex genotypes is required [11] to obtain a successful genotype–phenotype association, which single genetic markers cannot provide [10,44]. This is because of the small effect size that was exerted through the genetic markers on the phenotype measures, which had already been shown in the present training data set [12]. Specifically, the values of Cohen’s d for the effects of the 30 genotype markers on single pain threshold measures were lower than d
                     =0.2 (small) in 80% of the marker-threshold associations and only in 2% of the associations greater than d
                     =0.5 (medium). Using single markers on low versus high pain threshold clusters already provided increased effect sizes with 50% of the Cohen’s d values >0.2 (small) and 12%>0.5 (medium). However, a dramatic increase in effect sizes was obtained when using combined rather than single genetic markers. Thus, the composed ULR genotype provided values of Cohen’s d
                     =1.25, 1.35, 0.63 and 1.33 for heat, cold, pressure and electrical stimuli, respectively, for subjects belonging to either low or high pain threshold clusters (Table 2). An effect size is usually considered to be large, if Cohen’s d
                     >0.8.

The present selection of genetic markers originates from previously reported positive findings which, however, may implicitly be influenced by other non-accounted for variants [11], contain never-reproduced associations and often be based on weak biological bases. Therefore, the interpretation of variants expected to be present or absent in highly pain-sensitive subjects should be done with caution. Consistent with these expectations, the negatively influential GCH1 haplotype was originally reported to be pain protective [45]. This is biologically plausible as this haplotype impedes GCH1 up-regulation, followed by reduced availability of the pro-nociceptive tetrahydrobiopterin [29]. The fact that the COMT rs6269A/rs4633T/rs4818C/rs4680A haplotype, associated previously with average, but not with high pain sensitivity (APS) [28], received a negative connotation in our study is also consistent with expectations. A further agreement with expectations is the positive influence of female gender, as in women, higher pain sensitivity than in men has been identified in most gender studies on pain (for reviews, see [46–48]). However, the role MC1R genotype is less clear, as subjects carrying non-functional MC1R were reported to exhibit an increased tolerance to electrical pain stimuli [30], but this was not reproduced [31] and occasionally contradicted [31]; the latter outcome fitted best to the high-pain rule found in our study. However, the biological, mechanistic basis of MC1R pain regulation is not yet completely clear. In contrast to expectations, OPRM1 rs1799971 A>G, which has been associated with decreased nociception [49,50], was allocated a positive influence. However, the molecular basis of this association is questionable since the increased affinity of endorphin at N40D μ-opioid receptors [51], related to this genotype, with subsequent reduced activity of the endogenous nocifensive opioid system, could not be reproduced [52–54]. Moreover, the variant is well known to reduce opioid receptor signaling efficiency [52] and expression [53–55], including a genetic–epigenetic interaction impeding receptor up-regulation [56]. Therefore, its inclusion in lower pain threshold cluster predictions is biologically plausible. Further components of the genotypes are difficult to interpret on basis of previous findings, as they have been reported to be associated with changed pain sensitivity [27], without specifying the direction of that change.

After the successful development and verification of the present methodology for pain phenotype–genotype association, the analysis cannot be extended beyond the prediction of extreme phenotypes from combined genetic markers. A final characterization of human pain could not be expected as the data set was limited by the numbers of cases, pain markers and genetic markers. Currently, at least 410 pain genes have been established [9], for example, 390 “pain genes” are found in the PainGenes database [57] at http://www.jbldesign.com/jmogil/enter.html (accessed on April 4, 2013). The inclusion of a more comprehensive set of genetic markers is very likely to change the set. With genome-wide data, there is no impediment to the replacement of the ULR based generation of complex genotypes by ESOM/U-matrix based genotypes and this option is opened by the present methodology. Psychological factors also may be included, but again, the methodology is now available.

The present results show that machine-learned knowledge-generation from identified phenotype structures is suited for associating underlying biomarkers. The method exceeds the currently available pain genotype–phenotype association methods in several ways. Most importantly, the high-dimensionality of both pain phenotype and pain genotype is taken into account by the present ESOM/U-matrix-based cluster identification, CART rule-based phenotype extraction and ULR-based genotype association. Thus, the present methodology appears able to resolve the poor clinical utility of current genotyping information for pain management [10], by providing larger effect sizes of combined genetic as compared to single genetic markers and by preselecting subjects with similar pain phenotypes who are more likely to share pain-relevant genotypes. The key to successful approaches to personalized pain therapy seems to lie less in the identification of more and more factors but in the combination of the high-dimensional information by informatics methods. Provided accessibility to large pain phenotype and genotype data sets is possible, the present methodology may provide the basis for genetics-based personalized pain treatment. The approach thus satisfies the complexity of pain and exceeds by far the so far available pain genotype–phenotype association methods. This new method should be applied to larger data sets to ease the clinical utility of genotyping information for pain research and therapy. Due to its generality, this new method should also be applicable to other association tasks apart from pain.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This work has been supported by the “Landesoffensive zur Entwicklung wissenschaftlich-ökonomischer Exzellenz“: “LOEWE-Schwerpunkt: Anwendungsorientierte Arzneimittelforschung” and TRIP (JL). The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. The authors have declared that no competing interests exist. We thank Dr. A. Doehring for her contribution to the genotyping, Dr. K. Flühr and Dr. T.J. Neddermeyer for their contribution to the acquisition of the training data set (which had been used in previous publications with non-redundant data analyses: Neddermeyer TJ et al., Pain 2008; 138(2): 286–291, Flühr K et al., Clin J Pain 2009; 25(2): 128–131, Doehring A et al., PloS One 2011; 6(3): e17724 and Heimann et al., PLoS One 2013), and M. Schütz for his contribution to the acquisition of the test data set. We thank Prof. Michael Parnham for manuscript editing and Wolf von Waldow for help with Fig. 3. A preliminary version of this work has been presented at the Joint Annual Conference of the German Association for Pattern Recognition (DAGM) and the German Classification Society (GfKl).

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2013.07.010.


                     
                        
                           Supplementary table
                           
                              Genes and variants included in the genotyping data set as they were reported to increase or decrease pain (modified from [1]).
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

