@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Who is collaborating with whom? Part II. Application of the methods to male and to female networks

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           A theoretical approach of a mathematical model for 3-D computer graphs and corresponding methods for empirical testing are presented.


                        
                        
                           
                           Structures of preferences who is collaborating with whom are shown in 3-D versions.


                        
                        
                           
                           3-D visualization and animation of emerging collaboration patterns by the process of self-organization in collaboration networks are presented.


                        
                        
                           
                           These new methods are applied on male and female networks.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Social network analysis

Self-organization

Complementarities

Co-authorship

Gender

Mathematical model

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The theoretical approach of the mathematical model of Social Gestalts and the corresponding methods for the 3-D visualization and animation of collaboration networks are presented in Part I. The application of these new methods to male and female networks is shown in Part II. After regression analysis the visualized Social Gestalts are rather identically with the corresponding empirical distributions (R
                     2
                     >0.99). The structures of female co-authorship networks differ markedly from the structures of the male co-authorship networks. For female co-author pairs’ networks, accentuation of productivity dissimilarities of the pairs is becoming visible but on the contrary, for male co-author pairs’ networks, accentuation of productivity similarities of the pairs is expressed.
               
            

The theoretical approach of the mathematical model of Social Gestalts and the corresponding methods for the 3-D visualization and animation of collaboration networks are presented in Part I. The application of these new methods to male and to female networks as well as the results and suggestions for future research will be presented in the following sections.

There has been a rapid increase in studies of gender differences in science for many years (Dehdarirad, Villarroya, & Maite, 2014). In a pilot study (Kretschmer, Kundra, Beaver, & Kretschmer, 2012) we were able to compare different shapes of three Gestalts distinguishable by special different characteristic features (gender differences) of the three sets of people. The shapes of the two female overrepresented Gestalts differed markedly from the male overrepresented shape. We supposed it would be interesting to extend the analysis of these three-dimensional collaboration shapes further, to see whether a similar characterization holds, and whether we can find again differences between females and males in new collaboration shapes.

In conclusion – based on the above mentioned pilot study – we have applied this model to the data of the Turkish social sciences community from 2002 to 2007 (Ozel, Hildrun, & Theo, 2014) for comparison of all of the available gender patterns, beginning from the pilot study up to the present paper. Using these data sets the study presented in this paper is focused on gender differences in co-authorship networks.
                        Hypothesis 1
                        Proof of the theoretical model:
                              
                                 -
                                 The shapes of Social Gestalts obtained by regression analysis conform to the shapes obtained by empirical data.

The strength of visible similarities between two shapes are mirrored in the strength of similarities of their parameter values in the mathematical model. Vice versa, the differences between the parameter values of two shapes increase with the increasing dissimilarities of their shapes.

Supposing, special different characteristic features of two sets of people are given by female and male networks: different shapes of Social Gestalts can emerge.

Example:

The shape of a set of co-authors, overrepresented by male authors looks different from the shape of a set of co-authors, overrepresented by female authors.

Consequently, the parameter values of the male shapes are different from the parameter values of the female shapes.

We were inspired by the gender results of a previous study by Kretschmer et al. (2012) to test further whether there are special principles of gender differences in co-authorship network structures. In conclusion we have applied this model to the data of the Turkish social sciences community from 2002 to 2007 (Ozel et al., 2014) for comparison of the different 3-D patterns showing different shapes.

There are six bibliographies in total with more than 2000 authors per bibliography and i′(bin)=
                     j′(bin)≥8. Three of the bibliographies are already used in Kretschmer et al. (2012) and the three others are obtained from Turkish data.


                        
                           
                              -
                              Abbreviated as: PNAS
                              

Data obtained from the journal PNAS (1980–1998). Papers: 32,486; authors: 80,058. The data were provided by SCI and already used in (Kretschmer & Kretschmer, 2009).

Abbreviated as: PWQ
                              

Data obtained from the journal “Psychology of Women Quarterly” (1976–2011). Papers: 1146; authors: 2569.

Abbreviated as: Gender ALL 14
                              

A collection of data obtained from 14 journals of gender studies are based on a data sample of 8649 papers published during the years 1976–2011 written by 12,691 authors in all; 10,867 of them are females (≈0.856) and 1823 males (≈0.144), which makes ≈0.17 male-to-female ratio.


                        
                           
                              -
                              Abbreviated as: Turkish All
                              

Data obtained from the Social Sciences bibliography of national level publications, Turkey (2002–2007). Papers: 7835; authors: 6738. There are 2565 female authors (≈0.38) and 4173 male authors (≈0.62), which makes ≈1.6 male-to-female ratio. The data were provided by the Turkish Academic Network and Information Centre (ULAKBIM) and already used in the paper by Ozel et al. (2014).

Abbreviated as Turkish Female
                              

The co-author pairs (female with female) obtained from the 2565 female authors are studied.

Abbreviated as: Turkish Male
                              

The co-author pairs (male with male) obtained from the 4173 male authors are studied.


                        Table 1
                         is delivering a short overview regarding the gender overrepresentation in the six bibliographies.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The original data of the frequencies of co-author pairs depending on the productivities of the co-authors are presented in Section 3.1. The corresponding results of the log-linear regression analysis are shown in Section 3.2.

All of the theoreticcal 3-D patterns obtained from the results of the log-linear regression analysis are compared in Section 3.3 and the overlay of these theoretical 3-D patterns and the empirical distributions is presented in Section 3.4.

The original data of the frequencies of co-author pairs 
                           
                              
                                 N
                                 
                                    i
                                    j
                                 
                                 S
                              
                           
                         in dependence on i′(bin) and j′(bin) of the co-authors obtained from “Psychology of Women Quarterly” (PWQ) have been already shown in Part I: Section 3.4.2, Table 3. In Part II: Section 3.1, Table 2
                         is related to PNAS, and Table 3
                         to the collection of 14 journals in women's and gender studies (Gender ALL 14). Whereas the data obtained in total from Turkey are used in Table 4
                         (Turkish All), Turkish males’ data are separately used in Table 5
                         (Turkish Male), and the females’ data in Table 6
                         (Turkish Female).

The log–log–log presentation of data in the matrix of 
                           
                              log
                               
                              
                                 
                                    N
                                    ′
                                 
                                 
                                    i
                                    j
                                 
                              
                           
                         (cf. example in Part I, Section 3.4.2, Table 6: 
                           
                              log
                               
                              
                                 
                                    N
                                    ′
                                 
                                 
                                    i
                                    j
                                 
                              
                           
                         in dependence on log
                        i′ and log
                        j′) is used for obtaining the parameters α, β, γ, δ and the constant c by application of the log-linear regression analysis (Eq. 29). The results are presented in Tables 7 and 8
                        
                        .

According to Table 1, the six bibliographies are separated both in male and female overrepresented groups and numbered as follows:
                           
                              Male: 1-PNAS, 2-Turkish Male, 3-Turkish All

Female: 4-Turkish Female, 5-Gender ALL 14, 6-PWQ

These numbers are attached to the 3-D patterns of the corresponding bibliographies.


                        Fig. 1
                         shows the parameter values (black dots) depending on the six bibliographies. The numbers of the bibliographies are attached to the abscissa and the parameter values to the ordinate. The results are separately presented for each of the four parameters α, β, γ and δ.

Results:

All of the parameter values in Fig. 1 are higher for the three male bibliographies (numbers 1–3) than for the three female bibliographies (numbers 4–6).

Additionally, the differences between the values of the male bibliographies are smaller than the differences between the values of the female bibliographies.

We found a statistically significant correlation between the two variables X and Y:
                           
                              -
                              Variable X: “parameter values” (larger than the median or lower than the median)

Variable Y: “gender” (male overrepresented bibliographies or female overrepresented bibliographies)

The Pearson chi-square is highly significant (p
                        <0.001).

A contingency table has been created in Table 9
                         to display the data.

Conclusion:

Based on the statistically significant correlation between parameter values and gender (Pearson chi-square: p
                        <0.001) and the 3-D Gestalts produced by the four parameter values, the shapes of female co-authorship networks differ markedly from the shapes of the male co-authorship networks, cf. Sections 3.3 and 3.4.

Although in Fig. 1 the results are separately presented for each of the four parameters α, β, γ and δ, the relationships of the four parameters to each other determine the expressions of the complementarities (similarities/dissimilarities and edge effect, medium effect). The 3-D patterns are produced by the four parameters α, β, γ and δ.

We will illustrate these different 3-D shapes between males and females in Sections 3.3 and 3.4, Figs. 2–7
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        
                        .

Standardized theoretical patterns, explained in Part I: Section 3.4.4, Fig. 7, are used for comparison of patterns in Part II: Section 3.3, Figs. 2–4.

As mentioned above, the part of a pattern beyond the secondary diagonal is presented in dark color but the part below in light color, cf. Fig. 2, upper box and in Figs. 3 and 4.

In Fig. 2 (bottom box) the visibility of the pattern differences is reinforced by additional separation of these two parts of a pattern with a special distance between these parts.

Special results shown in Fig. 2:
                           
                              -
                              In Fig. 2 a clear difference can be observed between the three male shapes (numbers 1–3) and the three female shapes (numbers 4–6). These shape differences of the 3-D patterns are produced by the varying four parameter values (α, β, γ and δ). All of these values are higher for the three male bibliographies than for the three female bibliographies. The parameter values are presented in Section 3.2, Tables 7 and 8 and in Fig. 1.

Additionally, the differences between the male parameter values are smaller than the differences between the female parameter values. Thus, the male shapes are more similar to each other than the female shapes.

Depending on the changing parameter values from pattern 1 to pattern 6 (cf. Fig. 1), the size of the dark part of a pattern in proportion to the size of the light part is in Fig. 2 continuously increasing from pattern 1 to pattern 6. Vice versa, the size of the light part of a pattern in proportion to the size of the dark part is continuously decreasing from pattern 1 to pattern 6. The last phenomenon is especially visible on the bottom box, second row of Fig. 2, i.e. along the light patterns from left to right.

Special results shown in Fig. 3:
                           
                              -
                              As already shown in Fig. 2, the shapes of the male patterns are self-similar but different from the shapes of the other self-similar female patterns. The visibilities of this phenomenon are reinforced by a special kind of combination applied to the three male patterns and separately to the three female patterns. Two patterns emerge with fractal features, cf. Fig. 3. The male fractal-like pattern is placed on the left side and the female on the right. The shapes of these two fractal-like patterns are markedly different from each other.

Special results shown in Fig. 4:
                           
                              -
                              Comparison of differences between two shapes each: the shape of the male 3-D pattern (1-PNAS) is looking like a mirror image of the female 3-D pattern (6-PWQ), cf. the two uppermost patterns. The difference between these two shapes is the highest in relation to all possible pairs of shapes.

For better comparison of differences between two shapes the symmetrical patterns are divided into left and right parts. Given the left part of a special pattern this part will be combined with the right part of another pattern:
                                    
                                       •
                                       On the left side of Fig. 4, the left part of (1-PNAS) is combined in succession with the right parts of the other five patterns, downwards from (2-Turkish Male), (3-Turkish All), (4-Turkish Female), (5-Gender ALL 14) to (6-PWQ). The similarities between the left and the right parts of a pattern decrease from up to down.

On the right side of Fig. 3 the left part of (6-PWQ) is combined in succession with the right parts of the other five patterns, downwards from (5-Gender ALL 14), (4-Turkish Female), (3-Turkish All), (2-Turkish Male) to (1-PNAS). The similarities between the left and the right parts of a pattern decrease from up to down.

At the bottom of Fig. 4 the two mirror-image combinations of the parts from (1-PNAS) and (6-PWQ) present the highest dissimilarities between two of the 3-D patterns.

The overlay of the empirical distribution and the theoretical pattern into a single frame was explained in Part I: Section 3.4.3 in combination with Fig. 6 from Section 3.4.2. The goodness-of-fit is highest in the case where the empirical values (dots) are directly placed on the points where two of the theoretical lines intersect. But in the case the distance between the intersection points and the dots increases, the goodness-of-fit decreases.

For visual checking from various points of view we selected for each of the six Gestalts the clockwise rotation twice in succession of the leftmost pattern, cf. Figs. 5 and 6. This selection of shapes is a special part of the manifold pattern shapes visible in the space from all possible points of view.

The empirical values in all of the shapes in Figs. 5 and 6 are rather directly placed on the points of a shape obtained from the theoretical Gestalt. The corresponding results of the regression analysis are presented in Tables 7 and 8. The squared multiple R is varying from R
                        2
                        =0.992 up to R
                        2
                        =0.998.

In Fig. 5 the patterns of the three male bibliographies are arranged from up to down according to their numbers (1–3). Starting bibliography by bibliography from the upmost bibliography (1-PNAS) toward the bottom bibliography (3-Turkish ALL), continuous changes especially visible in the three patterns in the middle can be observed. Especially the pattern of the upmost bibliography (1-PNAS) “Birds of a feather flock together” is more likely to be in the foreground than in the pattern of the bottom bibliography (3-Turkish ALL).

In Fig. 6 the patterns of the three female bibliographies are arranged from up to down according to their numbers (4–6). Starting bibliography by bibliography from the upmost bibliography (4-Turkish Female) toward the bottom bibliography (6-PWQ), continuous changes especially visible in the three patterns in the middle can be observed. Especially the pattern of the bottom bibliography (6-PWQ) “Opposites attract” is more likely to be in the foreground than in the pattern of the upmost bibliography (4-Turkish Female).

Complementary tendencies mirrored in male overrepresented (1-PNAS) and female overrepresented (6-PWQ) shapes are the striking result of this paper, presented in Figs. 4–6. There are marked differences between all of the shapes of the two bibliographies. Whereas the male shapes are convex the female shapes approach concave shapes.

However the most different shapes delivered by (1-PNAS) and (6-PWQ) are separately presented in Figs. 5 and 6. Thus, for reinforcing visibility Fig. 7 shows both together on the upper box: the rotated shapes of 6-PWQ are placed on the first row and the rotated shapes of 1-PNAS on the second.

The female and male shapes can be compared on the bottom box of Fig. 7 as follows: the three mixed theoretical female patterns are presented on the first row and the three mixed theoretical male patterns on the second.

Procedure of mixing: the overlay of the three female (4–6) theoretical patterns (lines) into a single frame produces the mixed theoretical female pattern. The overlay of the three male (1–3) theoretical patterns (lines) into a single frame produces the mixed theoretical male pattern.

Result:

Based on the statistically significant correlation between parameter values and gender, the rotated female shapes are different from the rotated male shapes. Additionally, there are some similarities between the corresponding shapes on the upper and the bottom boxes.

In accordance with our expectations we have produced the following three main results:
                        
                           1.
                           We have shown Social Gestalts are well-ordered three-dimensional graphs, totally rotatable and their shapes are visible in space from many possible points of view (for example, Part I: Section 3.4.2, Fig. 6 and Part II: Section 3.4, Figs. 5–7)

Verification of the Hypothesis 1, Proof of the theoretical model:

The shapes of Social Gestalts obtained by regression analysis conform to the shapes obtained by empirical data. The empirical values in all of the shapes in Part II: Section 3.4, Figs. 5 and 6 are rather directly placed on the points of a shape obtained from the theoretical Gestalt. The corresponding results of the regression analysis are presented in Part II: Section 3.2, Tables 7 and 8. The squared multiple R varies from R
                              2
                              =0.994 up to R
                              2
                              =0.998.

The strength of visible similarities between two shapes is mirrored in the strength of similarities of their parameter values of the mathematical model. Vice versa, the differences between the parameter values of two shapes increase with the increasing dissimilarities of their shapes. In Part II: Section 3.2, Fig. 1 is showing the parameter values (α, β, γ and δ) in dependence on the six bibliographies. All of the parameter values are higher for the three male bibliographies (numbers 1–3) than for the three female bibliographies (numbers 4–6). The Pearson chi-square is highly significant (p
                              <0.001).

Result: selecting one female and one male shape, the dissimilarity between these two shapes has higher probability than selecting either two male or two female shapes.

Verification of the Hypothesis 2:

Supposing, special different characteristic features of two sets of people are given by female and male networks: different shapes of Social Gestalts can emerge.

Based on the statistical significant correlation between parameter values and gender (Pearson chi-square: p
                              <0.001) the shapes of female co-authorship networks differ markedly from the shapes of the male co-authorship networks (for example, Part II: Section 3.3, Figs. 2–4) up to two totally complementary shapes (1-PNAS) and (6-PWQ), cf. Part II: Section 3.4, Fig. 7. One of these differences can be explained as follows: for female co-author pairs’ networks, accentuation of productivity dissimilarities of the pairs are becoming visible in the shapes but on the contrary, for male co-author pairs’ networks, accentuation of productivity similarities of the pairs is expressed.

Limitations:

The application of the new methods (presented in Part I) to male and to female networks is the first research in this field. The statistical significant correlation between parameter values and gender are based on six co-authorship networks only under the special condition: more than 2000 authors per bibliography and i′(bin)=
                              j′(bin)≥8.

In other words, at present it is a successful pilot study. Therefore, some suggestions for future studies are given:

Some suggestions for future studies
                                 
                                    -
                                    As result of this study we suspect male and female scientists show mostly different collaboration behavior. Maybe future extensive studies will explain this difference. It would be interesting to extend the analysis of these three-dimensional collaboration patterns further, to find out, what it might imply about the shapes of authorship in different scientific fields or what those patterns might imply about the role of collaboration in general.

Furthermore, in other investigations we can extend these studies based on gender as a characteristic feature of the sets of people to other characteristic features as for example age or education.

A study could be focused on social network analysis (SNA) and special structure formation processes of collaboration patterns in scientific networks. Three-dimensional visualization can be used to show the growth and structural changes over time of the 3-D shapes in several journals.

Self-organization occurs in a variety of complex systems in nature and social networks. This process of self-organization can be found also in co-authorship networks. The result of self-organization in social systems is an emergent pattern of behavior at the global level arising at the lower level from special rules of behavior that are followed by individuals but does not involve any central coordination or any reference to the global pattern. In a future study we try to explain that the emerging 3-D patterns (Social Gestalts) at the global level arise at the lower level from special rules of behavior that are followed by individuals who depend on the intensity of interpersonal attraction as expressed in this paper by the mathematical model (intensity function of interpersonal attraction) and its application.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

Many thanks to the high energy of the anonymous reviewers and to the excellent Editor-in-Chief, Leo Egghe.

Some parts of Figs. 4–6 in Part II and some parts of the theoretical approach of the mathematical model of Social Gestalts (Part I) are reproduced from Kretschmer et al. (2012) with permission of the publisher.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

