@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#A content analysis of client e-mails in guided internet-based cognitive behavior therapy for depression

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           A content analysis of client e-mails was conducted within the setting of a guided internet-based cognitive behavior therapy program for depression.


                        
                        
                           
                           In a total of 29 patients almost 4000 meaning units were identified and coded.


                        
                        
                           
                           Significant correlations were found between outcome and statements in the two categories “observing positive consequences” and “alliance”.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Content analysis

Client e-mails

Guided internet-based treatment

Cognitive behavior therapy

Depression

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The relationship between what a client writes when communicating with an online therapist and treatment outcome in internet-based cognitive behavior therapy (ICBT) is largely unknown. The aim of this study was to address if written correspondence from the client to the therapist correlates with outcome and treatment completion. A total of 29 participants with mild to moderate depression were included from an ongoing randomized controlled trial targeting depression. Content analysis involving ten categories was performed on all emails and module responses sent by the participants to their internet therapist. A total of 3756 meaning units were identified and coded. Significant positive correlations were found between change in depression and statements in the two categories “observing positive consequences” (r
                     =.49) and “alliance” (r
                     =.42). Treatment module completion correlated with seven categories. The result suggests that text dealing with alliance and observing positive consequences can be used as indicators of how the treatment is progressing. This study suggests that written correspondence from an online client can be divided into ten categories and the frequency of those can be used by internet therapists to individualize treatment and perhaps make ICBT more effective.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Internet-based cognitive behavior therapy (ICBT) has been the topic for a large number of controlled trials, and a recent systematic review and meta-analysis of internet-based vs. face-to-face cognitive behavior therapy for psychiatric and somatic disorders concluded that the overall results indicated equivalence (Hedman et al., 2012). Given the emerging evidence it is likely that ICBT will be a part of regular services in the future (Carlbring and Andersson, 2006), either as a complement or as an alternative for suitable patients. Moreover, new findings indicate that side-effects of ICBT are rare (Boettcher et al., 2014), even if most research and implementations have been on mild to moderate conditions (Andersson, in press). However, in contrast to the knowledge about the effects of ICBT much less is known regarding mechanisms of change (Andersson et al., 2009). For example, the relationship between online client behaviors, such as what a client writes when communicating with an online therapist, and change in symptoms after treatment is something that has been sparsely investigated in ICBT research (Sanchez-Ortiz et al., 2011), and there is very little written about client behaviors, even if there are a few studies on therapist behaviors in the form of analyses of therapist e-mail correspondence with their clients (Paxling et al., 2013).

There are two major forms of internet-based self-help interventions; self-guided (Titov et al., 2014) and clinician-guided (Andersson et al., 2008). In the latter an online therapist should preferably be able to continuously assess a client's behavior with regard to the therapeutic process and find methods of optimally adapting the treatment and the text-based responses. This is of importance as research indicates that therapist support tends to lead to better outcomes and fewer dropout from treatment (Andersson et al., 2013a).

One way of acquiring a closer familiarity with the role the client plays in the therapeutic process on the internet is to examine the encrypted e-mails clients send to their therapists in guided treatments (Andersson et al., 2013b). Indeed, the therapeutic process has been shown to manifest itself in both clients' speech in the context of face-to-face treatment (Crowe et al., 2012) and in text in internet therapy when therapist and client correspondence is analyzed (Van der Zanden et al., 2014; Dirkse et al., 2015). In a study on therapist behavior in ICBT for GAD, Paxling and coworkers (2013) analyzed close to 500 e-mails from three online therapists providing support to patients with generalized anxiety disorder. Through content analysis of the written correspondence, eight therapist behaviors were derived: deadline flexibility, task reinforcement, alliance bolstering, task prompting, psychoeducation, self-disclosure, self-efficacy shaping, and empathetic utterances. The results showed that task reinforcement, task prompting, self-efficacy shaping and empathetic utterances were correlated with module completion, while deadline flexibility was negatively associated with outcome. In addition, task reinforcement positively correlated with changes on the main outcome measure. Hence, while internet interventions generally have been found to be an effective way to disseminate psychological treatment, little is known about what the therapists actually do when he or she provides support. However, emerging results suggest that therapist behaviors have an impact on change in symptoms and module completion. Taking the client perspective, Van der Zanden and coworkers (2014) examined chat session transcripts of 67 course completers in an online intervention for young adults with depressive symptoms. They wanted to investigate whether word use changes predicted treatment outcome and adherence. Indeed, depression improvement was predicted by a patient increasing the use of discrepancy words (e.g. should) during treatment. In addition, adherence was predicted by mainly using more words at application.

Finally, alongside a naturalistic study Dirkse et al. (2015) examined messages sent to therapists during the course of an internet-based treatment for generalized anxiety disorder. Using linguistic analysis it was found that patients' use of negative emotion, anxiety, causation, and insight words was reduced over the course of treatment, while past tense words increased. In addition, negative emotional words significantly covaried with symptoms over the course of treatment.

While more expensive in the short term (Titov et al., 2009) giving the patients in internet-based therapy some form of support has been found to be an important factor in achieving a change in symptoms (Spek et al., 2007). However, it is not only the mere existence or absence of therapist support that impacts treatment outcome, but rather the frequency, intensity, duration and the quality of support (Palmqvist et al., 2007). Perhaps one of the most important aspects of support is the potential of forming a bond between the patient and the therapist. This can be assessed by the Working Alliance Inventory (WAI; Horvath and Greenberg, 1989). For example, Berger et al. (2014) have shown that therapeutic alliance can be established through the Internet. However, the results are inconclusive. For example, Bergman Nordgren et al. (2013) found that WAI measured at week 3 into the internet-based treatment correlated significantly (r
                     =−.47) with the residual gain scores on the primary outcome measure. The same was found by Wagner and coworkers in posttraumatic stress symptoms (Wagner et al., 2012). In contrast, Andersson et al. (2012) only found small and not statistically significant correlations between the WAI and residualized change scores in three samples (depression, GAD and social anxiety disorder). This contradicts the findings of research on alliance in face-to-face treatments, in which alliance has been found to account for a small but robust effect on outcome (Horvath et al., 2011). Perhaps WAI is a suboptimal measure since new ways of studying the therapeutic relationship on the internet have been proposed (Knaevelsrud and Maercker, 2007; Richards and Richardson, 2012). One possibility is focusing on alliance ruptures (Hunter et al., 2014), which might be even more likely to occur in internet treatments since there is less room to quickly be responsive to a client's emotional needs. Not taking the emotional needs into consideration has been found to perpetuate ruptures (Cash et al., 2013).

An alliance rupture is an event that takes place between a therapist and client in the form of experienced tension or a rupture in the relationship (Ngai et al., in press). One way of defining alliance rupture is based on the categories of “avoidance” and “confrontational” alliance ruptures. In the avoidance form, the client tends to adopt an attitude of withdrawal from the therapy, and the alliance rupture is expressed indirectly or in a way that is not visible to the therapist. In a confrontational rupture, the patient expressly manifests negative feelings directed to the treatment or the therapist (Safran and Muran, 2000). The existence of unresolved alliance ruptures has been shown to adversely affect expected or actual treatment outcome in face-to-face treatment (Westra et al., 2011; McLaughlin et al., 2014, 2014). However, if alliance ruptures are present in ICBT and if they influence outcome is still an open question. Hence, one of the aims of this study is to examine the evidence of alliance and alliance ruptures in written correspondence and the relationship to improvements in depression. This is done by examining the patients' written communication and the association with treatment outcome and the number of treatment modules completed, using content analysis.

@&#METHOD@&#

The participants in this study came from the first inclusion wave of a randomized controlled trial that is currently still enrolling participants. As described in the study protocol (Carlbring et al., 2013) each participant was included by means of a screening process consisting of internet-based questionnaires containing self-assessment of depression and anxiety, as well as a telephone interview. In order to be included, the participant had to meet the criteria for current major depressive episode based on DSM-IV-TR (American Psychiatric Association, 2000) with or without dysthymia. Participants were randomized to a control group or treatment mainly focused on either behavioral activation or physical exercise. Exclusion was ongoing psychological treatment, somatic problems known to cause depression, ongoing treatment with certain medication known to bring about depression, sub-clinical symptoms of depression, main problem other than depression (e.g., bipolar disorder, anxiety disorders, substance use disorders or hypomania) and/or a high risk of suicide. The intervention was administered and monitored via an encrypted online interface. Within this system the participant was introduced to a variety of behavior change strategies stemming from behavioral activation, a form of Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT). These strategies include mapping of current behavior, finding reinforcing activities and creating a difficulty-ranked hierarchy of these activities, activity scheduling and structuring, self-monitoring of mood and activity, and so on. Each participant received approximately 15min of therapist support per week in the form of text messages. The intervention ran for 12weeks, divided into 8 standard weekly modules and four additional ones if desired. The study was carried out according to the guidelines for executing and reporting internet intervention research (Proudfoot et al., 2011). In addition, the study was approved by the Ethical Review Board and the treatments were conducted in compliance with the Swedish Personal Data Act (SFS: 1998:204), and the participants signed a written consent form allowing their personal data to be processed in a database, before they began treatment. Every name of a client and/or therapist was removed before the data was stored outside of the treatment platform, and was identified through the individual code they were assigned within the framework of the project.

The first 29 participants that were randomized to the treatment arm with a focus on behavioral activation were included in the present study provided that they completed more than one treatment module and also responded to the post-assessment questionnaires. In total 8 of 29 participants finished all the modules within the intended 12-week treatment period (mean number was 5.45 modules of the eight). Demographic data for the participants in this study are presented in Table 1
                        .

As described in the study protocol (Carlbring et al., 2013; trial registration: NCT01619930) the treatment was a type of internet therapy known as guided self-help, and consisted of a set of self-help materials with a strong focus on behavioral activation that were administered to the participant on a weekly basis during the course of twelve weeks. The treatment consisted of eight treatment modules with text and exercises, as well as the opportunity to do additional exercises if all the modules had been completed by the stipulated deadline. All modules contained homework assignments for the participants, which consisted of questions on the psychoeducational sections and tasks for the participant to complete, such as exposure exercises and activity records. The questions were of essay type and intended to encourage learning and to enable the therapists to assess whether the participants had assimilated the material, and finished their homework. In addition, each module included questions about the progress and the client's thoughts and feelings about the different exercises within each treatment module. Written feedback was given within 24–48h of the participants sending their answers via encrypted e-mail. On the basis of these messages, an assessment was made by the therapist whether the participant was ready to continue, if so, the next module was made available. If not, the participant received instructions on what needed to be completed before proceeding to the next step. Typically, the feedback included validation, normalization, encouragement, clarifications, advice and reflections. Master students (n=8) in the end of their 5-year psychologist training served as internet therapists for the participants. According to the study specific internal guidelines, these internet therapists were to devote 15min per participant and week to carrying on e-mail correspondence with their participants. Typically, one message was exchanged once a week. All the internet therapists had access to clinical guidance from a licensed psychologist and licensed psychotherapist, once a week.

Assessment of depression before and after therapy was measured by the Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9; Kroenke et al., 2001). The PHQ-9 is a self-assessment instrument with nine items that is intended to measure depression based on the DSM-IV criteria, and is derived from the Primary Care Evaluation of Mental Disorders (PRIME-MD) interview (Kroenke et al., 2001). The instrument has proven to be equivalent to longer clinician-administered instruments in a number of different therapeutic areas and cultural settings (Gilbody et al., 2007). The PHQ-9 has demonstrated good psychometric properties when administered via the internet (Titov et al., 2011).

Content analysis (Krippendorff, 1980) was used in this study to code client behaviors in encrypted e-mail and module responses, and based on that, to create categories. The comprehensive guide for using qualitative content analysis by Krippendorff (2013) was used. The procedure used for coding and categorizing was based on Schilling's (2006) method of using content analysis to create a quantitative description of the content of the text. In order to create categories for the content analysis, seven complete treatments were randomly selected for coding. Both e-mails from participants directed to the therapist, as well as what they wrote on interactive web-pages, which follows every chapter, were included in the coding. The e-mails from the therapist were also read, in order to gain a contextual understanding of the client texts and how they should be coded. Two of the authors (NS & MS) first jointly coded texts from one patient's therapy and discussed how they should be coded. They then separately coded the texts of three patients each. In order to create categories based on the codes, a method that was, in part, deductive, and, in part, inductive, was used. The categories developed inductively were selected in order to investigate where there was something in the material that was unique for internet interventions, and which should not become part of any theory. The deductive categories were developed based on behavioral (Dimidjian et al., 2011) and cognitive theory (Beck, 2008), as well as taken from psychotherapeutic research supported by codes found in the material.

Both raters, after coding the treatments, designed the categories in cooperation with each other, and checked how well the codes fit each category, and how close to the material was the theory on which the categories were based. The categories were also discussed with two experts in the field (the third and fifth authors) for their comments and theoretical suggestions. Based on the codes for the seven treatments, ten categories were created, eight of which had theoretical support (deductively), and two were based only on the material (inductively). For each category, a formal definition and a list of examples were created in order to make the categories clear and easily distinguishable. In order to check these ten categories, an additional three randomly selected treatment records were categorized using the preliminary coding template. This test-categorization was done separately by both the authors in order to enable them to ascertain the degree of agreement between their respective categorizations. In connection with the test-categorization, the categories were reformulated to make them even clearer and more easily distinguishable. The agreement between the two authors with all the data from 7 full double-coded treatments with respect to the final definitions of the ten categories was tested using Cohen's Kappa, which showed K=0.69 (70% agreement). After this, the categories were applied to 29 anonymized treatments. Three of these 29 were from the original seven. The four participants that were not included had gotten another variant of the treatment and were hence deemed not-representative since we wanted to focus on a specific treatment. In other words, only participants from treatment condition 3 (and not 4) were included. However, originally both groups 3 and 4 were planned to be included, but due to time constraints only group 3 was included. The two raters categorized the first 23 treatments separately, and the last six jointly. The reason for coding the last 6 jointly was because the agreement between the raters had become very high and in order to save time any disagreement was immediately discussed until a consensus was reached. In those cases where the authors disagreed on the categorization among the first 23 treatments, they reached a consensus through discussion. As both the raters had worked as internet therapists in the current study, it sometimes happened that they categorized treatments for which they were responsible.

First, we concluded that no single individual was an outlier which was defined as 3 or more standard deviations away from the group mean. In order to analyze whether the difference in improvement of symptoms, measured with the use of PHQ-9, correlated significantly (p<.05) with the incidence of any of the ten behavior categories, we used Spearman's rho.

@&#RESULTS@&#

A content analysis was performed, based on ten categories of behavior, which are defined in Table 2
                        . A total of 3756 meaning units, typically consisting of 1–3 sentences, were identified, and of these, 1755 (46.7%) were marked as belonging to one of the ten categories. The rest of the meaning units were considered as not belonging to any of the behavior categories. Sentences that were not coded were for example statements related to life events that were not regarded as ruminative nor related to the treatment (“I have a son, a cat and I work at a bank.”).

Correlations between written client statements, treatment outcome and the number of modules completed are described in Table 3
                        . Two behavior categories showed a positive correlation (Spearman's Rho) to treatment outcome, as measured by the PHQ-9 pre- to post-change scores. These were alliance (moderate level, p<.05) and observes positive consequences (high level, p<.01). This means that participants who often express alliance behavior or write that they observe positive consequences, self-assess a positive change in depression symptoms. The number of completed modules showed a strong positive correlation with the following categories: alliance, observes positive consequences, tries alternative behavior, avoidance of treatment and chooses alternative behavior. Two categories showed a moderate positive correlation with the number of modules completed. These were identifies patterns and problem behaviors and maladaptive repetitive thinking.

A correlation matrix between the various categories is presented in Table 4
                        . Alliance correlated with four other categories on a moderate to high level. These were: observes positive consequences, maladaptive repetitive thinking, tries alternative behavior and chooses alternative behavior. Identifies patterns and problem behaviors correlated with confrontational alliance rupture on a moderate level. Observes positive consequences correlated with four other categories on a moderate to high level. These were maladaptive repetitive thinking, tries alternative behavior, avoidance of treatment and chooses alternative behavior. Maladaptive repetitive thinking correlated with tries alternative behavior on a moderate level. Tries alternative behavior correlated with avoidance of treatment and chooses alternative behavior, both on a high level. Avoidance of treatment correlated with chooses alternative behavior on a high level.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The purpose of this study was to examine e-mails and determine which client behaviors in the context of guided ICBT depression correlate with treatment outcome and the number of treatment modules completed. The results showed that statements observing positive consequences of alternative behaviors and expressions of alliance demonstrated a positive correlation with self-assessed changes in symptoms. A significant positive correlation was found between modules completed and text about identifying patterns and problem behaviors, choosing to engage in alternative behaviors, test alternative behaviors, and observing positive consequences, as well as expressions of alliance. Contrary to what might be expected, utterances that had been categorized as maladaptive repetitive thinking, and avoidance, respectively, showed a significant positive correlation with the number of treatment modules completed.

The significant positive correlation between changes in symptoms and observing positive consequences accords with the theory of mechanisms of change in behavioral activation (Dimidjian et al., 2011),which means that the depressive spiral can be broken by the person gaining increased access to positive reinforcement. Statements about having observed positive consequences of alternative behaviors can be an indication that the participants had gained access to positive reinforcement, which can explain the covariation with changes in symptoms.

The fact that the category “observing positive consequences” correlated with changes in symptoms, but the category “trying alternative behavior” did not, indicates that it is important in a clinical setting to evaluate the alternative behaviors within the theoretical framework of treatment. According to Hopko et al. (2011), homework can have been completed but do not necessarily give rise to positive consequences. Hence, the client's success becomes based on homework assignments being completed, but also on whether these assignments lead to an experience of them being the source of positive consequences. On a related note a qualitative study on guided ICBT for depression showed that some clients tended to be more of readers of the treatment texts and did not engage fully in implementing the advice given in the treatment (Bendelin et al., 2011).

Statements that contain alliance utterances were correlated with positive changes in symptoms. The results suggest that an alliance indeed can be created within an internet-based intervention, and can, in turn, be of significance for the treatment. (Johansson and Andersson, 2012). Unlike face-to-face treatment where the alliance has shown itself to be a fairly consistent factor contributing to improvement (Horvath et al., 2011), the role of the alliance is less certain in guided ICBT (Sucala et al., 2012), even if high ratings usually are observed (Andersson et al., 2012). One explanation why, despite strong alliance assessments, there is no clearer correlation between alliance and changes in symptoms in the case of iCBT for depression can be that alliance is measured using a self-assessment questionnaire designed for face-to-face treatment. Most of the studies that have measured alliance within the framework of iCBT have used the short version of the Working Alliance Inventory self-assessment questionnaire (WAI; Horvath and Greenberg, 1989) (Andersson et al., 2012; Knaevelsrud and Maercker, 2007; Preschl et al., 2011; 
                     Richards et al., 2012). Perhaps the wording of the WAI is too therapist-centered, and thus does not fit in as well with how alliance is formed on the internet. Richards and Richardson (2012) are of the opinion that participants experience alliance in relation to all aspects of the treatment, and not only in relation to the therapist. Perhaps participants experience alliance in terms of esthetic design and user-friendliness in addition to the contact with the therapist and the texts. The exercises in the treatment modules and how they are presented can thus be assumed to be important components in an internet-based alliance. New ways to measure alliance on the internet are in demand (Knaevelsrud and Maercker, 2007; Richards and Richardson, 2012), and the results of this study indicate that textual analysis can be an appropriate way to measure alliance in internet-based therapy. Developing assessment scales specifically designed to measure alliance for iCBT can also be important, with possibly less focus on direct interaction with the therapist.

The results regarding correlations with completed modules showed that seven behavior categories correlated to the number of modules completed. The highest level of correlations occurs in statements about having observed positive consequences and trying alternative behaviors. This can indicate that those who have noted positive consequences of having tried an alternative behavior are more motivated to continue the treatment. Positive reinforcement has been shown to be a powerful motivating factor in continuing with alternative behavior, and to reduce negative reinforcement in one's surroundings (Payne and Dozier, 2013). The opposite might also be true. The more modules that a participant has completed, the more that participant gains an opportunity to experience more positive consequences of the behavior, thus indicating a gradually increasing treatment effect.

The positive correlation between alliance texts and the number of modules completed may possibly be explained by the fact that participants that express a great deal of alliance behavior also experience a more positive relationship to the therapist and to the treatment, and therefore become more motivated to complete it. An alternative explanation is that alliance increases the longer a person continues treatment. This result accords with previous research (Meier et al., 2006, 2006; Hansen et al., 1992), which has shown that early alliance can predict treatment compliance, and counteract the risk of quitting. Moreover, Nordgren et al. (2013) found that alliance ratings increased over the course of therapy.

The unexpected positive correlation between statements on avoidance of treatment, as well as texts that express maladaptive repetitive thinking, on one hand, and the number of modules completed, on the other, may be due to these behaviors reflecting compliance and lack of time rather than a way to indicate actual avoidance of the treatment. A participant who tells the therapist that he or she has been absent may actually be explaining the reasons for the absence. In this way, this behavior may show that the participant, after the absence, wishes to continue with the treatment. Describing one's problems in way that is categorized as maladaptive repetitive thinking may be intended to give the therapist an understanding for one's problems, rather than be evidence of rumination or anxiety with regard to one's symptoms.

The correlation design of this study makes it impossible to express an opinion as to causal connection, and there can be other factors that mediate the outcome. The correlational design also opens the way for alternative explanations of the covariation between the incidence of behavior categories and the number of modules completed. It may be, for example, that the number of modules is what accounts for the increase of the behavior, as the participant is given greater latitude to write as he or she completes more of the treatment.

This study has a number of additional weaknesses that should be highlighted. Alliance, Confrontational alliance rupture and Identifies patterns and problem behaviors categories had relatively broad definitions, and were meant to capture a greater number of different behaviors with similar meaning. One problem with having broad categories is that this increases the risk that some specific parts of these categories can have a greater joint effect with outcome than others, and thereby be overshadowed by other parts of the category in question. In addition, while there is no question that statements such as “Thank you for your reflection!” should be coded as alliance, one could question other statements. For example, “I believe that this exercise can be useful” could be a sign of alliance, especially in the context of other alliance related utterances, but it could also be argued that it might be better coded in a separate category such as “positive expectation”. As this is one of the first studies in this area, keeping the design explorative is a strength. The fact that some categories that were expected to have a correlation to changes in symptoms did not have one, and that there were certain unexpected intercorrelations raise the question of the conceptual validity of the categories, with regard, for example, to the Avoidance of treatment category, which correlated with Alliance. Since only 47% of the total content was coded it remains unclear whether there are additional categories that could have been created that would be better related to improved outcome. A related topic is that of Schilling (2006) who underlines that it is not only the presence, but also the absence of statements that can yield interesting results. The fact that a participant speaks about having missed things, at first blush, resembles avoidance, but, actually, the intent may well be to maintain the relationship with the therapist. The absence of client writing of missing things would possibly indicate an alliance rupture to a higher degree than the opposite in the case of a client missing for example homework assignments. This would indicate that a latent categorization should be able to be used in future studies of client behaviors in internet therapy. A majority of the e-mails by participants were first coded separately, and subsequently coded by two raters. Six treatments, however, were coded jointly by both the raters in a direct consensus. This may have led to a possible worsening of the quality of the assessments, as the authors may have affected each other more than in the case of the participants where the categorization was first done separately. Both the authors also coded a few treatments for which they served as internet-therapists. This could possibly affect the categorization in that the author who was responsible for the treatments might, for example, be less apt to code them as for alliance rupture and more apt to code his or her own treatments as alliance. In addition, there is always a danger that a study of this kind could reproduce theory and anticipations of the authors and not truly test their own epistemological and theoretical position.

In summary, this study shows that client behaviors, at least within an internet-based guided behavior activation treatment program, are correlated with changes in symptoms, and that several client behaviors correlate with the number of treatment modules completed. The question of which client behaviors have a correlation to changes in symptoms in psychotherapy is under-researched (Keijsers et al., 2000), and this is probably the first study that examines client behaviors in ICBT, using content analysis. It can therefore serve as a first step in gaining an understanding of how both clients communicate with their therapists in guided ICBT and how this communication co-varies with how they fare in treatment. The fact that the categories of alliance and observes positive consequences correlated positively with changes in symptoms indicates that there are textually-expressed client behaviors in psychological treatment via the internet that can serve as indicators of more or less successful treatment. This can be used as valuable information for internet therapists in the treatment of depression. It can be beneficial for future research to also examine behaviors at various stages of the treatment in order to ascertain whether, for example, the text at the beginning, middle and end co-vary with changes in symptoms or compliance.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

