@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Group versus Internet-based cognitive-behavioral therapy for procrastination: Study protocol for a randomized controlled trial

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Two treatment formats for procrastination are being compared.


                        
                        
                           
                           The treatments specifically target students suffering from procrastination.


                        
                        
                           
                           This is the first clinical trial for procrastination using clinical interviews.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Procrastination

Cognitive-behavioral therapy

Internet interventions

Group intervention

Students

Randomized controlled trial

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Procrastination is defined as a voluntarily delay of an intended course of action despite expecting to be worse-off for the delay, and is considered a persistent behavior pattern that can result in major psychological suffering. About one-fifth of the adult population and half of the student population are presumed having substantial difficulties due to recurrent procrastination in their everyday lives. However, chronic and severe procrastinators seldom receive adequate care due to preconceptions and the lack of understanding regarding procrastination and the treatment interventions that are assumed beneficial. Cognitive-behavioral therapy is often deemed a treatment of choice, although the evidence supporting its use is scarce, and only one randomized controlled trial has been performed. The primary aim of the proposed study is therefore to test the efficacy of cognitive-behavioral therapy delivered as either a group intervention or via the Internet. Participants will consist of students recruited through the Student Health Centre at Karolinska Institutet. A randomized controlled trial with a sample size of 100 participants divided into blocks of thirty will be used, comparing an eight-week Internet-based cognitive-behavioral therapy intervention, and an eight-week group cognitive-behavioral therapy based intervention. It is believed that the proposed study will result in two important findings. First, different treatment interventions in cognitive-behavioral therapy are assumed to be helpful for people suffering from problems caused by procrastination. Second, both an Internet-based cognitive-behavioral therapy intervention and a group intervention are presumed suitable for administering treatment for procrastination, which is considered important as the availability of adequate care is limited, particularly among students. The proposed study will increase the knowledge regarding the efficacy of different treatments of procrastination, as well as enhance the overall comprehension of the difficulties related to dilatory behavior.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Postponing tasks and assignments that need to be performed is a common phenomenon in everyday life. Albeit sometimes perceived as stressful, most people are able to complete their commitments in due time without having to experience any major psychological suffering. However, for some individuals, deferring what needs to be done can become a persistent behavior pattern that results in a number of negative consequences (Stead et al., 2010). The given definition for procrastination, “to voluntarily delay an intended course of action despite expecting to be worse-off for the delay” (Steel, 2007), involves the decision to adjourn the initiation or completion of a given task or commitment until the last minute, after the predetermined deadline has occurred, or indefinitely (Dryden, 2000). Procrastination shares much in common with difficulties prioritizing, being self-assertive, as well as having perfectionistic standards, but requires an active choice between competing activities in which one is being avoided in favor of the other (Steel, 2007). Evidence suggests that chronic and severe procrastination is associated with decreased well-being, poorer mental health, and fewer mental health-seeking behaviors (Sirios, 2004, 2007). Stress, worry, and feelings of guilt are particularly evident among individuals that procrastinate recurrently (Pychyl et al., 2000; Steel, 2007). Deferring commitments on a regular basis is also related to treatment delay and fewer wellness behaviors in general, resulting in the exacerbation of physical illness (Sirios et al., 2003). In addition, procrastination is never a helpful behavior in terms of performance, affecting the quality of tasks and assignments and having a negative impact on school and work (Tice and Baumeister, 1997; Steel, 2007; van Eerde, 2003).

According to self-report measures, procrastination is highly prevalent in both the adult and the student population. Approximately one-fifth of all people perceive themselves as engaging in dilatory behavior to the extent that it can result in personal distress (Harriott and Ferrari, 1996). However, the prevalence among students is assumed to be much higher, with almost half of the respondents experiencing great difficulties by habitually postponing their day to day commitments (Day et al., 2000). For students, procrastination may be especially troublesome, as it can interfere with the ability to perform tasks and assignments related to their curricula, putting both coursework and the opportunity to attain a university degree at risk (Ferrari and Scher, 2000). Furthermore, procrastination might in turn result in other psychiatric conditions as a consequence of having problems with initiating and completing commitments (Brown, 1991), most notably stress, anxiety, and depression. Receiving adequate care at an early stage in order to manage procrastination is thus important, helping students overcome academic procrastination, enhance psychological flexibility, and increase their well-being (Mulry et al., 1994; Glick et al., 2014).

Despite the many negative consequences that can be attributed to procrastination, research on treatment interventions has long been neglected in favor of exploring underlying mechanisms that could be related to deferring tasks and assignments, most notably personality factors (Steel, 2007). Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) is often regarded as treatment of choice, but the evidence for its use is still scarce, and the few clinical trials that exist lack validated outcome measures and randomized conditions, thus obscuring the results and making it difficult to determine its efficacy (Rozental and Carlbring, 2013). Still, many treatment interventions that are used in CBT involving both cognitive and behavioral approaches are assumed to be beneficial for people that procrastinate. Automaticity, stimulus control, and stimulus cues have, for instance, all been found suitable in order to facilitate routines, reduce the risk of becoming distracted, and prevent mental fatigue, i.e., working on tasks and assignments at specific locations and hours of the day, removing stimuli that might interfere with performance, and introducing stimuli that remind the individual of implementing a more adaptive response (Steel, 2007). Likewise, gradual exposure may help overcome the tendency to defer commitments due to feelings of discomfort or worry, similar to exposure in vivo often used for many anxiety disorders (Brown, 1991). In addition, goal setting, learned industriousness, and value clarification may aid time management and increase motivation by clarifying the rewards of completing tasks and assignments (Locke and Latham, 2002; Steel and König, 2006). Also, targeting unrealistic standards, fear of failure, and self-doubt are presumed useful to inhibit procrastination caused by irrational beliefs (Flett et al., 2012), and can include the administration of behavioral experiments and cognitive restructuring, as well as using motivational interviewing to instigate behavior change (McDermott, 2004; Miller and Rollnick, 2012).

The objective of the proposed study is to investigate the efficacy of CBT delivered as either a group intervention or via the Internet (c.f., Andersson et al., 2013), thereby extending the research of one previously performed randomized controlled trial of Internet-based CBT for procrastination that yielded promising results (Rozental and Carlbring, 2013). In addition, because the availability of adequate care is lacking, partly due to preconceptions and insufficient knowledge concerning what treatment interventions are presumed helpful for managing procrastination, it is important to explore the possibility of also delivering CBT as a group intervention (c.f., Bergström et al., 2010). This might be especially true for the student population, where difficulties related to procrastination are widespread and particularly disabling for their academic achievements and well-being (Day et al., 2000). Both conditions are assumed to be beneficial in reducing procrastination, and the proposed study is believed to contribute valuable knowledge concerning dilatory behavior among students, its comorbidities, and the treatment interventions that might help circumvent problems of chronic and severe procrastination.

@&#MATERIAL AND METHODS@&#

Participants will be recruited via the Student Health Centre at Karolinska Institutet, an outpatient health care provider that offers free services for students attending one of its affiliated universities: Karolinska Institutet, Södertörn University, Ersta Sköndal University College, Sophia Hemmet University, and the Red Cross University College. Advertisements via the official website of the Student Health Centre at Karolinska Institutet, through guidance counselors, as well as on the affiliated campuses, will be used to inform students about the proposed study. In line with the guidelines proposed by Proudfoot et al. (2011) participants need to complete an online screening process consisting of a number of measures regarding procrastination, depression, anxiety, and well-being, as well as fill out a written informed consent in order to become eligible for a structured clinical interview, i.e., Mini-International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI; Sheehan et al., 1998). Participants who meet the criteria for inclusion will be randomized into one of two conditions by an independent person: Internet-based CBT (n=50), or CBT delivered as a group intervention (n=50). A control condition, e.g., wait-list control, will not be used in the proposed study as this is not possible to implement within the operation of the Student Health Centre at Karolinska Institutet. To ensure that the group assignment cannot be predicted, but the number of participants will be of approximately the same size, blocking will be used with each block consisting of thirty participants.

Participants will be included in the proposed study if they are Swedish residents, are at least 18years old, are able to read, write and speak Swedish fluently, have a computer with Internet access as well as a working email, and are registered as students at one of the affiliated universities of the Student Health Centre at Karolinska Institutet. Participants also need to experience difficulties that are mainly related to chronic and severe procrastination. In order to determine the severity of procrastination, two outcome measures will be used: the Pure Procrastination Scale (PPS; Steel, 2010), and the Procrastination Assessment Scale for Students (PASS; Solomon and Rothblum, 1984). Comorbid psychiatric disorders are not a reason for exclusion, except for more acute conditions, in which case the participants are offered other treatment alternatives at the Student Health Centre at Karolinska Institutet, or are referred to another health care provider.

Participants will be excluded from the proposed study if their difficulties are primarily caused by more acute conditions, for example, severe depression defined as having 30 points or more on the self-report version of the Montgomery–Åsberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS-S; Svanborg and Åsberg, 2001), suicidal ideation as indicated by having four points or more on the question regarding suicidality (Svanborg and Åsberg, 2001), neuropsychiatric conditions (i.e., ADHD and ADD), misuse of alcohol or drugs according to the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT; Babor et al., 2001), and the Drug Use Disorders Identification Test (DUDIT; Berman et al., 2003), bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, psychosis, and other conditions warranting more immediate treatment. In order to assess the occurrence and severity of psychiatric disorders, as well as to probe for severe depression and suicidality, a structured clinical interview will be performed, i.e., MINI (Sheehan et al., 1998). In addition, participants are not allowed to be participating in another ongoing psychotherapy, and in the case of taking psychotropic medication, the dose must have been stabilized for at least three months prior to entering treatment.

Participants can withdraw from the proposed study at any time during the treatment period without specifying a reason behind the decision. Furthermore, should the condition of a participant deteriorate significantly, supervising clinicians may choose to end the participation prematurely and direct the participant back to the head physician at the Student Health Centre at Karolinska Institutet for other treatment alternatives or referral to another health care provider.

The proposed study will adhere to the Swedish Personal Data Act in terms of handling and storing data generated by the participants (Datainspektionen, 1998). Data will be encrypted, and all participants will receive an anonymous auto-generated identification code in order to log on to the secure online interface used during the treatment period; they will receive, for example, a code such as 1234abcd, as well as an auto-generated pin code delivered to the participant's telephone. Participants will also respond to questionnaires and outcome measures at pretreatment, weekly during the treatment period, post-treatment, as well as follow-up via the secure online interface, which uses electronic identification, in other words, SSL Certificates, similar to the security procedures at many banks and government agencies. Since questionnaires and outcome measures are completed online, the risk of data loss or data distortion is prevented (Carlbring et al., 2007; Thorndike et al., 2009).

The proposed study will use two primary outcome measures to assess the severity of procrastination: Swedish versions of PPS (Steel, 2010), and PASS (Solomon and Rothblum, 1984). PPS features twelve items measuring the occurrence and severity of procrastination, and was originally developed to improve the validity of several different procrastination scales (Steel, 2010). PPS has yielded a good internal consistency with Cronbach's alpha .92, and shows improved convergent validity with other outcome measures of procrastination. PASS consists of three items measuring difficulties of procrastination within six different domains of study-related activities such as writing a term paper, keeping up with weekly reading assignments, studying for exams, as well as a number of statements concerning the reason behind procrastination, and motivation to change. PASS has obtained an acceptable internal consistency with Cronbach's alpha .72 to .79, and has previously been used to explore the prevalence of procrastination among students (Solomon and Rothblum, 1984). However, because both the primary outcome measures lack established cut-offs, clinical assessment will be used to determine treatment outcome. Participants will complete the primary outcome measures before commencing treatment, weekly during the treatment period, upon completion of treatment, and at six-month follow-up.

A number of secondary outcome measures will also be used to investigate depression, anxiety, and well-being: MADRS-S (Svanborg and Åsberg, 2001), the Generalized Anxiety Disorder Assessment (GAD-7; Spitzer et al., 2006), and the Symptoms Checklist 90 (SCL-90; Fridell et al., 2002). MADRS-S is a self-report version of MADRS and features nine items measuring changes in mood, anxiety, sleeping patterns, appetite, concentration, initiative, emotional engagement, pessimism and attitude towards life (Svanborg and Åsberg, 2001). MADRS-S has acquired a good internal consistency with Cronbach's alpha .84, is sensitive to change with intraclass correlation coefficient of .78, and has a moderate correlation between expert ratings and self-reports with r
                        =.54 (Fantino and Moore, 2009). GAD-7 features seven items for assessing anxiety and screening for generalized anxiety disorder. GAD-7 has yielded good internal consistency with Cronbach's alpha .92, and is shown to have a good factorial structure, 69% to 81% of variance explained (Spitzer et al., 2006; Dear et al., 2011). SCL-90 features 90 items evaluating the participant's physical and mental well-being, and consists of three global domains as well as nine subdomains. SCL-90 has received good internal consistency with Cronbach's alpha .98, and is often used to evaluate the outcome of clinical trials (Fridell et al., 2002). Participants will complete the secondary outcome measures before commencing treatment, upon completion of treatment, and at six-month follow-up.

In order to investigate the occurrence and characteristics of possible negative effects, questionnaires regarding participants' experiences of adverse events will be distributed weekly during the treatment period, upon completion of treatment, and at six-month follow-up (Rozental et al., 2014). They will include items such as “Have you, during the course of treatment, experienced any unwanted events that you believe are related to treatment, or have you encountered any unwanted effects that could be attributable to treatment?”, as well as rating scales assessing the degree to which the adverse event has affected the participant.

Participants will be randomly assigned into one of two conditions by blocks of thirty: Internet-based CBT, or CBT delivered as a group intervention. Both conditions are based on a self-help book on procrastination written by one of the authors of the proposed study (Rozental and Wennersten, 2014). The treatment interventions are divided into eight modules: 1) psychoeducation and cost/benefit-analysis, 2) goal-setting, motivation, 3) learned industriousness and efficacy performance spirals, 4) mental fatigue, ego depletion stimulus control, and distractions, 5) self-assertiveness and self-efficacy, 6) thoughts and beliefs, 7) value clarification, and 8) relapse prevention. For participants in the group intervention condition, the modules will be delivered at four consecutive three-hour sessions at the Student Health Centre at Karolinska Institutet, with approximately two modules given at each session. The sessions will be spaced two weeks apart, during which participants are instructed to complete assignments related to the modules that were in focus of the previous session, such as goal-setting, time management, and behavioral experiments, which they are advised to present and discuss with the other participants during the sessions. For participants in the Internet-based condition, the modules will be distributed weekly during the treatment period, with one module given each week over the eight weeks of treatment period. In comparison to the group condition, participants will not be in contact with a therapist or attend any sessions. Furthermore, the participants are expected to complete both the reading material and the assignments that are included in each module.

The proposed study is the first randomized controlled trial that compares two active treatments for procrastination against each other. Prior research suggests that CBT delivered as a group intervention may be beneficial for dealing with difficulties associated with dilatory behavior (van Essen et al., 2004; Tuckman and Schouwenburg, 2004; van Horebeek et al., 2004). However, the lack of validated outcome measures and randomization obfuscates the results, complicating investigations regarding its efficacy and making it less clear what factors mediate treatment outcome. In terms of Internet-based CBT, the only randomized controlled trial performed indicates promising results on self-report measures of procrastination with moderate to large between-group effect sizes at post-treatment when compared to wait-list control (Rozental and Carlbring, 2013).

The proposed study has been approved by the regional Ethical Board in Stockholm, Sweden (Dnr 2014/322-31/1). In the application, a number of ethical issues were addressed. First, great consideration will be taken not to include participants suffering from more acute conditions in need of immediate treatment. However, should the condition of a participant deteriorate significantly during the treatment period, supervising clinicians may choose to end the participation prematurely and provide the participant with other healthcare services. Second, negative effects attributable to an internet intervention have previously been reported (Boettcher et al., 2014), and are assumed to exist in face-to-face treatments as well (Barlow, 2010). Consequently, this will be investigated by distributing questionnaires regarding potential adverse events weekly during the treatment period, and at post-treatment (Rozental et al., 2014). Third, when using the Internet to communicate and administer interventions, the privacy of the participants is of great concern and importance (Carlbring and Andersson, 2006). Participants will therefore be given anonymous auto-generated identification codes to use when interacting with the online interface, and only reminders will be sent to the email supplied by the participant.

@&#ANALYSIS@&#

The proposed study employs a research design that permits multiple comparisons. The two randomized conditions will be contrasted with each other throughout the treatment period, at post-treatment, as well as at six-month follow-up. Furthermore, within-group comparisons will also be possible, contrasting pretreatment to post-treatment scores. A number of statistical analyses will be used and implemented according to the intention-to-treat principle (Hollis and Campbell, 1999). The outcome of treatment will be examined using mixed-effect models, which are preferred to univariate and multivariate repeated measures of variance (Gueorguieva and Krystal, 2004), Bonferroni-correction for multiple comparisons. In addition, confidence intervals as well as within-group and between-group effect sizes using Cohen's d will be presented. Missing data analysis will be performed with t-tests and chi-2 of baseline severity level, age, and gender in order to determine if unexpected missing data due to participant drop out are related to chance or not. The proposed study will include 100 participants that are randomized into two treatment conditions by blocks of thirty, with 50 participants in each condition. Because prior research concerning CBT delivered as a group intervention for procrastination has not provided effect sizes, power calculations were not feasible for the proposed study. However, in terms of Internet-based CBT for procrastination, one clinical trial reveals moderate to large between-group effect sizes obtained on PPS, Cohen's d 0.50 to 0.70, depending on if the treatment was self-help only or guided by a therapist (Rozental and Carlbring, 2013). In addition, clinically significant change will be determined according to Jacobson and Truax (1991). However, because the mean of the normal population is unknown and the standard errors of the primary outcome measures are lacking, clinically significant change is defined as having a post-treatment score that is located two standard deviations beyond the mean for the two conditions at pre-treatment, in the direction of functionality (Jacobson and Truax, 1991).

@&#RESULTS@&#

The proposed study intends to evaluate the efficacy of treatment interventions for procrastination by performing a randomized controlled trial comparing CBT delivered as a group intervention to Internet-based CBT. Evidence from prior research suggests that CBT could be suitable for addressing dilatory behavior (van Essen et al., 2004; Tuckman and Schouwenburg, 2004; van Horebeek et al., 2004), but the lack of randomized conditions and validated outcome measures complicates the interpretation of the previous results. Meanwhile, research on procrastination has mainly involved the investigation of underlying mechanisms that are assumed related to its occurrence and severity (Steel, 2007), resulting in far less interest concerning what treatment interventions might alleviate problems associated with chronic and severe procrastination. One clinical trial exploring the efficacy of Internet-based CBT shows promising results in terms of self-reported difficulties of procrastination (Rozental and Carlbring, 2013). However, further research is necessary in order to determine the usefulness of CBT for procrastination, as well as to understand what mediates treatment outcome.

Conducting clinical trials that examine the efficacy of treatment interventions for procrastination is particularly important when considering the distress experienced by students (Brown, 1991). According to self-report measures, approximately half of all students procrastinate consistently and problematically (Day et al., 2000). In addition, almost 75% consider themselves to be procrastinators, and estimates imply that 80–95% engage in procrastination more or less regularly (Steel, 2007). Even though these numbers might not represent chronic and severe procrastination, it is often presumed that students have more problems with dilatory behavior than the population in general, generating more stress and worry, in turn affecting their possibilities of completing their coursework and attaining a university degree. Hence, providing students with treatment interventions that can prevent procrastination would be very beneficial, both in terms of aiding their study-related activities, and helping prevent other psychiatric disorders that are often associated with procrastination (Sirios et al., 2003; Sirios, 2004, 2007).

It is believed that the proposed study will result in several important findings. First, the evidence for using CBT in relation to problems of procrastination is still scarce. Thus, the main objective will be to investigate the efficacy of CBT delivered as a group intervention and Internet-based CBT, thereby increasing the understanding of how to circumvent procrastination. Second, the comparison of treatment interventions administered as either a group intervention or via the Internet might help to explore different ways of providing adequate care for difficulties related to procrastination; this type of help is deemed particularly essential for student population where the prevalence is high, and the negative consequences are often much more debilitating (Day et al., 2000). Third, by using a more rigorous and comprehensive screening process than usually performed in clinical trials of procrastination, the current study will also be able to do a more thorough analysis of the characteristics of individuals having chronic and severe problems of procrastination, especially in terms of comorbid psychiatric disorders.

The proposed study will have some limitations that need to be acknowledged. First, the treatment interventions administered in both conditions have only been used in one previous clinical trial (Rozental and Carlbring, 2013), making it uncertain whether it is, in fact, suitable for addressing problems of procrastination. In addition, the mean age of the student population recruited for the current study will be much lower, and the difficulties experienced in relation to procrastination might differ compared to other sociodemographic groups. However, since procrastination can be considered as self-regulatory failure that affects the initiation and completion of commitments regardless of context, the treatment interventions provided are also assumed to be beneficial for a student population. Second, since procrastination is not a psychiatric disorder, neither outcome measures nor a structured clinical interview may be able to distinguish chronic and severe procrastination from other related problems such as difficulties prioritizing, being self-assertive, and having perfectionistic standards. Clinical assessment will therefore be used in order to determine the severity of procrastination in each individual case, and to evaluate treatment outcome. In addition, investigating clinically significant change can help determine the number of participants having benefitted from the treatment conditions (Jacobson and Truax, 1991). Third, the natural fluctuation of tasks and assignments during the course of the academic semester might also affect the results on outcome measures, resulting in more procrastination at the beginning than at the end of the treatment period, similar to what has been found in prior research of procrastination among the student population (Tice and Baumeister, 1997). Examining academic procrastination in its true context is nonetheless preferred, resulting in a greater understanding of the difficulties students face when engaging in dilatory behavior in relation to their everyday commitments.

Participants will be recruited to the current study at three consecutive occasions: August 2014, January 2015, and August 2015, following the completion of each treatment period. Hence, approximately 30 participants will be block randomized into one of two conditions at the beginning of every semester, and follow-up will be carried out six months after post-treatment. The final round of participants will end their treatment period in December 2015, after which, data analysis will be performed.

The treatment interventions delivered to both treatment conditions are based on a self-help book on procrastination written by one of the authors of the current study (Rozental and Wennersten, 2014). Consequently, the author will not be involved in any of the informed consent procedures or analyses of outcome data in order to avoid any conflicting interests.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The current study will be the second randomized controlled trial that aims to investigate the efficacy of CBT for procrastination, and will be the first to compare CBT delivered as a group intervention to Internet-based CBT in terms of alleviating difficulties related to dilatory behavior. The results are expected to have a considerable impact on the understanding of what treatment interventions are suitable for managing procrastination, as well as the potential for administering CBT via different conditions.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

