@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Experiences of internet-delivered cognitive behavior therapy for social anxiety disorder four years later: A qualitative study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           We studied the experiences of guided internet-delivered CBT for social anxiety disorder.


                        
                        
                           
                           A core process was found involving either an active of a passive approach to the treatment.


                        
                        
                           
                           The findings adds to the growing literature on experiences of guided ICBT for anxiety disorders.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Internet treatment

Social anxiety disorder

Cognitive behavior therapy

Grounded theory

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  The current study is a qualitative follow-up of a study on guided internet-delivered cognitive behavior therapy (ICBT) for social anxiety disorder (SAD), conducted four years after treatment completion. The main aim was to capture participants' description of their experiences of the treatment, their view on treatment effects, memories of the treatment, and whether they continued using the gained knowledge after treatment. Sixty participants were selected from the original study's treatment group. A criterion based sampling approach was used based on the obtained treatment effect, and with a minimum of five completed treatment modules. E-mail invitations were sent, with information about the follow-up and the instruction to respond if interested in participating. Twelve semi-structured interviews were made and the material was analyzed using an approach based on grounded theory. The results showed that all participants found the treatment to have some effect, but they also found it to be demanding, difficult, and hard. Many appreciated to hear of the experiences of other participants in the online forum. Under the theme of memory, most could describe the setup of the treatment in general terms. The exposure module was mentioned by all, cognitive restructuring by most, and some also reported memories of the psychoeducation. A core process was identified which involved how the attained treatment effect was viewed over the time, and how this view changed from treatment completion to current time. The findings outlined in this study describe how treatment effects can be sustained via an active approach to the treatment and the symptoms of SAD.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Cognitive Behaviour Therapy (CBT) has strong empirical support as treatment for Social Anxiety Disorder (SAD) (Acarturk et al., 2009; Ponniah and Hollon, 2008). With the expanded use of the internet, the accessibility of self-help treatments has increased (Andersson, 2014), and CBT administered over internet has been developed and tested for a range of conditions with promising results (Andersson, 2009; Carlbring and Andersson, 2006). Several randomized controlled trials and independent replications have shown that SAD can be treated with therapist-guided internet-delivered CBT (ICBT) (Andersson et al., 2014), including trials from Sweden (Andersson et al., 2006), Australia (Titov et al., 2008), Spain (Botella et al., 2010), and Switzerland (Berger et al., 2009). In addition, guided ICBT has been found to be as effective as face-to-face CBT in a few trials (Andrews et al., 2011; Botella et al., 2010; Hedman et al., 2011a). Moreover, effects tend to be sustained over time (Carlbring et al., 2009), even as long as five years after treatment completion (Hedman et al., 2011b). However, we still have limited knowledge of how patients experience guided ICBT.

The number of qualitative studies focused on the experience of CBT is remarkably low. Hodgetts and Wright (2007) reviewed qualitative studies focusing on the patients' experiences of different therapies, including three qualitative studies on CBT (Hodgetts and Wright, 2007). The results varied regarding how the patients valued the treatment and which part they had found to be helpful. The researchers concluded that the view of the patients should receive more research interest, and that clinicians may gain important knowledge by listening to their patients by asking open questions about their therapeutic experiences. In a qualitative study of cognitive therapy for SAD (McManus et al., 2010), reports from patients suggested that the treatment was experienced as an emotional roller coaster. Participants in the study also reported difficulties in changing maladaptive habits (e.g., avoidance of social situations). In a study on the experience of guided CBT self-help (Macdonald et al., 2007), participants reported a variety of experiences of the treatment (such as a gap between patients' expectancies of psychological therapy and their experience of the guided self-help), and the research group highlighted the importance of understanding patients' expectancies regarding treatment. A meta-synthesis of qualitative studies found reports of both advantages (e.g., acceptance of self-help dependent on prior experiences) and disadvantages (e.g., stigma associated with treatment) of guided CBT self-help interventions for depression in primary care (Khan et al., 2007). Participants' also described self-help treatment to be hard work. In a qualitative study of guided ICBT for depression (Bendelin et al., 2011) participants also voiced a variety of experiences and views regarding the treatment. For example, some appreciated the format, others missed seeing a therapist face-to-face and others felt pressured during treatment (e.g., because of deadlines for homework completion). Another finding in that study was that some participants did not actively engage in the treatment even if they read the treatment material (i.e., not implementing changes in their lives and not completing homework).

In CBT a great deal of time and effort is devoted to educating patients about their condition and how it can be treated. Even though psychoeducation always is included, few studies have focused on what participants actually learn during treatment (Harvey et al., 2014). Scogin et al. (1998) investigated acquired knowledge after bibliotherapy for depression. Although knowledge about depression increased, this knowledge gain did not correlate with a decrease in depressive symptoms (Scogin et al., 1998). A later study showed that knowledge about affective disorders and in particular it's treatment was of importance for later outcome in a two year follow-up (Kronmuller et al., 2007). In a large trial with 204 patients with SAD, knowledge about SAD and its treatment increased following guided ICBT, with a small, but significant, association between knowledge gain and outcome (Andersson et al., 2012). Overall, not much is known about what patients gain in terms of knowledge from guided ICBT and what they remember from their treatment.

The current study was a qualitative follow-up of a randomized controlled trial (Andersson et al., 2012). In the primary study, 204 participants were randomized to either guided ICBT including an online discussion forum or to a control condition, which in this case was an online discussion forum only. The main aim for the primary study was to compare guided ICBT for SAD with a moderated discussion forum, to investigate whether knowledge about SAD and treatment for the disorder was influenced by treatment, and to investigate the effect of therapists' experience on treatment outcome. Briefly, the trial showed an Hedges g effect size of g
                     =0.75 in favor of the treatment and knowledge, as assessed by the knowledge test, which increased following treatment with little gain in the control group.

The present study was initiated four years after treatment had been completed in that study. The main objective of the our qualitative study was to add to the body of knowledge regarding participants' experience of guided ICBT, their own views on the treatment, but also their reports regarding gained knowledge about SAD and its treatment and what they found to be of use to them in a long term perspective.

@&#METHOD@&#

Participants were recruited from the initial treatment group in the controlled trial of guided ICBT for SAD (Andersson et al., 2012). Inclusion criteria were a minimum of five completed treatment modules out of a possible 9 modules (in order to be able to participate in a meaningful interview related to treatment contents). Briefly, the treatment had started with an introductory module describing SAD and facts about CBT. Modules 2–4 described a cognitive model for SAD and introduced cognitive restructuring. Modules 5–7 introduced exposure and attention shifting exercises. Modules 8–9 mainly concerned social skills and relapse prevention. Participants were asked to complete one module every week, i.e. a 9-week treatment period was recommended. In the original trial the average number of completed modules was 6.8 (Andersson et al., 2012). In addition to the treatment participants were also involved in a moderated online discussion forum. The treatment was guided via e-mail (in a closed secure system) by a student or a more experienced therapist each week in association with the homework assignments. Additional reminders were sent in case of non-response during the treatment period. Typically, the guidance took about 10min per patient and week, which is typical of guided ICBT (Andersson, 2014).

Criterion-based sampling was utilized in order to extract a sample which differed in terms of treatment effect, as measured by the Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale self-rated version (LSAS-SR) (Fresco et al., 2001). The purpose of this selection was to enable a variation in attained effect and to tap different patients' experiences of the treatment. Participants were divided into three equally sized groups based on their scores on the LSAS-SR before and after treatment (e.g., change scores). We selected one group with large (31 points or more on the LSAS-SR), one with medium (between 15 and 30 points), and one group with little or no improvement on the LSAS (14 or less change), in line with the procedure in a previous study on the experiences of guided ICBT for depression (Bendelin et al., 2011).

Participants were contacted via e-mail, four years after the treatment period which had lasted for nine weeks. The e-mail contained information about the follow-up, the aim of the study, how it would be conducted and the instruction to notify their interest in participating by responding to the e-mail. A book was offered as a reward for participation in the interview. Thirty e-mails were initially sent based on the selection criteria above. Within two weeks 30 additional e-mails were sent. Ten e-mails were immediately notified as being undelivered. Thirteen individuals responded with interest of participation, one of which responded too late to be included in the study. Altogether, 12 interviews were made. Four participants belonged to the group displaying a large effect on LSAS, five from the medium group and three from the group with a small or no effect at all. Nine participants were women, three men, and their ages ranged between 28 and 67years old. All participants gave their informed consent to participating and having the interviews audiotaped. The study was approved by the local ethics committee.

All interviews were held over telephone and were audiotaped. The interview guide was formulated by the researchers to suit the aims of the study. In the Introduction, the interviewer presented herself and informed the participants about the study and the interview. The interviewer was a female psychologist with CBT orientation. The participants gave their consent to proceeding before the researcher moved on to the questions. The interview guide was semi-structured, containing seven open-ended questions divided into three general themes: how the participants experienced the treatment, how they were doing today regarding symptoms of SAD, and what they remembered of the treatment. The guide started with broad questions, to become more specific along the way, and ended with the opportunity to express whatever the participant wished to share with the researcher. The duration of the interviews varied but was usually about 15 to 20min long.

@&#ANALYSIS@&#

The interviews were recorded, transcribed and analyzed informed by the method of grounded theory (Pidgeon and Henwood, 1996). Grounded theory is suitable for exploring complex phenomena, processes, and finding a way to explain them in new ways (Strauss and Corbin, 1990). In the current study, the analysis began as soon as the first interview was transcribed, and transcriptions were continuously coded. Along the way, codes were categorized and categories modified in comparison with each other and the original text. Categories were organized along the line of the emerging theory. During the whole process, notes and memos were made of emerging ideas for interpretations, theories, emerging hypotheses or expectations, and possible biases in personal reactions (Pidgeon and Henwood, 1997). The intention was to remain as objective as possible, by making sure that the empirical results and the emerging theory were based on patterns in original data (while still acknowledging the inherent subjective nature of qualitative methods). All interviews were initially conducted, transcribed and analyzed by one researcher (first author). In the process of searching for patterns and building the theory, discussions were held with a fellow researcher (second author), and the other involved researchers thereafter reviewed and commented on the results. Because the interview guide included three main themes, the results mainly reflect those three areas. Under each theme several main categories and sub-categories were identified during to the analysis. The last few interviews did not result in any new categories. Patterns were investigated and found, which led to a preliminary theory regarding process of symptom change and maintenance after treatment.

@&#RESULTS@&#

The results are organized under three themes: 1) Attained effect/approach to attained effect, 2) Experience and evaluation of the treatment and 3) Memory of the treatment. Pattern analysis of the theme Attained effect/approach to attained effect, resulted in a core finding showing a process of change in symptoms of SAD after treatment had ended. This core process was formulated in a preliminary theory, and the theory was grounded in the data. There are other findings worth mentioning, even though they did not end up as a part of any distinct pattern or process. Therefore, findings from the themes Experience and evaluation of the treatment and Memory of treatment are described below. Initially, however, the main finding is outlined (see figure 1
                     ).

All participants in the study described effects of the treatment, with some reporting a small effect, and others experiencing a larger effect, and the sustained effect over time differed. Data regarding attained effect on symptoms of SAD were organized along a timeline: reported symptoms at the time for treatment completion, reported symptoms during time after treatment, and current symptoms, where the participants reported no symptoms, few and manageable symptoms or symptoms impairing their everyday life. Two categories emerged regarding the attained effect: active approach and passive approach (see below). A pattern was found among these categories, showing a process of change in symptoms of SAD from end of treatment to this day, depending on the approach taken towards symptoms and the treatment as time moved on.

These participants described a clear effect of the treatment. After the treatment had ended, some kept on working with the material (in paper format or as PDF), searched for more information about SAD in books or on the internet, and kept giving themselves exercises based on the treatment. Others had somewhat of a setback after treatment completion and described how they chose to resume their work via the material given during treatment, or other sources of information. After returning to an active approach to their social anxiety, the symptoms were reduced again. All described a continuous work to handle tendencies to slide back into old patterns of behavior. Some found that it became easier to handle the symptoms by time, and the procedures prescribed by the treatment (e.g., exposure) demanded less effort and became an integrated part of their lives. Others found that the strain to continue did not result in any significant change. They all however reported sustained effects regarding SAD since the treatment. Some individuals with an active approach to the treatment and symptoms of SAD, also made clearly acceptance-based statements about themselves, their situation and symptoms of SAD. One of the participants, a man of 46years, reflected over his improvement during and after the treatment:
                              “Well, actually I think there was a noticeable improvement during the treatment and I also feel improvement over time, afterwards somehow, and I really must say, and it is something I carry with me all the time and that I try to work with and try to be aware of. (…) It is an active work for me all the time one might say.”
                           
                        

The participant in the quote above claimed expressively that he felt an improvement during the treatment, and that he had continued to improve during the four years that have passed. His active approach was also recurrently expressed in this quote, the continuous improvement was related to his active work. Another participant, a man of 47years, reflected over a setback immediately after treatment:
                              “One might say that it was really great in the beginning, but then (…) it diminishes, and it came back a little. And then you start working with yourself when you feel that this isn't so good, and then you become aware and start working with yourself, and this long after, when you score before and after and you see, God, the difference is huge. All of it, my entire life, it is a huge difference.”
                           
                        

The participant recalled feeling really great right after treatment, but soon experienced a setback of symptoms. His reaction to this experience was described in active terms, and he started to work with himself again and regained his improvement.

There were participants who described a more passive approach to their SAD symptoms and the treatment. Some reported a small effect of the treatment and others a vague, but notable effect of the treatment. Some also described increased symptoms of SAD after treatment was ended. They did not return to the material from treatment, even though some described having the thought of doing so. These individuals also reported how their everyday life was significantly impaired by symptoms of SAD four years after treatment. A woman of 30years reflected on her continuous symptoms in the interview:
                              “… the social phobia has become worse now, it has not become better, like. It wasn't much help, there are things I might think of but there is a difference between thinking and doing. (…) or it helped me for as long as I was in it, if I put it that way, as long as I was in CBT, but after a while I believe it has, the effect wore off.”
                           
                        

The participant described a reduction of symptoms as long as she was in CBT. Afterwards, however, the effect was not maintained. In the quote above she did not describe any strategy to regain the improvement. She rather presented herself in passive terms, and talked about what she had been “thinking” but not actually “doing”. Another participant, a woman of 45years, described a similar approach:
                              “Then there are things you are still held back by, you might say, because you don't apply for just any job and don't speak in certain contexts you would like to speak, so I can't say I have become completely well. Or without symptoms or what you call it, but I haven't been working. It is possible, if I had been more active with the material I might have been better.”
                           
                        

This participant outlined some remaining symptoms and claimed that she was not well. However, she also reflected on her own inactivity in relation to those remaining symptoms and claimed that a more active work could have led to improvement.

All participants found the treatment to be useful to them, but reported different parts of treatment as the being most significant. Most reported that the treatment program was of high quality, they appreciated the online format, found a relief in identifying with other participants and realized that they were not alone with their problems (the online forum). The experience of throwing oneself into the unknown (e.g., feared social situations) and acquiring the competence to handle it was a fairly common description. Most participants also reported treatment to be hard, demanding and emotionally challenging. A few individuals made a spontaneous comparison between face-to-face therapy and ICBT, where some preferred ICBT. Among the reasons were the possibility to stay anonymous, avoiding the anxiety evoking situation of sitting in front of a therapist, increased accessibility and the idea that ICBT reduces the risk of becoming addicted to therapy or the therapist. Others would have preferred face-to-face therapy, mainly in the form of a need for more support during treatment, and wished for meetings with a therapist face-to-face or meetings with other participants.

All participants remembered working with the computer during treatment, and some described how the program was divided into weeks, with one module per week. Most also mentioned the exercises they were encouraged to do and referred to the work as being time-consuming and the exercises sometimes being frightening. Many remembered the contact with their therapist via email (e.g., via the secure contact handling system), and the discussion forum, even though some needed some clarification to recall the contact with other participants online. When it comes to the content of the treatment program, all remembered modules dedicated to exposure. Some used the words exposure and safety behavior, whereas others called it doing things they did not want to do, doing things that scared them, and subject oneself to frightening situations. Most also remembered modules involve cognitive restructuring and described the process of evaluating one's thoughts and how they began to think in a different way. Some also mentioned cognitive distortions. About half of the participants could account for information from the introductory module, with the cognitive theory about SAD and the treatment. One participant remembered Clark and Wells' model of how SAD is maintained (Clark and Wells, 1995). Some participants mentioned the self-focused attention section of the treatment program. Few made statements that might refer to the module of how the results of the treatment should be sustained in the future. Not a single one mentioned the module on social skill training.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Few researchers have explored patient experiences of CBT using qualitative methods in general, and there are few qualitative studies on guided ICBT. Even though CBT is a treatment which focus on educating patients about their condition and how to handle their problems, knowledge of what participants actually learn during treatment is thus limited. The aim of the current study was to investigate experiences of guided ICBT for SAD, but also what participants remember from their treatment and what they in retrospect find to be useful to them in long term perspective. The study resulted in a preliminary theory on how treatment effects are sustained via an active approach to the treatment and one's symptoms of SAD, even after the treatment has ended. The theory is based on the pattern found in descriptions of symptoms of SAD over time and how symptoms were handled in relation to the treatment. The results indicate that individuals who report a high level of activity towards handling symptoms of SAD also report a more positive post-treatment course, and they continue to work on their social phobic tendencies. Their difficulties do not disappear, but are rather the subject of continuous management.

The idea of having to continue to handle symptoms even after treatment has ended is not new. On the contrary, plans for maintaining results, or so called relapse prevention, are commonly included in CBT (Wilson, 1996), since it can be assumed that patients might lose effect of treatment if he or she does not continue to use what was learnt in treatment (Scogin et al., 1998). Glasman et al. (2004) found that most participants in a qualitative study on CBT for depression and/or dysthymia reported self-therapeutic activity and viewed depression and treatment for the condition to be a continuous part of their life. Being a self-therapist was suggested to be a dynamic process (Glasman et al., 2004). On the other hand, the researchers pointed out that it is unknown whether improvement measured at follow-up after CBT is due to treatment having cured depression, if results are maintained via continuous handling of symptoms, or if it is a combination of both. In the present study participants appeared to link positive outcomes with the treatment, but social desirability (i.e., demand characteristics) may have influenced their reports.

How patients approach their ongoing treatment has also been shown to be important. Westra et al. (2007) researched patients' compliance and found that compliance early in treatment was an important predictor in SAD, with compliance in the middle of the treatment being important for reducing anxiety after treatment (Westra et al., 2007). Bendelin et al. (2011) found that individuals who lacked motivation or ability to work with the treatment material were more negative towards treatment. They also had a less favorable outcome than individuals with more of a “hands-on” approach, who on the other hand tended to appreciate the treatment format more and also managed to integrate principles from treatment in their everyday life. The researchers raised the question if individuals with high motivation and ability benefit the most from guided ICBT. One question that remains is whether it is possible to identify individuals with low level of activity early on, in order to turn this development around. It is also interesting to consider how we can enable participants who have benefitted from treatment to stay active after treatment has ended.

Another topic linked to the active approach is the term Acceptance. Several participants made comments about themselves, their situation and symptoms of SAD with an emphasis on self-acceptance. These statements were only found among individuals who reported an evident effect of treatment. These individuals also described an active approach to the treatment and symptoms of SAD. Bendelin et al. (2011) also found statements regarding acceptance of oneself and depression in their study. McManus et al. (2010) found that participants in cognitive therapy for SAD expressed a normalized and more accepting attitude towards anxiety after treatment. It seems as if several researchers have found that acceptance and a normalized view is a part of traditional CBT, as an effect of treatment, and this may be the case for guided ICBT as well.

Besides the preliminary theory regarding change in symptoms and maintenance of effects over time other findings are also worth mentioning. Participants overall expressed positive attitudes towards the program. Everyone experienced at least some effect of treatment, but how much they benefitted and for how long the effect lasted varied (most likely as a consequence of our selection of participants and the long follow-up period). Bendelin et al. (2011) also found varied experiences of treatment in their qualitative study on guided ICBT for depression. For example, some participants missed seeing a therapist face-to-face and also felt pressured during treatment. This is in line with the results of the current study where some participants expressed a wish to see the therapist face-to-face since they felt a need for more support and direct feedback, but also a wish to meet other participants. Bendelin et al. (2011) suggested that support (e.g., face-to-face contact) could be based on individual preferences and this possibility is yet to be explored in research.

Most participants reported the program to be hard work, difficult to understand at times and also emotionally demanding. McManus et al. (2010) found similar statements in their qualitative study on the experiences of cognitive therapy for SAD, where participants found treatment to be an “emotional rollercoaster”. Participants also reported difficulties in breaking habitual patterns. Khan et al. (2007) found that participants described self-help in primary care to be hard work. The experience of strain and hard work could be the focus for future research as it is not evident how it affects treatment process and outcome (Rozental et al., 2014). Indeed, we did not explicitly ask for negative effects which may be needed in order to solicit responses regarding side effects. A recent study showed that unwanted negative effects can occur in guided ICBT for SAD (Boettcher et al., 2014), even if they are not common.

No consistent pattern was found regarding how much the patients remembered of the treatment and their experience or evaluation of treatment. The narratives indicated that participants had some knowledge of SAD and the treatment at the time for the interview. Four years after treatment, participants were able to summarize the setup and contents of the treatment in general terms, and also account for a detailed recollection regarding specific parts of the treatment. They all remembered exposure, and most also reported working with cognitive techniques. This might be a good sign as exposure and cognitive restructuring has convincing research support for in the treatment of SAD (Ponniah and Hollon, 2008). Few participants remembered the module devoted to shifting focus. Theories about SAD put an emphasis on the high level of self-focus which is common for individuals with the disorder. Clark and Wells' model explains this to be an important part of maintaining SAD, and Kashdan et al. (2011) highlighted the negative bias socially anxious persons have and how this interferes with interaction with others (Kashdan et al., 2011). Not only is negative bias documented, but also a dismissal of positive information (Heinrichs and Hofmann, 2001). With this in mind, it was somewhat surprising to find that memory of the module concerning shift in attention were not more frequent. Another component of treatment was social skills training. No one mentioned this module in any direct manner, but it is possible that it was less well remembered as it came fairly late in the treatment and we cannot exclude the possibility that it was not even completed (as it falls beyond the module five limit for inclusion).

@&#LIMITATIONS@&#

The approach used in this qualitative follow-up was based on grounded theory. This study should be regarded as an early peek into the area of how participants experience guided ICBT for SAD, what they learn and find to be useful to them in the long run. The results of this study are not representative for all individuals undergoing ICBT for SAD and may only reflect the narratives of the twelve individuals who agreed to participate in the study. Merely 26% of individuals who received the e-mail invitation agreed to participate. It is of course possible that these 26% held a positive attitude towards the program, which might contribute to the positive views of the treatment. It is also possible that participants were polite and wished to spare the feelings of the researcher and associates by withholding criticism during the interviews.

In the current study, participants were not given a knowledge test on SAD, but were asked to verbally report what they remembered of treatment setup and content. The follow-up was conducted four years after treatment and all results are of course linked to memory. During the interview, one person mentioned having prepared herself for the interview by re-reading the treatment material. It is possible that others prepared themselves in the same way, without mentioning it, even if the interviewer did not ask for this specifically. Participants were contacted via e-mail before the interview. One way to prevent this might have been to instruct participants not to go through the material before the interview, since one aim of the study was to explore what participants had learnt during treatment and still remembered four years later. Another factor to consider regarding memory is that the interviewer offered cues on questions of treatment setup, but not treatment content. It is also possible that participants remembered more of the content than they verbalized. For example, that they did not come to think of everything at that exact moment or that parts of the treatment content have become so well internalized that they no longer think of it as being part of the treatment but rather a natural part of their everyday life. The aim of the study was to get a first glimpse of what the participants report on their own (free recall), but it could be of interest to look further into this in future research, by giving cues for memory recall. There are other limitations as well. For example, our method of sampling, possible interviewer and investigator bias, and the choice of interview questions may all have influenced the findings in a selective manner.

In conclusion, the current study showed that experiences of ICBT are present long after the treatment has ended and that an active approach to the treatment can be beneficial in the long run. Clinicians could consider how they might facilitate and monitor an active approach when guiding patients in ICBT, for example in their text correspondence when handling passivity (Paxling et al., 2013). Future research could focus on the experience of ICBT for other conditions and also how effects are sustained over time or forgotten and lost from memory.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This research was sponsored in part by grants from the Swedish Research Council for Health, Working Life and Welfare (Forte), the Swedish Research Council (VR), and Linköping University. We thank all co-workers in the SOFIE 6 trial for their contributions.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

