@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Can the effectiveness of an online stress management program be augmented by wearable sensor technology?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           This study examined whether wearable biosensors for self-tracking and biofeedback exercises could be used alongside a stress management program to augment effectiveness.


                        
                        
                           
                           A mixed methods design was used in order to gain insight into participant experience. Quantitative findings indicate that the stress management program worked better without, than with the sensors.


                        
                        
                           
                           Qualitative data help to explain participation burden as a likely cause of this, but also highlights the potential for future integration of biofeedback in online self-help.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Biofeedback

Stress management

Psychoeducation

CCBT

Quantified self

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Background
                  Internet interventions for mental health concerns are known to be effective, but how can developing technology be utilised to improve engagement and augment the effectiveness of these programs? One option might be to incorporate feedback about the user's physiological state into the program, via wearable sensors.
               
               
                  Objectives
                  This mixed-methods pilot study sought to examine whether the effectiveness of an online intervention for stress in students could be augmented by the use of prototype wearable sensors.
               
               
                  Methods
                  Students who were stressed, but not depressed, were allocated to a stress management program alone (n
                     =34), with sensors (n
                     =29), or to no intervention (n
                     =35). Interventions lasted 4weeks. Outcome measures included measures of stress, anxious, and depressive symptoms, and were measured immediately after the interventions and 4weeks later. Participants in the two program groups were interviewed to gain feedback about the program and the sensors.
               
               
                  Results
                  Significant pre-post reductions in stress (p
                     =.019) were observed for those in the program alone group. Significant reductions in depressive symptoms were observed among postgraduates (p
                     =.006), but not undergraduates, in the program only group. The program plus sensors group had a broadly similar, but weaker set of results, indicating that the sensors impeded, rather than augmented, the effectiveness of the program. Qualitative data explicate this finding, highlighting participation burden as a key issue. Participants provided detailed feedback about the program, the sensors, and biofeedback exercises, which are summarised and discussed with reference to the quantitative findings.
               
               
                  Conclusions
                  The newly developed stress management program could be an effective way to improve student mental health. Wearable sensor technology, particularly biofeedback exercises, may be a useful contribution for the next generation of e-therapies, but further development of the prototypes is needed and their reliability and usability will likely affect user responses to them.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

The use of technology for the promotion of self-driven psychological wellbeing has grown exponentially in recent years, and the Internet can be used for the delivery of psycho-education and therapies such as cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) to promote mental health and wellbeing (Andersson, 2009). It has been established that so-called ‘e-therapies’ can be effective and acceptable (Andrews et al., 2010; Barak et al., 2008) and cost effective (McCrone, 2004) in the treatment of a wide variety of psychological problems, including stress, among otherwise healthy individuals (Rose et al., 2013; Zetterqvist et al., 2003). Attention is turning to the future research agenda in e-mental health (Andrews and Williams, 2014; Barak and Grohol, 2011), where issues such as how to personalise and promote engagement with e-therapy programs have been highlighted as requiring attention (Cavanagh and Millings, 2013a). Some suggestions include enhancing therapeutic relationship factors (Cavanagh and Millings, 2013b), others include widening the pool of techniques utilised in e-therapies to include cognitive bias modification (Andrews and Williams, 2014), and yet others are turning to ambient intelligence (Alcañiz et al., 2009). A further direction is the inclusion of sensor technologies.

Recently, sensor technology for the detection and measurement of biological signals, such as in biofeedback, has been developing apace. The potential capacity of sensor technologies to augment the e-therapy experience, through objective, automatic monitoring and feedback, has attracted some interest (Alcañiz et al., 2009). Recent interdisciplinary funding strategies such as EC Seventh Framework Programme schemes like ITC Personal Health Systems have enabled a new synergy between e-therapies and sensor technologies. By way of context, several projects funded by such strategies involve a combination of sensors and Internet-delivered CBT treatment, with a goal of making e-therapies for depression and other mental health problems more personalised, and capitalising on the abilities of intelligent technologies to use and interpret physiological data in the delivery of e-therapy content. Two such projects were ICT4DEPRESSION (http://cordis.europa.eu/project/rcn/93794_en.html), which offered a mobile CBT treatment with wearable biosensors, and Help4Mood (http://cordis.europa.eu/project/rcn/97478_en.html), which brought together a 3D expressive virtual agent and activity monitoring for recovery from depression. In the present paper, we present an exploratory, mixed methods pilot study, from a project in the same funding round as those mentioned, investigating the feasibility of using prototype wearable sensors for periodic monitoring and biofeedback alongside an e-therapy program for stress.

Self-tracking is the practice of recording and monitoring aspects of oneself (e.g. sleep quality, management of a chronic condition, mood states, etc.), for the purposes of learning, noticing patterns, and effecting change (Swan, 2012). The appeal of ‘self-tracking’ or the ‘quantified self’ movement has grown rapidly since the inception of smartphones, which makes data capture and representation available to the masses. The inherent curiosity humans have about themselves makes self-tracking an engaging activity with a potential for clinical benefit.

Biofeedback can be considered a real-time relative of self-tracking, involving the feeding back of a biological signal, in a perceivable and comprehensible form, to the individual from whom it originates. The individual can then attempt to exert control over the signal, and produce a change in it. The continuous feeding back of the signal in real time provides reinforcement for behaviours that are having the desired effect on the signal (Zaichkowsky and Fuchs, 1988). For example, an individual might view a light flashing to indicate each beat of their heart, and attempt to slow the rate.

Offering individuals the technology with which to monitor certain biological signals, known to be associated with stress, both over time, and in real-time biofeedback, might serve to promote engagement with an e-therapy program for stress management. Two such biological signals were identified for monitoring and biofeedback purposes in the current study: heart rate variability (HRV) and alpha power.

Heart rate oscillations occur normally. Low HRV has been associated with anxiety disorders and stress (Friedman and Thayler, 1998), whereas high HRV is thought to indicate good emotion regulation abilities (Appelhans and Luecken, 2006). HRV is also commonly used in biofeedback (Lehrer, 2013). The goal of HRV biofeedback training is to produce increases in heart rate during inhalation and decreases in heart rate during exhalation, thus maximising overall heart rate variability (Lehrer et al., 2000).Training typically involves providing a visual signal of heart rate activity to the trainee, with the goal of trainees increasing their HRV (if low), often through modulating their breathing instruction. Because of the known relationship between HRV and stress (Vrijkotte et al., 2000), HRV was identified as an appropriate biosignal to allow participants to measure for themselves, periodically during the stress management program, and also to use in a realtime biofeedback exercise.

Alpha asymmetry is defined as unequal alpha power generation coming from the two hemispheres of the brain, and has been found to be associated with mental ill-health. Bruder et al. (1997) found that patients with depression, both with and without co-morbid anxiety, had significantly higher alpha asymmetry than healthy controls, and a meta-analysis found that despite many inconsistencies across studies, broadly, data support the notion of a link between frontal alpha asymmetry and depression and anxiety (Thibodeau et al., 2006).

When biofeedback involves feeding back of signals originating in the brain, it is termed neurofeedback. Neurofeedback has been used to reduce physiological symptoms such as migraine incidence (Stokes and Lappin, 2010), and to improve cognitive performance (Zoefel et al., 2011). Increases in alpha have been linked with meditative states (Cahn and Polich, 2006). Alpha neurofeedback training has been found to increase cognitive performance (Hanslmayr et al., 2005) short term memory (Nan et al., 2012), and may have benefits for anxiety and depression (Hammond, 2005). In our study, we therefore enabled participants to measure their own alpha asymmetry, periodically, during the stress management program, and also to practice a form of alpha neurofeedback training.

In the current study, we examine the feasibility of using prototype wearable sensors for periodic monitoring of biological variables as well as biofeedback and neurofeedback, to augment the effectiveness of a stress management program. We conducted an exploratory study comparing the effects of i) an online stress management program on its own; ii) the same program in conjunction with bio- and neurofeedback sensors; and iii) a no intervention control group; on psychological distress (stress, depression, and anxiety) during a stressful time period. Although the biosignals described above were measured in a self-tracking manner, they are not treated as outcomes here, due to a) their use only occurring in the sensors group, and b) the vast variation in use by participants in that group. We did not conduct a power calculation due to the novelty of the program plus sensors system (there was no prior art on which to base a power calculation), and because our goal was to examine the feasibility of using the prototype sensors, rather than to conduct a properly powered trial. Due to the novelty of the interventions, we employed a mixed methods design. Qualitative interviews were used to gain insight into the experience of the participants in both active intervention groups (stress management program alone, and stress management program with sensors).

@&#METHOD@&#

Participants were recruited via poster and email advertisements across a UK university campus. Advertisements offered the opportunity for learning stress management techniques and monetary compensation for time. Compensation was awarded at an hourly rate, which resulted in different payments across groups. Those in the control group earned £23, those in the stress management program group earned £51, and those in the stress management program plus sensors group earned £122. Participants had to complete the majority of the research tasks requested in order to receive payment. Inclusion criteria were the ability to use a computer and the internet without the aid of screen readers. Several exclusion criteria were applied to meet the requirements of the physiological aspects of the broader research programme (not discussed in this paper): daily use of recreational drugs, pregnancy, heavy smoking, diagnosed mental health condition or family history thereof, heart conditions, epilepsy, or cortisol medication. Potential participants were 98 students who were moderately stressed (scoring >14 on the Perceived Stress Scales (Cohen et al., 1983) but no more than mildly depressed (scoring <19 on the Beck Depression Inventory (Beck et al., 1996b). Participant recruitment and flow are depicted in Fig. 1
                        . At baseline lab sessions (to which 6 potential participants did not arrive), participants were 92 students (79% female, undergraduate n
                        =43, postgraduate n
                        =49), with a mean age of 23.71 (SD 4.75). Fifty-five percent were British and 45% were international students.

We used the 10-item Perceived Stress Scale, PSS-10 (Cohen et al., 1983) to measure self-reported stress at screening, and the 4 item version of the same measure subsequently, to avoid participation burden. The PSS is designed to measure the extent to which respondents feel their lives are uncontrollable, unpredictable, and overloading. The 10-item PSS typically has good reliability (α ranges from .78 to .91 across 3 large US samples (Cohen and Janicki-Deverts, 2012). In a representative US sample, an overall mean score of 13.02 (SD 6.35), 14.02 (SD 6.2) for the 20–29year olds, and 15.3 (SD 6.6) among students was reported (Cohen and Williamson, 1988). We therefore settled on middle ground a cut off of a score of 14 or higher for inclusion in our study. A recently published UK based study (Warttig et al., 2013) reported good reliability for the 4-item PSS (α=.77) and presented norms data including a mean of 6.66 (SD 3.23) for the 18–29year olds. No specific data were reported for students (Warttig et al., 2013).

To measure depression, we used the Beck Depression Inventory-II (BDI-II) (Beck et al., 1996b). The BDI-II has good reliability and validity (α=.91, (Beck et al. 1996a). Beck et al. (1996a, 1996b) report that scores of 0–13 represent minimal depression, scores of 14–19 represent mild depression, scores of 20–28 represent moderate depression, and scores of 29–63 represent severe depression. For the broader purposes of our research programme, participants with a BDI-II score>19 were excluded from participation.

To measure anxiety, we used the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory-Trait (STAI-T, Spielberger et al., 1970). The STAI-T is a 20 item questionnaire, measuring feelings of tension, worry and apprehension. Item are rated on a 4 point scale of agreement (1=‘not at all’, 4=‘very much’). All items are summed to provide a total score ranging from 20 to 80, and higher scores indicate greater anxiety. Previous research has found the measure to be reliable (α=.92, (Spielberger, 1983).

Two interventions were used in this study, a stress management program (SMP) and a prototype wearable sensor kit, comprising an ECG, and an EEG sensor, and a netbook from which to operate them. Both kinds of sensor had periodic monitoring functions, the data from which could be observed in the stress management program, and additionally, bio/neurofeedback exercises, which were completed in separate software. Participants either received the standalone SMP, the SMP plus the sensor kit (SMP+S), or no intervention.

The ECG sensor could be worn for periods of up to 24h. The sensor recorded heart rate, heart rate variability, and physical activity from a 3 axis accelerometer. For physical activity, the sensor recorded the 3 axis accelerometer values every half second, and stored the average result every 10min. For heart rate and heart rate variability, the sensor recorded 128 heart beats every 10min. The average heart rate was calculated and stored. A Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) was calculated using the 128 samples. Heart rate variability was calculated as a variance and as a ratio taking a sum of the low frequency and high frequency components of the FFT. The feedback viewed by the user from these data consisted of two scores – one for HRV (described as vagal tone) and one for sleep quality (based on physical activity). Both scores were presented graphically, as percentages, with higher scores referring to greater vagal tone and better sleep quality. Participants were informed that scores of 50% represented average scores achieved by previous research volunteers.

The ECG sensor could also be used for biofeedback training. In biofeedback mode, the ECG sensor transmitted a stream of raw data (the differences between heartbeats) to a software application on a netbook. The netbook software calculated the heart rate variability and displayed the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) result to the user as a frequency power spectrum. The software calculated the energy in the spectrum around a specific range of frequencies, which matched the optimum respiration rate for that person (based on pre-defined values according to age and gender). The software displayed an animated cue for in-breaths and out-breaths, which encouraged the user to breathe at their optimal rate. When optimal breathing was achieved, the power spectrum rose. Rises in the power spectrum produced an additional graphical cue to the user – a grayed-out butterfly became increasingly colourful.

The EEG sensor could be used to take short (5–10min), periodic recordings of alpha asymmetry. The EEG sensor collected raw data collected from 5 electrodes (including 2 reference points), and sent it wirelessly to the netbook software. The software calculated the power in the alpha range of frequencies in the raw data relating to the FP1 and FP2 electrodes, on the left and right sides of the forehead. These data were then converted into a ratio score, and could be viewed graphically by the user. Scores closer to 0 were said to indicate greater symmetry between the alpha power generated by the left and right hemispheres, which was explained to users as a possible indicator of feeling more positive and less stressed.

The EEG sensor could also be used for alpha neurofeedback training. In this mode, the netbook software received alpha and beta power data from the sensor. The software emitted a pleasant, waterfall-like sound to the user. The volume of this sound depended on the amount of power in the alpha part of the EEG spectrum, divided by the power in the beta part of the spectrum. The user could then learn how to take control of the volume of waterfall by increasing their alpha relative to beta power.

The stress management program used in the current study was developed specifically for this project, drawing on a widely used existing program for depression with or without comorbid anxiety, ‘Beating the Blues’. Our goal was to develop a system that could be used for stress rather than depression, with, or without, the sensors. In designing the content we drew from the principles of cognitive behavioural therapy and positive psychology, while also offering psychoeducation about the nature of stress, and the importance and function of attachment relationships and styles. Structurally, the program was designed as a user-driven ‘pick and mix’ program, rather than a defined or responsive route through the content. After a compulsory introduction incorporating stress psychoeducation and a goal-setting exercise, users could dip in and out of a range of modules as they chose. Modules offered were: relaxation, thought challenging, assessing values, insomnia relief, problem solving, and social relationships. The homepage provided access to each of these modules, additional information sheets, a graphical feedback stress-tracker using the Perceived Stress Scale (Cohen et al., 1983) and buttons to revisit the stress psychoeducation and goal-setting modules. The homepage also provided a button to access graphical feedback of data collected by using the sensors for periodic monitoring, where relevant.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

Participants meeting the inclusion criteria were invited to schedule themselves for a first lab session. Random allocation to groups was not possible due to the particular scheduling challenges associated with the sensors group. Thus, lab sessions were designated in advance for the stress management program group (SMP), the stress management program plus sensors group (SMP+S), or the control group. The allocation of sessions to intervention groups was concealed from participants. Participants booked themselves into lab sessions at their convenience, unknowingly allocating themselves to group.

All participants attended a first lab session where they completed some experimental tasks for a different research project, followed by a battery of questionnaires. Within 1–2days, they attended a second lab session, where they completed further experimental tasks for a different research project, and were informed which intervention group they had been assigned to. Those in the control group were advised that they would have access to the program after the end of the study and informed that the research team would be in touch to schedule their final lab session 4weeks later. Those in the SMP group received an explanation of the program, along with a 5min demo. Participants were asked to use it 2–3 times per week, for a minimum of 10min each time, and to get in touch with the team in the event of any questions or problems. They were informed that the research team would be in touch to schedule their final lab session 4weeks later. Those in the SMP+S group were introduced to the concept of sensors and shown how to complete an EEG recording, and how to begin an ECG recording. They were then sent home wearing the ECG sensor, and returned for an additional lab session 1–2days later.

In the additional lab session (undertaken only by the SMP+S group), participants were shown how to download the ECG data they had recorded since the previous session, and taught how to use the biofeedback and neurofeedback programs, and were also provided with the same 5min demo of the Optimise Me program as the SMP group. Participants were asked to aim to complete each week: 1 EEG recording, 1 ECG recording, biofeedback and neurofeedback, and 2×10min sessions on Optimise Me, where their sensor recordings data could be viewed. They were then asked to get in touch with any questions or problems and were informed that the research team would be in touch to schedule their final lab session 4weeks later.

Final lab sessions were scheduled 4weeks after the beginning of the interventions. In this session, equipment was returned and the experimental tasks for another research study were repeated. Participants also completed the same questionnaire measures as they did at baseline. Participants in either the SMP or SMP+S groups were asked to participate in a short interview (SMP n
                        =23, SMP+S n
                        =17) or focus group (4 x SMP focus groups of 2 people, 1 x SMP+S focus group of 3 people, and 3 SMP+S focus groups of 2 people) to provide feedback about their experience of the SMP and sensors (where relevant).

The semi-structured interview probed for information about what they liked and disliked about the SMP, each of the sensors, and each way of using the sensors, and what changes they would recommend should anything be further developed. Data were audio-recorded and transcribed. Participants in the SMP and SMP+S groups were free to continue use the stress management program (without sensors) after this point at their own choosing (they were not guided or requested to do).
                           1
                        
                        
                           1
                           Participants were asked in the final questionnaire whether, and how often, they had used the stress management program during the month between post-intervention and the (current)1month follow-up questionnaire. Of those in the SMP group, 19 reported not using it, and 14 reported using it. Of those in the SMP+S program, 24 reported not using it, and 2 reported using it. Participants in the SMP+S group were less likely to use the program than participants in the SMP group (χ2 (1, n
                              =59)=8.88, p
                              =.003). Among those that used the program, frequency of use was fairly limited. In the SMP group, 12 reported having used it once or twice, and 2 reported having used it a few times. In the SMP+S group, 1 reported using it once or twice, and 1 reported using it a few times. No participants in either group reported having used it once per week, or twice per week.
                         Finally, 4weeks later, participants were asked to complete the questionnaires again, online. Participants were thanked and debriefed.

We used mixed design ANOVAs to assess the existence of between group differences in outcome variables at post-intervention compared to pre-intervention. Undergraduates (UG) and postgraduates (PG) face different kinds of study-related stress (high stress flashpoints in the academic year versus chronic, ongoing stress respectively), which may reflect the distinction made between chronic and acute stress in depression literature (McGonagle and Kessler, 1990). We therefore took UG/PG status into account in our analysis. For each target variable (stress, depression, and anxiety) we first used a 3 (Group: control, SMP, SMP+S) × 2 (Time: baseline, follow-up) × 2 (Status: UG, PG) mixed repeated measures ANOVA comparing pre- to post-intervention scores (model 1). If UG/PG status affected outcomes, we expected to observe a significant time x group x year interaction. In the absence of this significant three-way interaction term, we then adopted a more parsimonious model: a 3 (Group: control, SMP, SMP+S) × 2 (Time: baseline, follow-up) mixed ANOVA with repeated measures pre- to post-intervention (model 2). We first investigated these models for the post-intervention data, to compare pre- and post- intervention scores, and then subsequently repeated the analysis with the follow-up data, to compare pre-intervention and 1month after post-intervention scores.

Descriptive statistics are shown in Table 1
                        .

The Time x Group x Status interaction in model 1 was not significant (F(2, 83)=1.344, p
                           =.266), so we proceeded to model 2. In model 2, the main effects for Time (F(1,86)=.953, p
                           =.332) and Group (F(2, 86)=.582, p
                           =.561) were not significant, an indication that neither of these variables had an independent main effect on stress scores. The Time x Group interaction was significant (F(2, 86)=4.285, p
                           =.017), indicating that the change in stress scores from pre- to post-intervention differed as a function of intervention group. Post-hoc analysis with one-way ANOVAs showed no significant differences between groups at pre-intervention (F (2,89)=1.262, p
                           =.288) but differences approaching significance at post-intervention (F (2,86)=2.53, p
                           =.085). The post hoc Tukey test revealed a difference approaching significance (p
                           =.070) between the SMP (M =5.61, SD=2.66) and control group (M=7.10, SD=2.578) at post-intervention, with a Cohen's d of .57, indicating a medium effect size. Paired samples t-tests showed that participants in the control group had higher (worse) PSS scores at post-intervention approaching significance (t (29)=−1.975, p
                           =.058) with a Cohen's d of −.40, indicated a small effect size. Those in the SMP group had significantly lower (better) PSS scores at post-intervention (t (32)=2.48, p
                           =.019) compared to pre-intervention, with a Cohen's d of .53, indicating a medium effect size. Those in the SMP+S group also decreased from pre- to post-intervention, but not significantly (t (25)=.849, p
                           =.404, Cohen's d=.21, a small effect size).

We repeated this model with the follow-up data (1month after post-intervention), finding no main effect of Group (F(2, 86)=1.114, p
                           =.333), a significant effect of Time (F(2,85)=8.873, p
                           <.001), and a Time x Group interaction approaching significance (F(4, 172)=4.285, p
                           =.074). This indicates that all groups improved over time, but the level of improvement differs by group. Fig. 2
                            displays the pre-intervention, post-intervention, and follow-up PSS means for each group. An ANOVA probing the differences between groups at 1month follow-up revealed no significant differences (F(2, 46)=1.414, p
                           =.249).

Our findings indicate that both intervention groups improved their stress scores over the intervention period, and appear to continue to improve over the following month (Fig. 2). However, the differences between groups at 1month follow-up were no longer large enough to be statistically significant. The greatest improvements were evident in the SMP group, followed by the SMP+S group. Thus, while both groups improved, only the SMP did so in a statistically meaningful way, and this greater improvement relative to the other two groups was not maintained at 1month follow-up.

To avoid over-burdening our participants, we used BDI-II during screening (ensuring that participants passed our exclusion criteria) but did not repeat the measure at pre- intervention. We therefore analyse changes in BDI-II scores from screening to post-intervention, and from screening to follow-up.

In model 1 for BDI-II, the three-way interaction Time x Group x Status (F(2, 83), = 3.138, p
                           =.049) was significant, indicating that undergraduates and postgraduates differed in the way their scores changed as a function of group. We therefore based our subsequent analysis on model 1. No significant main effects were found for Time (F(1, 83)=2.370, p
                           =.127), Group (F(2, 83)=1.656, p
                           =.197), or Status (F(1, 83)=.076, p
                           =.784). No significant two-way interactions were found for Time X Group (F(2,83)=1.336, p
                           =.269), Time X Status: F(1, 83)=1.668, p
                           =.200), or Group x Year (F(2, 83)=1.405, p
                           =.251). This model is depicted graphically in Figs. 3 and 4
                           
                           .

Post hoc analyses using one-way ANOVAs were used to probe the 3-way interaction by examining differences between groups. As it appears in the graph, there were no significant differences between groups for undergraduates at either screening or post-intervention. Among the postgraduates however, while the groups did not differ significantly at screening (F (2, 46)=.071, p
                           =.932), there was a significant difference between the groups at post-intervention (F (2, 46)=5.959, p
                           =.005). Post hoc Tukeys reveal that specifically, the difference between the SMP and control groups (p
                           =.006), and the difference between SMP+S and control group (p
                           =.047) were both significant, with Cohen's ds of 1.04 and .84 respectively, which equate to large effect sizes. Additionally, paired sample t- tests were used to probe the interaction by examining within-group differences. Consistent with the ANOVA described above, no significant differences were found for undergraduates. Among postgraduates, while those in the control group had increased scores of depressive symptoms at post- intervention, this was not significantly higher than at screening (t (18)=−1.030, p
                           =.317), and had a small effect size (Cohen's d=−.28). Those in the SMP group had significantly lower (better) BDI-II scores at post- intervention (t (17)=3.150, p
                           =.006) compared to screening, with a Cohen's d of .93 (a large effect size). Finally, those in the SMP+S group also showed a trend approaching significance for decreased BDI-II scores from screening to post- intervention (t (11)=1.890, p
                           =.085), with a medium effect size (Cohen's d=.60).

We then repeated this model with the 1-month follow up data to examine changes from screening to 1-month post intervention, but found that the three-way interaction Time x Group x Year (F(4, 166)=1.512, p
                           =.201) was non-significant, so we opted for model 2. In model 2 for BDI-II scores at 1month follow up, we found no significant effect of Group (F(2, 86)=1.801, p
                           =.171) a significant effect of Time (F(2,85)=10.668, p
                           <.001), and a significant Time x Group interaction (F(4, 172)=2.865, p
                           =.025) indicating that improvements in BDI-II scores over time differed as a function of group. This model is depicted in Fig. 5
                           .

One-way ANOVAs were used to look at the differences between the groups. At screening there was no difference between the groups (F (2, 89)=.191, p
                           =.826) and while at the 1-month follow-up there appears to be a larger difference between the groups, the difference was not significant (F (2, 86)=2.136, p
                           =.124). Therefore, no between-group post hoc Tukeys were conducted. Investigation of the within-group differences from screening to follow up using repeated measures t-tests revealed no significant differences for the control (t (29)=1.652, p
                           =.109, Cohen's d=.45, a small effect size) or SMP+S (t (25)=1.212, p
                           =.237, Cohen's d=.27, a small effect size) groups, but a significant difference for the SMP group (t (32)=1.212, p
                           <.001, Cohen's d=1.20, a large effect size). At follow up then, while all groups improved compared to screening, the SMP group was the only group to improve in a statistically meaningful way.

At post- intervention, undergrads and postgrads differed in the extent to which their depression scores changed, with no effects of intervention group among undergrads, but both intervention groups doing better than the control group among postgrads, with the SMP group showing the most improvement. At follow up, there was no longer any distinction between undergrads’ and postgrads’ changes in depression scores, with the whole SMP group showing a statistically meaningful improvement. The SMP+S and control groups’ pre- intervention to follow up improvements were only slight, suggesting that for depressive symptoms as measured by the BDI-II, the SMP was a more effective intervention than SMP+S.

In model 1 for anxiety, as measured by the STAI-T, the three way interaction Time X Group x Status was not significant (F(2, 83)=.095, p
                           =.910). We therefore applied model 2, and again found no significant main effects of Time (F(1,86)=.515, p
                           =.475) or Group (F(2, 86)=.302, p
                           =.740). The Time x Group interaction was also non-significant (F(2, 86)=.369, p
                           =.693). The interventions therefore had no effect on anxiety from pre- to post- intervention. We repeated model 1 examining changes from pre-intervention to 1-month follow up, and again found no statistical evidence to separate the undergrads and postgrads (i.e. no significant Time x Group x Status interaction term). Model 2 was therefore repeated for the 1-month follow up data. This model yielded a significant main effect of Time (F(2,85)=5.335, p
                           =.007), indicating that all three groups improved over time. The main effect of Group was non-significant (F(2, 86)=.746, p
                           =.477), as was the interaction between Time x Group (F(4, 172)=.729, p
                           =.573), indicating that improvement did not differ as a function of intervention group. Thus, while all groups improved over time in anxiety, the interventions made no difference to this improvement.

All interviews and focus group data for the SMP+S group was recorded successfully and transcribed (n
                        =26). Data from the SMP group was unfortunately incomplete: three participants were not interviewed. In one case, the participant had to leave the lab session early; in two cases it was due to experimenter error. Data from two further SMP participants was lost due to corruption of a data file. In the end, data was successfully recorded and transcribed for 28 out of 33 SMP participants.

Transcribed data was subjected to theoretical, thematic analysis (Braun and Clarke, 2006) using NVivo 9. In this approach, data is coded in the light of a-priori research questions and pre-existing knowledge rather than being entirely data-driven. A second feature of our analysis was that we considered only the semantic (explicit) and not the latent content in statements by our participants (Braun and Clarke, 2006). In other words, we took our data at face value. Themes were derived by line-by-line coding of the dataset. The coding structure was then reviewed and revised, prior to additional re-reading and re-coding. We then formulated thematic maps for our central concepts. For brevity, we here present summaries of only the aspects of our findings that help to explain our quantitative results, rather than our full set of qualitative findings.

Participants in both the SMP and SMP+S groups provided a lot of feedback about the Optimise Me stress management program. The program was viewed in broadly positive terms overall, and the majority found some parts useful:


                        
                           “Very brilliant! I just thought it was really really good and I definitely want to continue using it, you know.” (Participant 70, SMP group).
                        
                     


                        
                           “I found it quite useful yeah. Yeah, um, the thinking right and the goal setting, were especially... I probably used those the most.” (Participant 41, SMP+S group).
                        
                     

Some participants also said that they thought it had helped to reduce their own symptoms of stress and provided examples of how:


                        
                           
                              “I think the main thing that I found useful was the sleep stuff and like some of it I heard that you should do before, but I had never done it. Because of this I did do it and it did actually, like, help.” Participant 1, SMP group.
                        
                     


                        
                           
                              “I found myself using it more so when like, I was feeling stressed or something had stressed me out, so I thought I'll try that now and see how that goes… I thought the breathing one especially was quite good, because I'd never tried that before…” Participant 95, SMP group.
                        
                     


                        
                           “…In terms of changing your attitude and thinking in a different sort of way to achieve your goal. I think it's about gradually changing your mind-set.” Participant 32, SMP+S group.
                        
                     

Other participants felt that they had not learned anything from the program:


                        
                           “I didn't really feel like I learnt something.” Participant 39, SMP+S group.
                        
                     

These data serve to explicate our quantitative finding that the program was useful in reducing stress, suggesting some of the specific ways in which participants might have benefited from the program.

In our quantitative data, we found that the SMP group seemed to benefit more than the SMP+S group, suggesting that the prototype sensors impeded, rather than augmented the effectiveness of the stress management program. Our qualitative data provide some insight into this. Many participants experienced technical problems with the prototype sensors, which were associated with feelings of frustration:


                        
                           “I'd be there for 20
                              
                              minutes, like, trying to click, like, reset, because… I like turn off all my electronics and there was still, like, no reason it's not going below the curve. So that was quite frustrating.” Participant 37, SMP+S group.
                        
                     


                        
                           “…When you can't get the signal and you can't do it in the first place that's really annoying, and it can end up being very time consuming.” Participant 39, SMP+S group.
                        
                     


                        
                           “I think it's OK, it always seems to be broken or cannot...does not work, so I was quite frustrated about it...” Participant 43, SMP+S group.
                        
                     

These technical issues may help to account for our quantitative findings. We consider that problems with the sensors may have negatively impacted outcomes, through frustration with the sensors directly affecting psychological state. It is also possible that the technical problems could have impacted on outcomes indirectly, by reducing participant motivation, however, we found no relevant qualitative data on this issue. In fact, for at least one participant, using the sensors (without technical difficulties) encouraged program use:


                        
                           “I honestly just went on just to check my sensor, but then was like let's do this, let's do that, oh that would help, so… it wasn't like it was something I had to remember to do, it was just curiosity to see, and then I would go on from there.” Participant 55, SMP+S group.
                        
                     

Despite the technical problems experienced with the sensors, many participants reported enjoying the bio- and neuro-feedback exercises:


                        
                           “Yeah, they were a lot of fun. I really liked the EEG thing, it was so cool. I actually did it in front a couple of my friends and they thought it was cool as well. (haha!) OK, yeah, trying to get the volume up, while you're calming down. Sometimes I would leave a tap open, filling a bowl, just to hear the running water sound again, just for a moment just to feel calm it was very nice … I loved that… I love that one.” Participant 55, SMP+S group.
                        
                     


                        
                           “The other one, the ECG one, I thought that was fine. Just following the breathing system, it was nice to see the butterfly getting all colourful – knowing that I did it right.” Participant 32, SMP+S group.
                        
                     

Many had a preference for one feedback exercise over the other (approximately even preferences were expressed for each kind), but struggled to articulate exactly why:


                        
                           “The EEG one wasn't so bad, the sound getting quieter and louder was quite satisfying. But the breathing one exercise looking at the circle and the butterfly wasn't as good. I don't know why …I never quite got the hang of that, not like I did the EEG.” Participant 34, SMP+S group.
                        
                     

Common responses likened both exercises to meditation or relaxation, and participants reported enjoying the positive feedback received when they were achieving the desired state. A couple of participants mentioned a new-found interest in meditation as a result of using the biofeedback exercises:


                        
                           “I want to meditate now, I'm going to get a meditation CD.” Participant 35, SMP+S group.
                        
                     


                        
                           “Well, since doing them I've started meditating …Yeah, I just thought about you know, sitting in a room and thinking about your brain and I just went to meditation from there, but yeah, it's been good.” Participant 36, SMP+S group.
                        
                     

All in all, sensor experiences were mixed, and themes of frustration with technical difficulties were dominant. However, regarding biofeedback, many had positive experiences with one or other biofeedback exercises, and reported appreciation for them.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

In this study examining the effectiveness of a stress management program with or without wearable sensors at reducing psychological distress in students, we found evidence for the utility of the program, and some aspects of the sensors. However, overall, using the sensor package served to reduce, rather than increase the effectiveness of the program. This is likely explained by our qualitative data suggesting participation burden associated with using the sensors. This burden mainly stemmed from technical difficulties related to the sensors being prototypes. Despite the difficulties experienced, positive feedback was received about the concept of the system as a whole, the Optimise Me program, and the bio- and neuro- feedback training programs.

That our stress management program was effective in reducing stress in students after a brief intervention period of 4weeks is encouraging. It is also in keeping with existing literature that shows that a program to reduce stress in an otherwise healthy population can be useful (Rose et al., 2013; Zetterqvist et al., 2003). Although the improvements in the SMP and SMP+S groups continued in the month following the intervention, it was not at a great enough rate to remain significant. This might be to do with a drop in their usage of the program.1 While participants in both groups continued to have access to the program, their use was no longer prescribed. The SMP+S group were less likely to use it during this period than the SMP group, and this may mean that the sensor experience had put the SMP+S group off engaging with the program, even after the sensors themselves were handed back to the research team. It is also possible that handing back the sensors implicitly signalled the end of the ‘real’ intervention for the sensors group, for some of whom the sensors constituted a useful aspect of the intervention, although further research would be needed to explore this issue. There are some important implications for future research and practice involving experimental technological augmentation of interventions that are already known to be effective. Too much technology might do more harm than good, especially if still in development and not working optimally.

That said, our study has found potential value in the bio- and neuro-feedback exercises. Despite being beta programs, most participants who used them very much enjoyed either the bio- or the neurofeedback, and reported perceived benefits from using them. In our study, these programs ran in separate software to the stress management program, and required the use of specially designed prototype sensors. The sensor kit experience as a whole was therefore not a smooth and integrated one. More research and development is therefore needed in how future iterations of e-therapy programs might be able to incorporate these kinds of biofeedback training into the e-therapy software itself, potentially using less intrusive, more familiar and commonly occurring sensors, such as those present in a Smart phone, or wearable fitness device.

While our study has yielded some interesting and useful findings, both for the e-therapy research community and the developers of interventions and biosensors, it is not without limitations. Firstly, our participants were paid for their time. Due to the prototype nature of the sensors and the time required to use them it was deemed appropriate to pay our participants, both for ethical and practical reasons related to recruitment. We paid our participants an estimated hourly rate, and the amount of time required for participation differed by intervention group. However, the beneficial effects we found for the stress management program reducing stress cannot be accounted for by the monetary value of the payment, because the SMP group received less money than the SMP+S group, and yet they improved the most. In other words, the differences in improvements were not commensurate with the differences in payments, leading us to believe that the improvements were related to the interventions, and independent of the financial incentives. However, because payment was contingent on study completion, further research is needed to examine program adherence in an unpaid sample.

A further limitation is that due to the prescribed nature of participation tasks we set our participants, our study does is not generalizable. Future research is needed to further examine the utility of the Optimise Me stress management program, without a prescribed usage plan and financial incentive, on a larger scale. Despite this, our study suggests that the program could be effective. Although not significant, the SMP group had continued to improve at follow up, despite a drop in usage. It might be that the skills learned in the program take longer than the 4week intervention period to become fully integrated into an individual's stress management strategies. A larger and properly powered trial would allow this to be examined. We had some small and some medium effects that approached significance, so it may be appropriate for future research to base power calculations on small-medium effect sizes. A trial employing our 3 group, 3 time-point design powered at .90, with alpha set at .05, would require 1017 participants to detect small effect size, and 168 participants to detect a medium effect size.

The Optimise Me stress management program was designed in a ‘pick and mix’ format, and other than our qualitative data, we have no way of knowing exactly which areas of the program participants accessed, or how frequently. It might be that some aspects of the program contained more effective ingredients than others, or that some aspects were responsible for the reduction in stress, while others were responsible for the reductions in depression. Future research could seek to tease out the active ingredients through dismantling (Andersson et al., 2008). Such work could also seek to identify the mechanisms of improvement by measuring potential mediators of the beneficial effects, such as skills learned at various points in the program, and even changes in biosignals in response to stress (Rose et al., 2013) as a result of practicing biofeedback.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

We conclude that the stress management program Optimise Me shows promise for reducing stress in a student population. Further research is required to see the extent of its potential, both in student and other populations. We conclude that biofeedback exercises might be a useful adjunct for incorporation into the next generation of e-therapies, but that the reliability and usability of the technology is of utmost importance. Future research and development, including extensive usability testing, is required to ensure that wearable sensor technology can augment, rather than dilute the known benefits of online self-help programs.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The authors acknowledge Kevin Collins, formerly of ETH Zurich, for making the sensor software, Ultrasis UK Ltd. for making Optimise Me, and MA Systems for making the sensors. This work was funded by European Commission F7 Grant 248544. The funding source had no involvement in the preparation of this paper.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

