@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Developing an integrated, Internet-based self-help programme for young people with depression and alcohol use problems

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Overall, the DEAL Project programme was well-received by young people and experts.


                        
                        
                           
                           The programme was found to be acceptable, and have potential utility.


                        
                        
                           
                           Major concerns related to program engagement and motivation.


                        
                        
                           
                           Modifications pertained to visual elements, simplification, reminders and summaries.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Depression

Alcohol

Comorbidity

Internet interventions

Youth

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Depression and alcohol use problems represent two of the major causes of disease burden in young people today. These conditions frequently co-occur and this co-occurrence is associated with increased risks and poorer outcomes than either disorder in isolation. Integrated treatments have been shown to be effective, however, there remains a significant gap between those in need of treatment and those receiving it, particularly in young people. The increased availability of Internet-based programmes to complement health care presents a unique opportunity in the treatment of these conditions. This paper presents the findings of a development stage of the first Internet-based programme for young people (aged 18–25years) with co-occurring depression and alcohol use problems: the DEAL Project (DEpression-ALcohol). This stage involved engaging young people and mental health professionals to provide feedback regarding the acceptability and feasibility of a draft version of the programme.
                  The 4-module draft programme incorporated evidence-based cognitive-behavioural therapy techniques and motivational enhancement principles. A series of focus groups with young people (n=25) and interviews of key professionals (n=6) were conducted. The feedback provided by this phase of testing was used to inform revisions to the programme.
                  Overall, the DEAL Project programme was well-received and provides an innovative new platform for the treatment of co-occurring depression and alcohol use problems in young people. The next phase will include an evaluation of programme efficacy. If found to be efficacious, the programme has the potential to improve outcomes, reduce disease burden, and increase treatment uptake in this vulnerable group.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Depression and alcohol use problems are two of the major causes of disease burden in young people (Gore et al., 2011) and commonly these conditions co-occur (Teesson et al., 2009). Where this occurs these conditions serve to maintain and ex]acerbate one another (Quello et al., 2005). Compared to those with a single condition ‘comorbidity’ is associated with increased symptom severity and suicidality (Esposito-Smythers and Spirito, 2004; Sher et al., 2009; Sher and Zalsman, 2005), and poorer functioning (Erfan et al., 2010; Sullivan et al., 2005) and quality of life (Lubman et al., 2007).

The National Comorbidity Survey — Adolescent version (NCS-A) found approximately one-quarter (25%) of young people affected by at least one class of disorder also met criteria for a disorder from one additional class; 11% were affected by three classes of disorders; and 7% were affected by four or five classes of disorder (Merikangas et al., 2010). Similarly, data from the Australian National Survey of Mental Health and Well-Being (NSMHWB) indicates that 18.4% of young people (aged 16–25) with a lifetime alcohol use disorder (AUD), also met criteria for major depressive disorder (MDD) at some point in their lives (ABS, 2008). Conversely, 36.6% of those with a lifetime MDD also met criteria for AUD at some point in their lives.

AUDs are defined as substance use disorders and sub-classified as mild, moderate, and severe by Diagnostic and Statistical Manual-5 (American Psychiatric Association, 2013). Similarly, MDD (commonly referred to as depression) a mood disorder characterised by varying degrees of sadness, disappointment, loneliness, hopelessness, self-doubt, and guilt. These diagnostic criteria are only part of the story especially in younger populations who show high rates of hazardous alcohol use (Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, 2010) and subthreshold depression (Fergusson et al., 2005), which have the potential to dramatically affect vitally supportive relationships, or significantly disrupt career and study plans (Davis et al., 2004; Masten et al., 2004; Vander Stoep et al., 2000).

As a result of the severe impact of these conditions intervening early is crucial to long-term health and wellbeing. However, this group is considerably less likely to access traditional health services (Reavley et al., 2010) and therefore innovative intervention approaches are needed to resolve this gap. Internet-based interventions have recently emerged as an effective means of treating depression (Andersson and Cuijpers, 2009; Cuijpers et al., 2011) and alcohol use problems (Riper et al., 2011; White et al., 2010). Despite increasing support for integrated psychotherapeutic approaches to comorbidity (Hesse, 2009; Kelly et al., 2012), no Internet-based comorbidity interventions of this kind exist (Deady et al., in press; Deas and Brown, 2006; Singh, 2009).

These therapies have the unique potential to overcome a number of traditional barriers (via flexibility, anonymity, and accessibility) to treatment-seeking in young people (Rickwood et al., 2007). Furthermore, widespread youth Internet use (ABS, 2009; Fox, 2011) makes this form of treatment particularly encouraging for use with younger populations (Burns et al., 2009; Christensen and Griffiths, 2000). Research suggests that young people also feel empowered online (Valaitis, 2005), and are comfortable accessing both general health information and specific mental health treatment online (Gould et al., 2002; Nicholas et al., 2004). Furthermore, Internet-based treatments have the potential to increase treatment standardisation (McCrone et al., 2004; Taylor and Luce, 2003), reduce costs associated with treatment (by reducing contact time with the therapist), and overcome imbalances in access and availability (Blanchard et al., 2008).

In response to this treatment gap, the authors began the development of the DEAL Project—the first Internet-delivered, integrated treatment package for young people (aged 18–25years) with co-occurring depression and alcohol use problems. The draft DEAL Project consists of four, 1-hour modules, to be completed (one per week) over a 4-week period and uses cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) and motivational interviewing (MI) techniques to deliver an integrated psychological treatment for depression and alcohol use problems.

This paper presents the final development phase (Craig et al., 2008) of the DEAL Project in which young people and mental health professionals were engaged in order to enhance and refine the programme and explore the acceptability and preliminary feasibility of programme elements.

@&#METHOD@&#

Clinical content of the programme is based on the SHADE (Self Help for Alcohol/other drug use and DEpression) programme, a general population computerised comorbidity intervention targeting these disorders (Kay-Lambkin et al., 2009, 2011a,b,c). Modifications were made to the SHADE programme's length, language, design, and flow in line with current best practice regarding ‘youth-friendly’ treatment (Chanen and McCutcheon, 2008; Hides et al., 2007; McDermott et al., 2010; Proude et al., 2009; Saunders and Rey, 2011; Winters et al., 2011) in an attempt to make it more youth appropriate. In order to create a programme relevant to the experiences of young people, tailored youth case study vignettes were incorporated. These case studies aimed to engage, via the use of storytelling, and to elucidate depression and alcohol use experiences for the user (McDrury and Alterio, 2002). They also provided examples of skill practice and the recovery process. In a review of current alcohol/drug support websites, Kay-Lambkin et al. (2011a,b,c), found that inclusion of life stories was important, as it personalised the experience, accentuated information, relevance, and engendered hope. Visual elements are a critical part of youth engagement (Sauter et al., 2009) particularly online. Kay-Lambkin et al. (2011a,b,c) reported that a site's “look and feel” was important in attaining and maintaining young user interest in alcohol-related websites. As such the programme incorporated the key features recommended by this study:
                           
                              •
                              Engaging use of colour, graphics, or images and interactive elements;

Clear, easy-to-read text (language level and typography);

A ‘clean’, uncluttered layout (minimal text, inclusion of graphics);

Simple navigation (e.g., ability to readily returning to the home page);

A logical flow of information throughout the site.

A major change to the programme was a reduction in length, producing a brief intervention. Although extended interventions have been shown to be more effective compared to brief interventions (Baker et al., 2012), attrition was a significant issue in longer programmes, particularly Internet-based trials (Christensen et al., 2006). Furthermore, secondary analysis on the SHADE dataset suggests that although most participants failed to complete all ten sessions, young people (aged under 30) completed significantly fewer sessions than their older counterparts (Deady et al., in press). Specifically, the DEAL Project modules are as follows:
                           
                              1.
                              Where Are You At?: Psycho-education, assessment, goal-setting, mood/activity/alcohol use monitoring.

Getting Moving Again: Behavioural activation, decisional balance (alcohol use), negotiation of change plan, activity scheduling.

Taking Charge of your Thoughts: Mood monitoring, cognitive restructuring.

Coping with Tough Situations: Coping skills including mindfulness and relaxation, problem solving, drink reduction and refusal, relapse-planning and management.

Participants for the youth focus groups were recruited via university campus advertisements and snowball sampling (i.e., word-of-mouth). Advertisements explained that participants would help in the development of an online self-help programme for young people with depression and alcohol use problems. To be eligible for inclusion, interested individuals needed to be aged between 18 and 25years and report regular alcohol use (past month weekly use) or past month depressed mood. Although not indicative of specific problems in these areas, these criteria were used to attain feedback from young people on specific age-related patterns of alcohol use or depression, appropriateness of language, design, etc. Comorbidity was not a requirement as this would have limited recruitment and was not believed to be associated with differential outcomes in the areas of interest.

Twelve field professionals (clinicians and researchers) were contacted via email and asked to provide feedback on the development of an online self-help programme for young people with depression and alcohol use problems.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

Five 2- to 3-hour youth focus groups and six professional interviews were conducted to enhance and refine the programme, and evaluate its acceptability (appropriateness, accuracy, usefulness, satisfaction) and feasibility (deliverability, potential effectiveness). Ethical approval was obtained from University of New South Wales (UNSW) Human Research Ethics Committee (HREC; # HC12147) and all participants provided informed consent.

Each participant was allocated sequentially to one of the five focus groups and provided with a comprehensive booklet of screenshots of the programme. The booklet matched the programme in all ways except for the ability to enter information and receive any relevant feedback. The facilitator explained the role of the group was to provide feedback on the draft version of the programme in order to improve the acceptability and utility of the finalised programme. After participants provided consent the facilitator read through the content of the DEAL Project programme, while participants followed using individual copies of the draft. Participants were encouraged to make comments on the draft and provide verbal feedback on completion of each subsection of the programme. Responses were transcribed verbatim by a research assistant. At the end of the each focus group, participants also filled out a brief feedback questionnaire regarding the acceptability and feasibility of the programme. Participants were reimbursed $40 for their time.

Professionals were provided a booklet of screenshots of the programme and feedback questionnaire. They were instructed to review the programme and assess whether they thought the programme was relevant for the age group and clinically appropriate. Interviews were conducted in person or over the phone in an open format, with the facilitator guiding the professional through the programme modules and topic areas of the questionnaire. The completed feedback questionnaire was either returned via email or in person during the interview. Responses were transcribed verbatim by a research assistant.

Using a 4-point Likert scale, participants were asked the extent to which they agreed (“strongly disagree” to “strongly agree”) that different components of the programme (case studies vignettes, clinical content [professionals only], concept comprehension, language, and length) were acceptable. Similarly, using a 5-point Likert scale, participants were asked to speculate on how applicable or potentially effective (“extremely” to “not at all”) they felt the programme would be across different areas (eliciting alcohol use change, encouraging adoption of depression coping strategies, and engaging young people via design/flow). Participants were also asked for specific suggestions to increase programme acceptability and applicability across specific areas and overall, and what they determined to be the best and worst features of the programme. Questionnaires have been attached as Appendices A and B.

@&#ANALYSIS@&#

The thematic framework was determined a priori based on the aims of the study. These themes were guided by the facilitator and followed the sections of the questionnaire. Information obtained from any written feedback, and verbatim responses not documented in the feedback questionnaire were categorised according to these themes using techniques drawn from previous research used to develop mental health and substance abuse interventions (Newton et al., 2011; Osilla et al., 2009; Stern et al., 2007). Participants were also encouraged to provide any other criticisms that were unrelated to these thematic areas, these were incorporated in the section “Additional Comments.”

First, after all the focus groups were conducted, the transcripts were reviewed by two members of the research team independently in order to identify, label, and group together key points. Each author independently sorted quotes by theme into the various sections of the feedback questionnaire and then together reached a consensus on any discrepancies. This analysis was then repeated for professional interviews.

@&#RESULTS@&#

Twenty-five young people, aged from 18 to 25years (M=20.7; S.D.=2.0) agreed to participate in the focus groups for the development phase of the DEAL Project. Of the twenty-five young people, twenty (80.0%) were undergraduate students, and seventeen (68.0%) were female, this is consistent with population-based rates of comorbidity (Burns and Teesson, 2002) and treatment seeking in young people (Reavley et al., 2010).

Six of the professionals contacted agreed to participate in the study. Although feedback was collected from all professionals, one only provided verbal feedback only. Professionals were aged from 29 to 33years (M=31.4; S.D.=1.5) and 83.3% were female. Of the six professionals, four (66.7%) were clinical psychologists generally working in both a research and clinical capacity. The remaining two were academics specialising in the fields of comorbidity and either online treatment or youth mental health.

Overall, both young people and the professionals found the programme to be generally acceptable. Fig. 1
                         summarises the responses to programme elements. The specific responses to programme elements are discussed in turn.

All of young people ‘agreed’ or ‘strongly agreed’ that the content in the scripts was age-appropriate, believable, and valid, with comments reflecting this finding, for instance, “All these situations, I can see them (around me) in my life;” and “They aren’t real? They seemed totally real to me.” It was suggested that the word ‘character’ should be changed to make the scenarios more realistic. The general consensus was that the amount of content per vignette was appropriate, but perhaps extra vignettes could be added. There was also the suggestion that one character should be younger and have more issues pertaining to school/family life.

All but one of the young people ‘agreed’ or ‘strongly agreed’ that the content of the programme would be understandable and retained, for instance, “The concepts are explained in a simple way. One good point is that the way it’s phrased does not sound patronising.” The only participant to disagree suggested that the use of reminders of past content and more examples would aid comprehensibility. A recurrent view was that, although understandable, committing some content to memory may require greater rehearsal. Suggestions to achieve this included emphasis on skill practice and summaries. The use of analogies, examples, and acronyms were well-received: “The analogies used make it much easier to understand.”

All of the young people ‘agreed’ or ‘strongly agreed’ that the length of the programme was appropriate for the content. Importantly comments suggested the length was manageable: “Straight to the point. The modules don’t dwell and waffle on certain concepts too much, they are straight forward for the reader to understand and move on.” One participant ‘agreed’, but felt it could be too short and wanted an option to extend the course. Suggestions largely related to increasing flexibility around programme length and minor reductions in length of module three.

All but one of the young people ‘agreed’ or ‘strongly agreed’ that the language used in the programme was appropriate for the age group. The only participant to disagree felt it could be more colloquial. Comments were positive, suggesting that language used in the programme was realistic without being condescending: “(It’s) relatable and not patronising or too “dumbed down” which I think is really important for young people.” Occasional coarse language appeared in the vignettes, this was very well-received. The majority of young people felt this to be honest and added to the credibility of the programme: “Love it, it's real—if you try to censor it, you’ll lose that and it won’t seem credible.” Suggestions largely related to grammar and simplification of more complex concepts in some areas of the programme.

All of the professionals ‘agreed’ or ‘strongly agreed’ that the content in the scripts was age-appropriate, believable, and valid. Comments reflected this finding: “Excellent scenarios… I like that you can identify your own character and young people will really like this aspect.” Two professionals suggested the creation of a vignette with lower symptom severity.

All of the professionals ‘agreed’ or ‘strongly agreed’ that the content of the programme would be understandable and memorable. Generally comments were positive: “Overall the concepts in each module are clear and easy to understand and implement, the references back to previous results are very good, this is likely to enhance engagement and increase relevance.” Suggestions related to concept simplification, such as removal of jargon, chunks of text, and additional examples.

All of the professionals ‘agreed’ or ‘strongly agreed’ that the length of the programme was appropriate for the content. Professionals generally felt that the difficult balance between comprehensiveness and brevity had been achieved: “Module lengths are long enough to be informative but short enough to maintain interest and not be a burden.” It was suggested that longer modules could be split to adequately cover complex concepts. However, this was offset by the acknowledgement that this strategy might increase participant dropout.

All of the experts ‘agreed’ or ‘strongly agreed’ that the language used in the programme was appropriate for the age group: “Language appears to be appropriate and at an acceptable reading level.” Comments and suggestions, however, did raise the issue of further simplifying and substituting larger text content.

All of the professionals ‘agreed’ or ‘strongly agreed’ that the clinical content of the programme was reasonable and appropriate for young people. Comments were generally positive: “A lot to take in, but you have written them in an easy to understand way.” Suggestions and concerns largely focussed on provision of feedback and removal of terms such as ‘diagnosis’, and ‘therapy’.

Overall, both young people and the professionals found the programme to be applicable and potentially effective. Fig. 2
                         summarises the responses to programme elements. The specific responses to programme elements are discussed in turn.

All of the young people believed that the programme would be ‘somewhat’ or ‘very’ applicable in helping young people with problematic drinking to consider reducing their alcohol use. The findings regarding applicability pertaining to alcohol were encouraging as this was targeted indirectly and non-confrontationally, by way of MI principles, personalised normative feedback, education, and strategies for reducing use. Comments were generally positive, but motivation was raised as an important factor to the programme's success: “It would be extremely effective if they were motivated and reminded of the techniques they were taught.” Engagement was raised as an important issue; unfortunately few specific suggestions were proposed for how to do this best.

All but two of the young people believed that the programme would be ‘very’ or ‘extremely’ applicable in helping young people with depression adopt coping strategies to increase their wellbeing. The final two participants believed that the programme would be ‘somewhat’ applicable. Comments were positive and commended the ease in which the skills could be understood and applied: “It provides a lot of simple and helpful advice which is very easy to adopt and I think that will appeal to young adults.” Few suggestions were given for the improvement of the programme in this area, but engagement was again raised as a potential issue.

All of the young people believed that the design of the programme was ‘somewhat’, ‘very’ or ‘extremely’ effective in engaging a young population. Although some found the design to be a little dark, comments were generally positive, “I like the design especially the quote at the bottom of the screen. Flow is easy to follow.” Elements including the typography, illustration, and layout were well-received and the design was described as “modern”, “eye-catching”, and “visually engaging”. The programme's use of illustration to visually depict emotion was also praised: “I like the idea of the illustrated images, especially the illustration of emotions.”

All of the professionals believed that the programme would be ‘very’ or ‘extremely’ effective in helping young people with problematic drinking to consider reducing their alcohol use: “Good contents—covers main targets of treatment…Approach is good, i.e. MI—not too pushy and authoritative.” Suggestions included a more extensive focus on goal-setting, and the essential requirement that motivation be generated and maintained.

All of the professionals believed that the programme would be ‘very’ or ‘extremely’ effective in helping young people with depression adopt coping strategies to increase their wellbeing. There were few comments, but all were positive: “Good content. I like the addition of mindfulness.” Few suggestions were proposed, except in relation to concept simplification.

All of the professionals believed that the design of the programme would be ‘very’ or ‘extremely’ effective in engaging a young population. There was enthusiastic support for the design elements: “Very cool design and likeability for young people—different, really unique!” Again, length of text content was raised as a concern in terms of the amount of information covered.

There were a number of general suggestions made to improve individual sections of the programme, as well as the programme overall. The need for increased room for reflection (e.g. summaries) during the programme was frequently proposed, along with the need for increased visual elements, examples, and reminders. For instance: “It’s good that participants are able to choose options and enter their entries at certain places. (This) makes them feel empowered. Give more examples to clarify issues.”

Participants were most fond of the programme's vignette case studies: “The best is the personal characters for people to relate to, engage with and make you feel less alone.” Frequent reference was also made to the programme's simplicity and personalisation. Clinically, the skills and strategies provided in the programme were also popular. There were few comments regarding what the participants were least fond of in the programme, the few that arose related largely to formatting: “The current format of the ‘activity/mood log’ (is) a bit overwhelming with all the boxes.”

General suggestions made to improve the programme overall focussed largely on developing ways to engage users to complete the programme and homework tasks. The incorporation of mobile technology was also mentioned, along with options for printing and saving of content. No comments were made regarding best/worst features.

On the basis of the focus groups and professional consultation a number of changes were made to the programme. Table 1
                         summarises the changes made to make the programme more acceptable. Changes were made to case study vignettes including the incorporation of a moderated vignette, and the integration of issues faced by younger persons (e.g. school and family). A variety of changes were made to language and content to simplify the programme, reduce text, and reinforce core messages. Summary pages were added to consolidate the module content.


                        Table 2
                         summarises the changes made to make the programme more applicable and potentially effective. A number of design elements were augmented including the addition of more non-text elements, and changes to colour scheme. Reminder emails were included as part of the programme and a number of onscreen markers were integrated in an attempt to facilitate programme/homework completion (e.g., progress bar, mp3 downloads, interactive homework sheets, completion ticks). A progress diary (which collected input data to create a personalised change plan) was also included.

Although the programme retained its 4 module structure, additional information was included if the user required further treatment or wanted to explore concepts further.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Co-occurring depression and alcohol use problems represent a significant burden to young people, however, few treatment approaches exist (Deady et al., in press; Deas and Brown, 2006; Singh, 2009). As each condition serves to maintain and exacerbate the other (Quello et al., 2005), treating such conditions in an integrated way makes intuitive sense and has been shown to be effective (Baker et al., 2010). The aim of the current paper was to refine and explore the acceptability and applicability of a draft version of the DEAL Project, the first, integrated, Internet-based self-help programme for youth depression and alcohol use problems. The clinical content of the draft programme was based on the SHADE resource and evidence for best practice treatment of young people, with the aim of creating a tailored intervention for 18–25year olds. The web-based delivery of the programme holds a number of advantages over traditional intervention methods in this group. Despite some limitations to generalizability (acknowledged below) the current study indicates that the intervention may have value in engaging and applicability to young people. Furthermore, the process of involving professionals and relevant stakeholders in the process of treatment development is likely to contribute to the wider acceptability and utility of the resource (Campbell and Kirmani, 2000).

Young person and professional responses regarding the programme were overwhelmingly positive. The case study vignettes incorporated in the programme were particularly well-received, attesting to the importance young people potentially place on being able to relate to individual stories of people in similar situations and of similar background (Kay-Lambkin et al., 2011a,b,c). The positive appraisal of the vignettes was particularly important as these were fictionalised stories developed by the research team on the basis of in-depth firsthand accounts and composite case studies and they required validation from the demographic.

Programme engagement, particularly around both engendering motivation to reduce alcohol reduction and complete the programme more generally, was a main concern raised in this review process. Other modifications included increasing visual elements and simplifying non-visual ones, the use of reminders and summaries to increase recall and perseverance, and a variety of formatting changes. This evaluation process allowed the research team to address these concerns in the revision of the DEAL Project programme. It could be argued that incorporation of therapist guidance may increase adherence, however, evidence is mixed. Although there is evidence that web-based interventions without any therapist support (such as this one) seem to result in more modest outcomes and considerably higher dropout rates (Andersson and Cuijpers, 2009; Spek et al., 2007), as there are few direct experimental comparisons between guided and unguided Internet-delivered treatments, differences between self-guided and guided interventions may be due to other factors than therapist support. For instance, guided treatments tend to be more comprehensive and longer than unguided internet interventions (Vernmark et al., 2010). Of the few studies to compare guided and unguided Internet-delivered treatments directly most show small differences in effect sizes for depression (Berger et al., 2011) or no significant effect for alcohol use (Blankers et al., 2011; Doumas and Hannah, 2008; Riper et al., 2014). Therefore, it has been suggested that other factors are more relevant than guidance in selecting treatment (Berger et al., 2011), and the inherent advantages of unguided treatments (regarding of dissemination, cost, and availability) may become pertinent to treatment.

There were several study limitations that may affect generalisability of the results. The use of programme screenshots rather than the online version of the programme may limit some of the findings of this study, as feedback may not translate perfectly to the online experience. However, this is likely to be a potential issue only in regard to programme flow. Secondly, despite being regular drinkers or having experienced significant depressed mood, the young people involved in the focus groups were not a clinical sample. Therefore, they only represent potential users based on demographic factors and not necessarily active consumers requiring treatment. Nevertheless, the majority of this population were recruited from university settings, a demographic of young people who have been found to drink more heavily (Dawson et al., 2004; Kypri et al., 2005) and to display more clinically significant alcohol-related problems (Slutske, 2005) than their non-student peers. Similarly, this population is more than four times more likely depressed than other people their age and to report higher levels of emotional distress (Cvetkovski et al., 2012; Leahy et al., 2010). Furthermore, the general aim of the study was to provide an indication of acceptability of concepts such as vignette scenarios, language, and applicability of the programme overall among young people broadly, we would argue that this can largely be accomplished without the use of a clinical sample. Nonetheless, the authors acknowledge that this group cannot be considered broadly representative and the opinions of this small, restricted sample may have limited generalisability to other young people.

The next step will include feasibility testing regarding compliance and delivery, and evaluation of programme effectiveness in reducing depression and alcohol use in young people. Following this, it would be advantageous to examine the views and suggestions of these consumers to ascertain if further changes to the programme are required. Finally, the dissemination and long-term sustainability of such programmes are vital to real-world applicability.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

Overall, the DEAL Project programme represents a novel and innovative approach to addressing the significant problem of depression and alcohol use problem comorbidity facing young people today. The current study indicates that the intervention is acceptable, applicable, and may have potential utility to young people.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

The National Drug and Alcohol Research Centre at the University of New South Wales is supported by funding from the Australian Government. The Centre for Research Excellence in Mental Health and Substance Use is funded by the NHMRC, Australia. Maree Teesson is funded by Australia National Health and Medical Research Council Research Fellowship. Mark Deady is supported by a PhD scholarship from the National Drug and Alcohol Research Centre, which is acknowledged with gratitude. The authors acknowledge the assistance of Zac Bryant who provided valued support in the study.


                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  


                     
                        
                           
                           
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

