@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Experiences of a guided smartphone-based behavioral activation therapy for depression: A qualitative study

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Experiences of a smartphone intervention of depression was assessed.


                        
                        
                           
                           Findings are comparable with previous qualitative research of ICBT.


                        
                        
                           
                           Advantages of smartphone interventions include availability and assimilation into patients' everyday lives.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Smartphone treatment

Depression

Behavioral activation

Mobile application

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Recently, a number of studies have investigated treatments administered via smartphones showing that this treatment format has a potential to be effective. However, we still have limited knowledge of how patients experience this treatment format. The objective of this study was to explore participants' views of a smartphone-based behavioral activation treatment. In-depth interviews were conducted with 12 strategically (participants with different overall experiences) selected participants, suffering from major depression according to the DSM-IV. The interview data were processed with the aid of thematic analysis. The analysis generated the three main themes: Commitment, Treatment and Lack of important components, with attached subthemes. In conclusion, the findings from the current study correspond with existing knowledge in the field of internet-based treatment. Considering that this kind of treatment is still quite new, the need for further research and development is considerable. Nevertheless, its availability, assimilation into users' everyday lives and possible motivational qualities speak of its potential.
               
            

@&#BACKGROUND@&#

It is well established that guided self-help interventions, administered through internet, can have positive effects on symptoms of depression (Andrews et al., 2010; Cuijpers et al., 2010; Carlbring et al., 2013; Johansson and Andersson, 2012). An increasing number of studies show that this treatment format can be as effective as face-to-face treatment for mild-to-moderate depression (Andersson et al., 2013; Wagner et al., 2014). Recently, a number of studies have also investigated treatments administered via smartphones (Watts et al., 2013; Ly et al., 2014; Donker et al., 2013). The increased usage of smartphones presents promising opportunities to extend the reach of psychological interventions into users' everyday life (Ly et al., 2012, 2014). The relatively few studies conducted so far show that smartphone-administered interventions have a potential to be effective in the treatment of mild-to-moderate depression (Watts et al., 2013; Ly et al., 2014; Kauer et al., 2012; Burns et al., 2011), as well as for other conditions (Dagöö et al., 2014; Donker et al., 2013). However, we still have limited knowledge of how patients experience these treatment formats, including both internet- and smartphone-based treatments (Kok et al., 2014), even though patient satisfaction with smartphone applications has been measured (Watts et al., 2013; Burns et al., 2011).

Studies targeting patients' experiences of a treatment, using qualitative methods, can be helpful when investigating the potential benefits and disadvantages of treatment (Pope and Mays, 1995). Nevertheless, only a few qualitative studies have investigated patients' experiences of guided internet-based self-help treatments. One of the more recent studies (Bendelin et al., 2011), aiming to explore participants' experience of internet administrated guided self-help treatment for depression, showed that participants who take responsibility for the treatment and also attribute success to themselves appeared to benefit more from internet-based treatment than those who do not. The authors of the study concluded that motivation to work on your own through the treatment is a crucial aspect for guided self-help in the treatment of depression to be effective (Bendelin et al., 2011). The study also indicated that therapeutic work in an internet-based treatment is as dynamic a process as face-to-face therapy, and that the treatment is perceived differently by patients depending on expectations and outcome (Bendelin et al., 2011). The latter is in line with a previous qualitative study on a guided self-help ‘minimal intervention’ for depression (MacDonald et al., 2007). Another study that investigated experiences of online cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) for depression, focusing especially on how the format impacts the therapeutic experience, concluded that online CBT seems to be acceptable to, and experienced as helpful by, certain subgroups of patients with depression (Beattie et al., 2009). The results showed that online CBT was more attractive to patients who were comfortable with internet communication, felt comfortable expressing their feelings in writing, and enjoyed the opportunities to review and reflect on written (or typed) communication (Beattie et al., 2009). A pilot study (Watts et al., 2013) comparing a depression program via mobile phone to a program via computer showed that slightly more participants using the computer (64% versus 54%) endorsed the program stating that they were ‘very satisfied’, with the remaining participants endorsing ‘somewhat satisfied’.


                     Donkin and Glozier (2012) focused on adherence and motivation in their study on internet-based treatment for depression in persons with risk of cardiovascular disease and found that content which enhances motivation such as having a sense of control and being able to identify with the program could be useful as well as increasing the relative value of the treatment program in order to enhance persistence. A meta-synthesis of qualitative studies revealed a number of themes, including the nature of personal experience in depression; help-seeking in primary care; control and helplessness in engagement with treatment; stigma associated with treatment; and patients' understandings of self-help interventions (Khan et al., 2007). Overall, not much is known about how depressed patients experience internet-based treatments (Gerhards et al., 2011), although some studies have been conducted in other areas, such as eating disorders showing that participants were mainly attracted by the ease of access, anonymity and flexibility in internet-based treatment (Sánchez-Ortiz et al., 2011). Furthermore, there are to our knowledge no qualitative studies investigating the experience of a smartphone-based treatment of depression, even if qualitative smartphone studies have been conducted to explore users' perspectives on general health applications (Dennison et al., 2013) and among schizophrenia patients (Palmier-Claus et al., 2013). The latter study showed that mobile-phone assessment can be successfully integrated into patients' everyday routine. Qualitative studies are important for the research field digitally administrated therapy, considering the rapid development of smartphone-based interventions (Donker et al., 2013). More knowledge on participants' perceptions of this particular format can be helpful in the development of new smartphone-based treatments. The main objective of the current study was to develop an understanding of the views and experiences of a smartphone-based behavioral activation treatment using interviews and questionnaires. The content of the interviews were analyzed using thematic analysis.

The current study was a qualitative follow-up of a randomized controlled trial (Ly et al., 2014). In the original study, 81 participants were randomized into either guided behavioral activation self-help treatment or to a guided mindfulness-based treatment, both administered through smartphone applications. The principal aim of the original study was to compare the effectiveness of the two smartphone-delivered treatments. The results from the original study showed that there were no significant interaction effects of group and time on any of the outcome measures, however among the participants with higher initial severity of depression, the behavioral activation treatment was significantly more effective, whereas among those with lower initial depression severity, the mindfulness treatment worked significantly better. The current study focused on the participants' experience from the behavioral activation treatment and was initiated six months after the treatment had been completed in the original study.

@&#METHOD@&#

The study group consisted of 12 individuals who had participated in the above-mentioned original study of a behavioral activation treatment administered via smartphone. The participants for the original study were mainly recruited via mass media and advertisements in large Swedish newspapers. The main inclusion criteria were: suffering from major depression according to the DSM-IV, with at least an episode in partial remission, and having a point total of ≥5 on the 9-item Patient Health Questionnaire Depression Scale (PHQ-9) (Kroenke et al., 2001). A more detailed information of the inclusion criteria and its process has been described elsewhere (Ly et al., 2014).

Most participants (91%) from this prior quantitative study had agreed in advance to also participate in this current, qualitative study. A strategic selection was made among these participants, in order to cover as broad an experience of the treatment as possible. Due to time limitations, the number of participants was limited to 12. In accordance with the strive for maximum variation, participants with different overall experiences (positive, neutral and negative) after treatment were selected. This data was obtained in connection with post-measurement of the original study, through a telephone interview where all participants were asked open-ended questions about their experience of the intervention. Of those who were initially selected (12 participants), the researchers failed to reach two. Therefore, two new participants were selected, which resulted in a slight overrepresentation of participants who had experienced the treatment as positive (5 participants instead of 4). Table 1
                         informs about the 12 selected participants' demographics, their overall experience of the treatment and their change scores (from pre- to post-measurement) on the Beck Depression Inventory-II (Beck et al., 1996). It could be assumed that patients who experienced a larger decrease in depressive symptoms would also have a more positive experience of the treatment, but as seen in Table 1, the overall experience of the treatment and the change scores on the BDI-II do not always correspond. Also, two participants who experienced the treatment as negative (participant 3 and participant 9) quit the treatment beforehand.

The intervention was an 8-week smartphone-based behavioral activation program with minimal therapist contact (maximum time of 20min per participant per week). The program was administered via a smartphone application and consisted of a short web-based psychoeducational text, and a step-by-step behavior activation intervention (Ly et al., 2014). The psychoeducation aimed to introduce the participants to the treatment and to establish a minimum level of knowledge concerning Major Depressive Disorder (MDD). The aim of the smartphone application was to make it easy for the participant to remember and register behaviors, in order to increase everyday activation (Ly et al., 2012). Statistics and summaries of registered behaviors were presented in the application for the participant. There was also a back-end system where all the data from the participant was accessible from a website for the therapist. From the back-end system, the therapist could also send short encouraging text messages to the participants, similar to Short Message Service (SMS). The participants were told to write a reflection to summarize every week for their therapist, and send it via e-mail by the end of every treatment week. The participants received personal feedback on their reflection from their therapist via e-mail. A more detailed explanation of the intervention has been described elsewhere (Ly et al., 2014).

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

The qualitative data were gathered at post-measurement through semi-structured telephone interviews that were audio-recorded and lasted 30 to 60min. The interview guide (attached Appendix A) was prepared to allow for openness in the questions while at the same time covering the areas that prior research (i.e. qualitative studies investigating patients' experiences of guided internet-based self-help treatments) has shown to be central to the outcome of all psychological treatments, e.g. expectations (Halmetoja et al., 2014; Bendelin et al., 2011; MacDonald et al., 2007; Beattie et al., 2009), alliance (Beattie et al., 2009; Bendelin et al., 2011) and feedback (Halmetoja et al., 2014; Sánchez-Ortiz et al., 2011). One challenge was to allow for the interviews to capture experiences relating specifically to smartphone-based therapy as well as other CBT-specific factors and general factors such as therapeutic alliance (Horvath and Symonds, 1991). In order to gain as rich information as possible, most questions were open-ended with subsequent follow-up questions. The qualitative method allowed for adjustments of the interview guide during the course of the study, as new questions arose. The validity of a qualitative study does not depend on all participants getting the exact same questions, but instead on the width and depth of the information gained (Creswell, 2013; Stiles, 1993; Elliott et al., 1999). The interview guide was used rather as an inspiration than as a mandatory instrument. The interviews were recorded and transcribed to facilitate analysis. The interviewers, both clinical psychology students in their last term of a 5-year clinical program, and specifically trained to assess qualitative interviews, conducted and transcribed six interviews each. The interviewers were familiar with the original study, and were not blinded to the participants' outcome of the treatment.

@&#ANALYSIS@&#

The interview data were processed with the aid of thematic analysis (Braun and Clarke, 2006). This is a qualitative method aimed at pinpointing central aspects in a set of data, by means of detailed pattern identification and analysis. The analysis should lead to the detection of themes that facilitate understanding of the data. Analysis can be guided either by theory, i.e. be deductive, or by empirical findings, i.e. be inductive (Hayes, 2000). In most cases, both approaches are employed (Fereday and Muir-Cochrane, 2008; Thomas, 2006). In the current study, as mentioned above, the main focus was on empirical findings. However, to a certain extent the analysis was also guided by the interview guide, which in turn was formed with regard to prior research findings on clients' experiences of therapy (expectations (Halmetoja et al., 2014; Bendelin et al., 2011; MacDonald et al., 2007; Beattie et al., 2009); alliance (Beattie et al., 2009; Bendelin et al., 2011); and feedback (Halmetoja et al., 2014; Sánchez-Ortiz et al., 2011)).

In the current study, the interviewers' pre-understanding was mainly reflected in the selection of themes for the interview guide. The research process was then guided by the participants' answers to the largest possible extent. The first step of analysis was the transcription of the interviews, followed by several thorough readings in order to identify patterns in the data, reflecting common themes in the participants' experiences of the treatment. The next step was to code the interview content. Interview materials that provided answers to the research questions were identified. For each section that was deemed meaningful in terms of answering the research question, a code was ascribed. When all interviews had been coded, these codes and their corresponding quotes were assembled in a document. Preliminary themes were then identified, and the codes were grouped under these themes. This procedure is in line with how thematical analysis is described in literature (Braun and Clarke, 2006). The whole coding process was performed manually.

Up until this point, the two interviewers worked individually with six interviews each. To increase reliability, i.e. to test whether the coding would be replicated by an additional person trained in coding of qualitative data, a senior researcher (co-author MS) also read and coded all interviews. New themes were then generated. The next step was to find relevant and representative quotes to illustrate the results. In order to check the study for quality and content we followed the COREQ checklist (Tong et al., 2007).

@&#RESULTS@&#

As evident from Table 2
                      the analysis generated three main themes with attached subthemes. The themes were Commitment with the subthemes expectations and motivation; Treatment with the subthemes Awareness, Behavioral activation, Tool for help, Therapist support, Positive experiences of treatment, Standardization and individualization, and Impressions of the application; and lastly Lack of important components with the subthemes goals and closure.

The theme Commitment relates to the individual's own attitude towards the treatment, both before and during the treatment process. The majority of the participants turned out to have positive expectations about the treatment, although they varied in strength. The level of motivation also varied, both between participants and over time for individual participants. However, most participants felt motivated during at least some part of the treatment.

The result showed that almost all participants (11 out of 12), at the start of the treatment, expected that the application would help them with reducing depressive symptoms. Most of them hoped that the treatment would give them tools for self-help, and several reported that they were hoping to feel better and be happier. One person had no expectations at all and described himself as “pretty zeroed out”. Several participants reported that curiosity was the driving factor behind them trying the treatment; they wanted to see what it was like and what it could do for them. Economic and practical reasons were also mentioned for choosing this kind of treatment, and a couple of participants suggested that the threshold for participating was much lower compared to seeking traditional help with a psychologist. Although all except one participant had had some positive expectations on the treatment, there was individual variation. Some had held high hopes that the treatment would be effective, while others entered the treatment with more of an open mind, hoping that something good may come out of it. Those who felt early on that the treatment did not match their expectations also ended the treatment prematurely. One of these participants admitted that she had wanted another type of treatment already from the start, but simply stated that she had accepted what was offered. She perceived the treatment and therapist contact as too inflexible. The other participant had held high initial expectations, but had not understood how the treatment would be structured and was disappointed early on. Comments included:
                                 
                                    “My expectation was clearly to find a tool that would help stop the depression from reappearing in the future. Both finding a tool that will help me recognize when a depression is on its way, and a tool that can quickly be a way out of it so that I won't have to end up being as deeply depressed.”
                                 
                                 Participant 2
                              
                              
                                 
                                    “It was more like seeing an ad and just, okay I should try this — and then I found it on the internet and signed up. It was more like a fun thing. We'll see if it works. More like that.”
                                 
                                 Participant 12
                              
                           

@&#MOTIVATION@&#

Initial motivation varied among participants, but each individual also had varying levels of motivation during the treatment process. Most participants felt motivated during at least some part of the treatment. The majority of the participants felt their motivation peaked at the beginning of the treatment and then weaned off somewhat, while others had trouble getting started but became motivated when they started to perceive reinforcing qualities of the treatment. The participants mentioned different factors that had affected their motivation. Some participants thought motivation was independent of the treatment and only related to their current life situation, while others were motivated by the actual activities and the satisfaction of having gone through with something they had set out to do. Feedback from the therapist was a clear source of motivation for most, as was the reminder function and the mobility of the treatment. For some individuals, behavioral activation and registration quickly became routine habits. Two participants lost their motivation completely when they felt that the treatment did not at all match their expectations, which made them quit the treatment after a few weeks. It was clear that the participants' motivation was in most cases governed by the reinforcement they received, or by their own progress. For example:
                                 
                                    “I got more and more engaged in it the longer it lasted, and I could feel that it had an effect on me. I learned things and it got self-sustaining in some way, self-reinforcing.”
                                 
                                 Participant 4
                              And:
                                 
                                    “The therapist helped me to find my motivation every now and then, and then I was on top of it for about a week or so, and eventually the application sort of became a part of my everyday life. Then it was pretty obvious that I would use it and then I didn't even think about whether it was hard to use it, I just did it.”
                                 
                                 Participant 11
                              
                           

One participant also described the therapist's response as an important motivator. This participant had realized that the interaction made possible by the application made a powerful motivational addition to a simple to-do list:
                                 
                                    “I might as well use a to-do list in a notebook and it will be just as meaningful and if I don't care about it, no one will care except that I will feel guilty, but … here, someone was sitting and checking that I did these things, how much I registered and then every week I had to write down my experiences of things and … that was positive and that was good, and it also pushed me quite a bit.”
                                 
                                 Participant 2
                              
                           

The second main theme – Treatment – involves the treatment factors that the individuals spoke of in the interviews. Central therapeutic factors such as behavioral activation and the therapeutic alliance are included here. Results of the treatment will also be regarded, such as the participants' experience of having received a tool for help and an increased awareness of their problems, as well as other positive experiences of the treatment. The subcategory standardization and individualization in the treatment will also be discussed, as well as the participants' experience of the actual application — its technique and graphical features. The results revealed that the treatment had provided more help for some individuals than for others. For some, the treatment had made them take a step in the right direction, towards self-awareness and towards using some of the strategies provided to help themselves. Others realized that they wanted to continue with more traditional psychotherapy. Others still did not feel the treatment had helped them at all. No one reported that the help that they received from the treatment had led to any dramatic change for the better — rather, the treatment had helped them to start taking the initial steps towards improvement. In some cases, the effect had worn off after the treatment ended. It was also clear that different participants perceived different working mechanisms of the treatment. Some mentioned the activities, others the reflections, and others still focused mostly on the therapist contact.

For many participants, a significant result of the treatment was becoming aware of their problems in a new way, and gaining a clearer picture of what changes they wanted to, and would be able to, make. This awareness was described by several as critical for taking a first step towards improvement. Some participants stressed the insight that even small steps can make a difference, and one person stated that she no longer viewed herself as a victim — she now understood that she had the power to change her own situation. Besides the reading of psychoeducational material, different participants underlined different factors contributing to greater awareness. For some, it was mainly the activities that had made them see the relation between behavior and well-being; for others, the weekly reflections and the feedback from the therapist had played an important role. Some reported that the treatment constituted their first opportunity for self-reflection and in-depth consideration of their own situation. For example:
                                 
                                    “The treatment made me more aware, for sure. I was clearly more aware of my situation and what I could do to feel better. I guess I was made aware of it since I got these questions all the time and I had to self-reflect, and because I knew that in a week or two I had to respond again, so it was there all the time in one's consciousness. You did think about it.”
                                 
                                 Participant 7
                              
                           

Behavioral activation turned out to be the core component of the treatment, the activities being used by all participants. For some participants, it was clear that the activities had caused their improvement. E.g., one participant stated:
                                 
                                    “It was these different activities that you were supposed to achieve and this kind of stuff. I think it helped me a lot because then I started to take care of some stuff and got it done. Just the happy feeling that you get when you have managed to accomplish your goal.”
                                 
                                 Participant 11
                              
                           

Several participants stated that the small, every-day activities included in the treatment had a substantial effect on their mood. The following quote illustrates this experience:
                                 
                                    “It was useful to have this kind of simple stuff like calling someone or texting someone. Or having coffee with colleagues, I remember that was one of those important things to do. That's something you usually ignore when you don't feel very well.”
                                 
                                 Participant 2
                              
                           

However, some participants also reported a perceived lack of variation in the activities. They appreciated the possibility to choose among alternatives, but they would have wished for more challenging ones. Although they had the option of creating their own activities, they would have wanted to be able to choose among more pre-existing options. It was mainly the participants that already had a fairly good activity level at baseline who wished for more difficult activities. Often, the pre-defined activities began to appear insufficient later on in the treatment, as this quote illustrates:
                                 
                                    “There was a lot of already pre-defined behaviors, and some suited me very well and some did not suit me so well. It was actually nice to have these already pre-defined behaviors, especially in the beginning so that you didn't have to think, but an even larger variety and different levels of difficulty would have been good, if you can wish for something.”
                                 
                                 Participant 5
                              
                           

Some individuals gained new tools for handling problems. The treatment became a help to self-help. E.g., one participant concluded:
                                 
                                    “I've been given a tool to help me get a better life and also knowledge about myself and about defining different emotions or situations.”
                                 
                                 Participant 1
                              
                           

One aspect of this tool for self-help was that participants felt more capable of handling their own reactions in challenging situations:
                                 
                                    “I guess I feel that I can control myself in a different way today, and that I'm not as afraid of my stress as I was before.”
                                 
                                 Participant 7
                              
                           

Participants also felt that the treatment had provided them with tools to handle early signs of depression in a more effective manner:
                                 
                                    “I have learned both to find tools and to recognize when the depression is starting, and at the same time to find a quick way out of it and not having to end up being in it so deep. So now I feel that I recognize the pattern and I know what I have to do. And I have kind of realized that, this is life. It definitely worked.”
                                 
                                 Participant 2
                              
                           

The analysis clearly showed that the relationship with the therapist was viewed as an important treatment component. Overall, the therapist–client relationship was described as positive by the participants. Even though a couple of participants saw the smartphone delivery as an advantage, most had wished for more frequent and personal contact with the therapist, preferably over the phone Noteworthy, none of the participants thought that the treatment would be effective without a therapist, so the notion of using just the application did not seem to be an alternative. In several cases, the therapist was described as an important support. For example:
                                 
                                    “…it felt like she always encouraged me when I explained that I had not had the energy to do something or, it felt like she, there was like no pressure — just an understanding and encouragement in the situation you were in at the time and it felt great.”
                                 
                                 Participant 7
                              
                           

One of the participants who quit the treatment did not perceive the therapist as supportive — on the contrary, she was slightly disappointed that feedback was only provided on a pre-determined day of the week:
                                 
                                    “Well, it was in the beginning I think when I had a reflection, let's say a question maybe on Wednesday. In other words, in the middle of the week, and then I got the reply: unfortunately I will not be able to respond to this until Sunday, because I can't do it according to this and that. Whatever that was. And I was a bit like: ‘ehm, ok’. It was a bit like that.”
                                 
                                 Participant 9
                              
                           

Most participants expressed having had positive experiences of the treatment and mentioned tangible improvements. These were usually seen as a step in the right direction, but few thought that the treatment had been sufficient in itself. Particularly those that had experienced an improvement wanted to keep finding new strategies to feel better, on their own or with the help from a therapist. They felt encouraged to do so by the fact that the treatment had taught them the value of small, every-day actions, illustrated by the two following quotes.
                                 
                                    “These aren't major things you know, only because it feels like things are big projects they don't have to be, you can start with one step at a time and then you'll see. Sometimes it's much easier than you think.”
                                 
                                 Participant 5
                              
                              
                                 
                                    “I guess it's the small things that you plan, simply to be more focused, to live more in the present moment.”
                                 
                                 Participant 7
                              
                           

The results showed that some regarded the treatment as overly standardized; not taking individual needs into account to the extent needed. As mentioned earlier, one of the persons who dropped out of treatment mentioned the lack of flexibility in both activities and therapist support as the main reason for quitting. Although each participant had the option of creating their own activities, they generally preferred to choose among the pre-existing ones. They also described the activities as being too few and, at times, too simple. The activities were regarded as more suitable for those participants who had problems with very basic activities, such as getting out of bed to eat breakfast and going for a walk. One person viewed some of the reflection exercises as very strange and not at all adequate for his own development:
                                 
                                    “There is nothing wrong with that in itself, you just need a lot more time initially with a therapist who does more tailoring for you, the things that you're in need of. Because I wasn't so deeply depressed that I couldn't get up and have breakfast and so on. Nah, it just felt like I wasn't in the target group at all for those eating breakfast-activities. There were many pre-defined activities that felt … It just becomes strange, that's all.”
                                 
                                 Participant 9
                              
                           

One participant also lamented the lack of possibility to ask follow-up questions to the therapist:
                                 
                                    “Nah, conversations are… When it's more of a survey that you respond to or an application, then it's standard questions that are coming in. In a normal conversation, you can ask follow-up questions when you and I talk. Depending on my answers to certain questions.”
                                 
                                 Participant 3
                              
                           

The results also revealed that some of the participants had adjusted the treatment themselves in order for it to meet their own needs. They designed activities that they thought were challenging and developing. One person, whose stuttering made him reluctant to getting in contact with other people, added the activity of making contact with friends, which he also did. He also added the activity of going to the supermarket and ask a stranger a question, but did not perform it because it seemed too difficult. Another participant stressed his difficulties with social interactions and planned the activity of having coffee with some colleagues, and also went through with it. However, he also added activities that he did not perform. Several participants added adjusted activities aimed at reducing stress: scheduling some quiet time, cleaning and creating harmony at home, drawing a clear line between work and leisure time, or walking slower to relax. A couple of persons also used the reflections very actively, and described this as very helpful:
                                 
                                    “Everyone should realize how beneficial it is to write down what's on your mind, you get rid of aggressions, and you learn a lot that you haven't learned before. Many of those insights I was of course very well aware of, but it didn't click until I wrote about them.”
                                 
                                 Participant 1
                              
                           

The fact that this treatment was delivered via a smartphone application sets it apart from traditional internet-based therapy. Thus, it was of interest to the study to investigate the participants' impressions of the actual application. None of the participants were using it to any larger extent at the time of this study (i.e. six months after the treatment had ended). Two participants ascribed a psychological quality to the application. During the treatment period, they felt that it provided a sense of security, since they could always bring their smartphone with them:
                                 
                                    “It's some kind of security, because you can look at it whenever you want and so on. Because I'm the kind of person who always uses his/her phone so it felt good being able to bring it everywhere instead of other things. I think it was convenient.”
                                 
                                 Participant 11
                              
                           

Some people described the availability of the smartphone as a factor that facilitated the treatment, as mirrored in the two following quotes.
                                 
                                    “It felt like it was easier to check off things once they happened and when I remembered things, maybe it enabled me do things a bit more freely.”
                                 
                                 Participant 5
                              
                              
                                 
                                    “I guess it's always useful to have some sort of list or so that you can look at and remember that ‘this is something I should get on with right now’.”
                                 
                                 Participant 8
                              
                           

One person described the application in itself as a motivator for the treatment.
                                 
                                    “The smartphone part, if you say so, became an additional push since you were reminded and you added these activities and how you experienced them and so on. It made you do something, like, as an individual, in your normal life. It gets interesting and that part became strengthening too. You added these activities to your phone.”
                                 
                                 Participant 4
                              
                           

Some focused uniquely on technical or graphical dimensions of the application in their interviews. Most participants thought the application was easy to use; only two people had had some initial technical issues. Several participants wished for better graphics and additional functionalities:
                                 
                                    “If you could get a graph or something that showed that ‘about a week ago you wept when you went outside the door to meet a friend, and today you laughed’. Or something that can let you see a positive curve.”
                                 
                                 Participant 12
                              
                           

According to the participants, the treatment lacked clear individual goals as well as a clear closure including maintenance planning and relapse prevention — components that are generally standard ingredients in CBT therapy. No participants mentioned having gone through these tasks, and a few reported missing them in the treatment.

The smartphone application had a function called “goals”, where you could set both short- and long term goals for yourself. None of the participants reported having set any goals together with their therapist. The interviewers did not ask specifically about goals; however, a couple of participants brought the issue up themselves, commenting on the fact that they did not set any goals during treatment.

Much like the treatment goals, the treatment closure seemed to have been vague in the eyes of the participants. None of them expressed having written a maintenance- or relapse prevention plan. Several participants also spoke of a sense of emptiness after the treatment:
                                 
                                    “And it was a little sad when all of a sudden you weren't going to proceed with the treatment in this way. And then I thought, yes, but I will of course continue to use the application afterwards, you could do that. But I haven't done it. So since the reminder disappeared I haven't used the application either. It's not like I had any plan. But more that you could have applied this method in several different other things you do in your daily life on a daily basis.”
                                 
                                 Participant 12
                              
                           

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The aim of this study was to explore participants' experience of a smartphone-based behavioral activation treatment for depression using qualitative methods. Thus, the data in this study should be considered within the context of qualitative research (Greenhalgh and Taylor, 1997), and should not be regarded as representative for all people who receive smartphone-administrated treatment for depression. The analysis of the participants' accounts of the treatment sixth months after the treatment yielded three distinct themes, with a couple of sub-themes related to each theme.

The results indicate that the participants' experiences on the whole are comparable with previous findings within qualitative research of internet-based guided self-help treatment (Bendelin et al., 2011; Beattie et al., 2009; Khan et al., 2007; MacDonald et al., 2007). What seems to be unique to the experience of this study's participants is that the smartphone-based treatment felt more accessible and present in their everyday life, something that has been suggested earlier (Ly et al., 2012, 2014; Palmier-Claus et al., 2013). One participant pointed to the possibility of smartphone-based treatment being more immediately motivating because of the reminders. Some individuals thought that the constant proximity of the smartphone created a sense of security. Thus, smartphone-based treatment seems to have a number of potential benefits that deserve further investigation.

Further, the results reveal that the therapist support was perceived as crucial to a positive experience of treatment; none of the participants thought the treatment would be motivating or effective without a therapist. This is a finding that is in line with prior research (Khan et al., 2007). Above all, the therapist support has a motivating function. The reminders and feedback from the therapist probably acted as a reinforcer for the participants. Another function of the therapist support, partially covered in the interviews, is the possibility of individual tailoring of the treatment. Several participants described how they, together with the therapist, designed activities that suited their particular problems. This, too, is an interesting focus for further research (cf., (Nordgren et al., 2014)). A number of participants lamented the lack of individualization of the treatment, and the therapist probably plays a central role in solving this problem in future treatments. Some of the participants also wished for clearer goals and closure. These are components that can rather easily be added to a treatment, and hence they could be further developed in future studies. However, it is noteworthy that none of the participants experienced any negative or enduring effects from using the smartphone application such as the emergence of new symptoms, deterioration of depressive symptoms or negative well-being (cf. (Rozental et al., 2014)).

@&#LIMITATIONS@&#

One possible limitation of the present study is that the interviews were conducted via telephone. This issue should not be confounded with the fact that the depression treatment was administered via a smartphone application, since data collection is not necessarily done best in the same administration format as the treatment. Due to the telephone format, some of the personal alliance between interviewer and participant might have been affected and important information could potentially have been missed out (Aquilino, 1994). However, it may also be seen as an advantage that the interviews were conducted over the telephone, as implicit demands to be grateful for the therapy received probably are less present when the interview is not face-to-face (Opdenakker, 2006). In fact, it has been reported that the lack of eye contact facilitated the sharing of sensitive and important issues (Carlbring et al., 2001; Hopper, 1992).

Another limitation is that the interviews took place six months after treatment had ended. The participants' memories of the treatment are a key factor to what information is revealed. The result from the study could be subject to bias (e.g., Fading Affect Bias; (Gibbons et al., 2011)), due to the fact that people tend to construct memories in accordance with their present situation. This might make it difficult to draw any firm conclusions about participants' experiences of the treatment (Harvey et al., 2004).

The third and most important limitation is that the results cannot be regarded as representative for all people who receive a smartphone-based treatment for depression. The sample was limited, small and selected, which means that the findings cannot be generalized. In addition, a larger number of participants might have been preferable, in order to gain a fuller description. Also, the study included fewer participants who had experienced the treatment as negative compared to positive (3 participants vs. 5 participants), and no participants with negative effects on the BDI-II. If more participants with a negative experience or a negative BDI-II score had been included, additional themes or subthemes might have emerged. However, this study should be viewed as an exploratory study that can provide a first insight into how users may experience this type of treatment and provide a ground for further studies.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The current study adds important information to the body of knowledge regarding participants' experience of guided self-help interventions, distributed digitally, namely that the smartphone-based treatment might be more accessible and present in users' everyday lives. It is, however, important to highlight the limited generalizability of the results given that the data of this study are related to a single smartphone application featuring one specific treatment. Considering that smartphone-based treatment is still quite new as a format, the need for further research on participant experience of these interventions is considerable. Nevertheless, its availability, assimilation into users' everyday lives and possible motivational qualities speak of its potential as an effective treatment format.

KHL was the project manager for the study and has developed the application. KHL, EJ, RW and GA conceived the study and its design. EJ and RW conducted the interviews. GA worked with the write-up and re-analyses, and MS supervised the qualitative analyses. KHL, GA, PC and TD drafted the current manuscript. GA was the principal investigator of the study. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

The Swedish Research Council sponsored this study with funding 2011-2476.

A related version of the smartphone application is currently developed for the open market by KHL.


                     GENERAL
                  

How would you describe the treatment?

How has it affected you?


                     BEFORE TREATMENT
                  

What were your expectations before the treatment?
                        
                           •
                           Hopes

Concerns?

Expectations of the treatment?


                     PROCESS
                  

How would you describe the treatment and how you experienced it?

Treatment
                        
                           •
                           What is your strongest memory from the treatment?

What do you think worked best in the treatment?

Was there anything that was difficult for you to accomplish?

Did you have a clear objective? What was it? Did you achieve it?

What do you think made you get better?

Was there a turning point during the treatment?

How did the treatment change your daily practical life?

What can be improved?

Technology
                        
                           •
                           How did you use the app? How did it work?

What was good and bad with the technology? How did you experience the usability?

What are your thoughts on having the treatment close at hand all the time (on the phone)?

Alliance and feedback
                        
                           •
                           How did you experience the contact with the therapist?

How did you experience your relationship with the app?

Motivation for treatment
                        
                           •
                           How was your motivation during the treatment?

Were there any external factors that affected your motivation?

What in the actual treatment (including the technology) did you experience as obstacles and motivating factors?


                     AFTER TREATMENT
                     
                        
                           •
                           How did you feel after the treatment?

How does it feel now when some time has passed?

In what way have you changed?

Has your view of your problem changed?

Have others noticed any difference about you after the treatment?

Can you describe how you think now about the treatment and compare with how you felt before?

How would you describe the idea behind the treatment?

Do you have some general reflections on the treatment itself?

Do you have some general reflections on the app itself?

@&#REFERENCES@&#

