@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#The impact of telephone versus e-mail therapist guidance on treatment outcomes, therapeutic alliance and treatment engagement in Internet-delivered CBT for depression: A randomised pilot trial

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Individuals with depression received Internet-delivered CBT.


                        
                        
                           
                           Therapist guidance was delivered either via telephone (n
                              =19) or e-mail (n
                              =19).


                        
                        
                           
                           Groups showed equal, large symptom reduction.


                        
                        
                           
                           Groups showed equal therapeutic (working) alliance and treatment engagement.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Depression

Therapist guided

Cognitive behavioral therapy

Internet intervention

Telephone

E-mail

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Background
                  Internet-administered cognitive behavioural therapy (iCBT) is an effective treatment of depression, yet much remains to be learned about the specific mechanisms influencing symptom reduction. Although previous research has consistently shown that therapist-guided iCBT is more effective than unguided iCBT, it is unknown whether the medium used for therapist-client communication has an impact on results.
               
               
                  Methods
                  Thirty-eight subjects with major depression were recruited from the waiting list of another iCBT study and randomised to a guided iCBT program with therapist guidance either by telephone calls (n
                     =19) or e-mail correspondence (n
                     =19). Outcome measures were self-rated measures of depression, anxiety and quality of life.
               
               
                  Results
                  At post-treatment, both groups showed significant and large symptom reductions yet did not differ from each other. Neither was there any between-group difference in client-rated therapeutic alliance or treatment engagement. Symptom reductions were maintained at a three-month follow-up.
               
               
                  Conclusion
                  Therapist guidance by telephone does not appear to differ from therapist guidance by e-mail in iCBT for depression, although further research featuring larger samples is necessary to draw more definite conclusions.
                  
                     Trial registration: None
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Accumulating evidence shows that Internet-delivered self-help based on cognitive behavioural therapy (iCBT) (Andersson, 2009) is an effective treatment of depression (Richards and Richardson, 2012; Titov, 2011), somatic disorders (Cuijpers et al., 2008) and a range of anxiety disorders (Andersson et al., 2013a). The addition of a therapist to guide the client through the self-help program has been shown to yield greater effects (Johansson and Andersson, 2012; Newman et al., 2011; Palmqvist et al., 2007; Spek et al., 2007), equal in size to traditional face-to-face CBT (Andersson et al., 2013b, in press; Cuijpers et al., 2010). The mechanisms behind these effects have not been the subject of much research and remain largely unknown (Andersson et al., 2009). In particular, much remains to be learned regarding what specific aspects of the therapist-client interaction that influence treatment outcomes in iCBT. Recent iCBT research has investigated the effect of the amount, intensity and content of the therapist support (Bendelin et al., 2011; Paxling et al., 2012; Titov, 2011; Titov et al., 2010), the potential added benefit of additional telephone support (Andersson et al., 2003) and the development of a therapeutic alliance (TA) (Andersson et al., 2012; Bergman Nordgren et al., 2013; Jasper et al., 2014). To our knowledge, no previous study on depression has directly investigated the potential impact of the medium by which the therapist-client communication is provided in iCBT, e.g. via telephone or e-mail. Nor has there been any meta-analysis published directly comparing these two ways of delivering therapist guidance. Hence, it is currently unknown whether the therapist-client communication medium influences treatment outcomes.

Although there is scarce prior research to motivate a hypothesis of superiority of one specific type of communication medium, equality cannot be assumed. Communication via telephone is more similar to traditional, face-to-face CBT and may be experienced by some as more personal, thereby possibly aiding the formation of a therapeutic alliance and indirectly influencing symptom reduction. Communicating via e-mail, on the other hand, allows for more time to reflect upon content and to formulate thoughts and feelings into comprehensible words, which are some of the goals and assumed therapeutic mechanisms of all psychotherapy. Thus, both communication formats have inherent benefits of importance for symptom reduction. We hypothesised that real-time feedback and therapist contact over the telephone would be more beneficial than asynchronous e-mail contact in part due to the telephone calls requiring scheduling and that they would thus be less easy to avoid and postpone compared to reading the e-mail feedback. Indeed, there is some evidence that scheduled support boosts treatment effects (Kenwright et al., 2005). If guidance by telephone would be found superior to guidance by e-mail, this would have great implications for the design, implementation and effectiveness of future iCBT interventions. Here, we report a pilot randomised trial designed to investigate this question.

@&#METHODS@&#

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

Participants were recruited from the waiting list control group included in a previous study on iCBT for depression (Carlbring et al., 2013a). Hence, the pre-treatment measures reported in this second-stage study correspond to the control group post-measurements in Carlbring et al. (2013a). The study was approved by the Regional Ethical Review Board and all participants provided written informed consent. Out of the 40 participants originally randomised to the waiting list control group in the Carlbring et al. (2013a) study, 38 participants completed the post-treatment measurement that served as the pre-measurement in the current study. These 38 participants were randomised to either telephone or e-mail therapist guidance using an online, true random generator. Two MSc students in clinical psychology, supervised by an experienced psychotherapist, served as therapists. To minimise the potential risk of a therapist effect, both therapists provided both types of therapist guidance via random allocation of patients. See the flowchart (Fig. 1
                        ) for group-wise dropout numbers during the study.

After randomisation, both groups were given access to a self-help program consisting of seven modules (one per week) focused on behavioural activation (cf. Carlbring et al., 2013b) with some influences from acceptance and commitment therapy (Hayes et al., 2003), namely, defusion (through acceptance and mindfulness) and values work. See Carlbring et al. (2013a) for more details on the treatment program. In both treatment groups, therapist-client communication focused on a module summary along with personal reflections and question, written and submitted by secure e-mail each week by all participants. In order to distinguish the pure effect of therapist support type, attempts were made to match the two groups on other factors of hypothesised importance: Prior to treatment commencing, the therapists were instructed to devote the same amount of time (approx. 15minutes per participant and week) and the same type of individualised, non-standardised support (primarily validating the participants' experiences, providing feedback on performed tasks and reinforcing progress and plans of future work), regardless of communication type. Treatment fidelity was monitored during supervision sessions, but was not systematically recorded. The e-mail support group received a reply from their therapist within 24hours after submitting a module summary, while the telephone support group had scheduled, regular telephone sessions regardless of whether the weekly module summary had been submitted or not. These telephone sessions lasted approximately 10minutes, with an additional five minutes spent on preparation. In the e-mail support group, participants who failed to submit a weekly module summary received reminders and encouragements by e-mail.

Participants included were at least 18years old and had a score range of 15–30 on the Montgomery–Åsberg Depression Rating Scale Self-Rated (Svanborg and Åsberg, 1994). A diagnostic screening interview was conducted via telephone (Rohde et al., 1997), using the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV—Axis I disorders (SCID-I) (First et al., 2002). All participants fulfilled DSM-IV criteria for major depressive disorder (as their primary diagnosis), with or without comorbid dysthymia, and reported neither participating in other current psychological treatments nor any change in psychoactive medication (if any) during the last three months. When commencing the current study, all but two participants had a Beck Depression Inventory II (Beck et al., 1996) score of >10 and were hence within the clinical range (see Table 1
                         for full demographics and clinical characteristics). Importantly, there were no between-group differences in pre-treatment clinical variables. Statistical analyses did however reveal a significant and large (Cohen's d
                        =0.8) between-group difference in age. However, there was no correlation between age and any clinical variable except for pre-treatment Quality of Life Inventory (QOLI) (Frisch et al., 1992) scores. To ensure no confounding effect of age, the QOLI repeated measures analyses were repeated using age as a covariate. This did not change the between-group findings.

Outcome measures consisted of the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI-II) (Beck et al., 1996), the self-rated Montgomery–Åsberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS-S) (Svanborg and Åsberg, 1994), the Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI) (Beck et al., 1988) and the Quality of Life Inventory (QOLI) (Frisch, 1998; Frisch et al., 1992; Paunović and Öst, 2004). These self-report scales have been independently psychometrically validated for Internet-administration (Carlbring et al., 2007a; Holländare et al., 2010; Lindner et al., 2013; Thorndike et al., 2009). The BDI-II served as primary outcome measure. All items were mandatory. Participants answered the forms before commencing treatment (pre), immediately afterwards (post) and at a three months follow-up, always via a secure, dedicated online platform. To investigate whether the therapist guidance communication medium had any influence on the formation of a therapeutic alliance, possibly as mediator of symptom reduction, participants also answered the client version of the short (12-item) Working Alliance Inventory (WAI-S) (Tracey and Kokotovic, 1989) after the second treatment week, post-treatment and at the follow-up. The overall alliance score was used as a metric. As in previous iCBT research using the WAI-S (Bergman Nordgren et al., 2013), a wording-revised version of the WAI-S suitable for Internet therapy was used. Finally, self-rated treatment engagement was measured post-treatment by asking participants to estimate both how much time they dedicated to their treatment each week and to rate their effort on a five-point scale corresponding to the range Very large to None at all (ranked 4–0). Therapists recorded the amount of time spent each week on each client.

Statistical analyses were carried out using IBM SPSS Statistics 22 and the R statistical environment (version 2.15.3). In this pilot study, our primary objective was to investigate whether iCBT with therapist guidance via telephone was superior to therapist guidance via e-mail. Prospective power analyses revealed a 67% probability of detecting a large (Cohen's d
                        =0.8) effect in an independent samples t-test (with p
                        =0.05), which was deemed acceptable for this pilot trial. Longitudinal outcome data was analysed using repeated-measures ANOVA. Since F tests revealed that participants with missing post-treatment data had significantly higher pre-treatment scores on the BDI-II, MADRS and BAI, we concluded that outcome data were not missing at random, making missing-data approaches such as mixed effects models and multiple imputations inappropriate. We therefore replaced missing values using the last-observation-carried-forward approach for the outcome measures. Missing WAI data were not replaced. All data were analysed on an intention-to-treat basis, departing from the randomisations into the current study's two arms. Single time-point between-group differences were tested using F tests and Pearson (exact) Chi-square tests. Bonferroni correction was applied whenever applicable. Cohen's d effect sizes (Cohen, 1988) were calculated within- and between-groups using the compute.es R package (http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/compute.es/index.html). Relevant clinical change was defined as having a BDI-II score of >10 pre-treatment, and ≤10 post-treatment and at follow-up (two participants excluded due to low pre-treatment BDI-II scores).

@&#RESULTS@&#

Seven participants dropped out during the course of the trial: 6 in the telephone support group and 1 in the e-mail support group. This difference was not significant yet at trend-level (χ
                     2[1, n
                     =38]=4.38, p
                     =0.09). Most drop-outs occurred after the material was made available but before first contact with the therapist (n
                     =4, including the 1 in the e-mail group) and three occurred during treatment.

Both groups showed significant improvement from pre-treatment to post-treatment on all measures, with effects maintained at follow-up. As shown in Table 2
                        , groups did not differ on any measure, nor were there any group×time interaction effects. Adding estimated appropriated therapist time, mid-treatment WAI-S scores, or self-rated treatment engagement as separate covariates did not result in any effect of group. To test whether the drop-out rates impacted results, we also conducted non-intention-to-treat analyses including only the participants who did not drop-out and completed all measurements (full completers; n
                        =26). The results did not change across any significance level, with the exception of BAI outcomes where there was a significant time×group effect when using Huynh–Feldt correction for non-sphericity (p
                        =0.047), albeit not when using Greenhouse–Geisser correction (p
                        =0.052).

Groups did not differ in regards to proportions of subjects scoring≤10 on the BDI-II post-treatment (χ
                        2[1, n
                        =36]=0.11, p
                        =1.00) or at follow-up (χ
                        2[1, n
                        =36]=0.358, p
                        =0.730). Group-wise pre- and post-treatment scores are plotted in Fig. 2
                        .

Twenty-seven participants provided WAI scores at all three timepoints. At post-treatment, both groups rated higher (p
                        =0.007) WAI scores (M=66.63, SD=12.58) compared to mid-treatment (M=58.37, SD=10.55), which was followed by a significant decrease at follow-up (M=62.67, SD=11.85; p
                        =0.042; overall effect of time F[2, 15]=8.145, p
                        =0.002). There was no effect of group (F[1, 15]=0.282, p
                        =0.6), or any group×time interaction effect (F[1, 15]=1.50, p
                        =0.234). Group-wise average WAI scores over time are displayed in Fig. 3
                         (all available data at each timepoint plotted).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

Internet-delivered, therapist-guided self-help programs based on cognitive behavioural therapy have repeatedly been found to be effective, yet little research has investigated the mechanisms influencing these effects. In contrast with our hypothesis, we found no indications that therapist guidance via scheduled telephone sessions was superior to therapist guidance via e-mail correspondence with regards to symptom reduction, therapeutic alliance or patient-perceived treatment engagement. Although preliminary and thus to be interpreted with caution, these results indicate that future guided iCBT interventions for depression can be designed according to local logistic prerequisites to feature therapist guidance either via telephone calls or e-mail correspondence, without loss of effect.

Unlike Kenwright et al. (2005), we found no indication that the scheduling aspect (featured only in the telephone guidance intervention) produced superior results. However, it should be noted that our study featured a different clinical population and that our study was not designed to specifically test the importance of scheduled versus un-scheduled guidance. Several other details of this study deserve consideration. In this pilot trial, participants were randomised to their condition; whether or not there is an added benefit of allowing patients to choose the communication medium themselves remains to be investigated (c.f. Andersson et al., 2011; Johansson et al., 2013). It should be noted that all participants submitted written assignments each week regardless of group allocation. The between-group difference was thus limited to how the therapist responded to this written material and the patient's response. This procedure eliminated the potential confounding effects of different accumulated therapist time and client preparation time, and other possible consequences of having participants in the telephone group also presenting their assignment over the telephone.

It is unclear to what extent the results of this trial are applicable to Internet interventions for other psychiatric disorders. In the case of social anxiety disorder, for example, difficulty speaking on the telephone with an authority figure (such as therapist) is a common symptom (Carlbring et al., 2007b). While this impairment may impose an initial barrier to developing a therapeutic alliance and conducting therapeutic work (resulting in symptom reduction) in an iCBT program with therapist support via the telephone, such a component could also be considered additional exposure therapy and may alternatively result in additional symptom reduction. Hence, it is important that future research investigates whether therapist guidance communication medium has an impact in iCBT interventions for other psychiatric disorders. It should also be noted that although there was no significant difference in drop-out rates between groups, there was a slight trend towards it (p
                     =0.09). There were also some indications of a time×group effect on anxiety ratings when only including full completers, yet the statistics here were not conclusive and this finding should thus be interpreted with caution. Future studies with larger samples should address whether scheduled therapist guidance via telephone poses a greater barrier to treatment completion compared to written correspondence, especially when treating depression. Such studies may also benefit from systematically recording therapist experiences with the two communication mediums, an aspect important for clinical implementations not covered by the present study.

In light of the guidelines suggested by Proudfoot et al. (2011), this pilot study has some limitations in need of recognition. First, our sample size was small, limiting the statistical power to detect between-group differences. Future research featuring larger sample sizes are required to draw more definite conclusions on the equivalence of delivering therapist guidance through different communication mediums. Larger samples will also be required to test whether demographic characteristics (e.g. sex or age) influence results. The significant group difference in age is also a limitation, although no statistics indicated a confounding effect of age on results. Second, with regards to causal mechanisms, the ethical protocol did not allow for measuring and comparing therapist and patient behaviours in written correspondence or during telephone sessions. While there are some results showing no effect of specific therapist behaviours (e.g. clinical advice) on treatment outcomes (Titov et al., 2010), another study suggests such a correlation (Paxling et al., 2012). Hence, we cannot exclude the possibility that a true effect of communication medium was masked by an effect of medium-specific therapist behaviours. In addition, our study was not immune to problems commonly found in randomised trials, e.g. missing data (Christensen et al., 2009). Standard procedures were employed to counteract these issues. Finally, negative effects were not measured as suggested by Rozental et al.(2014). These limitations notwithstanding, the pilot randomised trial herein described extends the extant literature on factors influencing treatment outcomes in guided iCBT.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

The results of this pilot study suggest that in Internet-delivered, therapist-guided cognitive behavioural therapy for depression, therapist guidance by telephone appears to be equal to therapist guidance by e-mail with regards to symptom reduction, therapeutic alliance and patient-rated treatment engagement. Further research using larger samples and additional clinical populations is required to conclude what aspects of therapist guidance influence treatment outcomes.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGMENTS@&#

This study was made possible by a generous grant from the Swedish Research Council for Health, Working Life and Welfare (FORTE) and Swedish Research Council (Vetenskapsrådet).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

