@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Experiences and attitudes of primary care therapists in the implementation and use of internet-based treatment in Swedish primary care settings

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Therapistssee ICBT as a good treatment that should be introduced in primary care.


                        
                        
                           
                           Adaptations of ICBT to the primary care context could improve usability.


                        
                        
                           
                           Barriers to implementation, and perhaps integration of psychology were identified.


                        
                        
                           
                           The experience of the therapists supports the implementation of ICBT in primary care.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Qualitative method

ICBT

Implementation

Primary care

Therapists' view

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Background
                  The current knowledge of internet-based cognitive behavior therapy (ICBT) implemented in primary care settings is sparse. Our objective was to explore primary care therapists' experiences and attitudes of ICBT, the opportunities and conditions for research in primary care, and to identify potential barriers to the implementation of ICBT treatment in primary care.
               
               
                  Methods
                  Eleven therapists (of 14) participating in the research and implementation project PRIM-NET completed a survey. Four of them were selected also for a detailed semi-structured interview. Data from the interviews were analyzed qualitatively and according to methods used in implementation science.
               
               
                  Results
                  
                     Six general themes were identified in which the therapists considered ICBT as a good treatment that ought to be introduced in primary care. To optimize procedure in primary care settings, several adaptations of ICBT were suggested. Integrating and blending ICBT and face-to-face therapies, for example, would render primary care psychology more efficient. The PRIM-NET study and research within primary care was seen as rewarding and necessary, but challenging. To a large extent primary care still revolves around the general practitioner, with a focus on production, finances, and a somatic aspect of the patients. Five possible barriers to implementation of ICBT were identified which perhaps explains why psychological procedures are not fully integrated into primary care.
               
               
                  Conclusions
                  Although the implementation of new methods and routines is typically accompanied by challenges, the overall experience of the therapists supports the implementation of ICBT as an additional treatment in primary care.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Internet-based cognitive behavior therapy (ICBT) may be described as guided self-help interventions where the therapist interaction is asynchronous and the treatment is mainly delivered via websites in the form of text, pictures, and audio file (Andersson and Hedman, 2013). “Defining internet-delivered interventions can however be problematic as there are different conceptualisations and viewpoints” (Andersson, 2009, p.175). For example e-mail therapy, video therapy, and chat therapy (Andersson et al., 2008; Lindefors et al., 2012) make it difficult to refer to ICBT as one clearly defined treatment (Lindefors et al., 2012). Considering current focus on evidence-based treatments, and in light of the positive results from efficacy studies of ICBT for depression (Andersson et al., 2013; Arnberg et al., 2014; Cuijpers et al., 2013; Richards and Richardson, 2012), the introduction and large scale implementation of these techniques in Swedish health care seem imminent. Several programs treating depression with different foci (for example cognitive or behavioral) and setups (for example number of modules, with or without support, and also mode of support) have been used (Andersson et al., 2005; Carlbring et al., 2013; Johansson et al., 2012; Meyer et al., 2009; Perini et al., 2009; Ruwaard et al., 2009; Titov et al., 2011; Warmerdam et al., 2008). However, so far most studies may be characterized as efficacy studies. Also, the effectiveness studies that have been conducted have mostly been performed within second level care and/or in centralized units (Hedman et al., 2014; Hedman et al., 2013; Ruwaard et al., 2012). Also, some studies are performed as open trials without a control group (Newby et al., 2014).

Depression presents a serious condition associated with somatic disorders, a worsened overall health status and an increased risk of morbidity and mortality (Craven and Bland, 2013; Musselman et al., 1998; Pan et al., 2011; Wulsin et al., 1999). It is estimated that about 10% of primary care patients worldwide suffer from clinical depression (World Health Organization, 2001). Most cases of depression are identified and treated at primary care level (Bijl and Ravelli, 2000), making it especially relevant to introduce ICBT into primary care context.

When introducing ICBT at primary care centers, the attitudes of the therapists that primarily will be responsible for the implementation and use of ICBT are of course paramount. Nevertheless, there is a paucity of more detailed studies focusing exclusively on ICBT in primary care (Arnberg et al., 2014). Currently little is known of primary care therapists' attitudes towards, and experiences of ICBT. A structured literature search revealed no specific studies on this topic. We have however located reports on psychology students' experiences from training in and using ICBT (Friesen et al., 2014; Hadjistavropoulos et al., 2012), and a Swedish regional report based on attitudes among seven primary care therapists and seven psychiatry therapists using ICBT (Axelsson, 2014). In Axelsson (2014) the therapists viewed ICBT as a valuable complement that could be used in conjunction with face-to-face treatment. According to the therapists, other health care staff had, to some extent, not referred the intended patients but used the ICBT project to offload demanding and severely ill patients. The lack of “flow-through” regarding appropriate patients limits the ability to maintain methodological competence. Axelsson (2014) concludes that a successful introduction and “marketing” of ICBT in health care requires supporting structures on a regional and national level.

Primary care operates in settings and under conditions that in many ways differ from second level or specialized care (Roy-Byrne et al., 2003). In this respect, primary care psychology and primary care therapists need to be cooperative generalists, with knowledge of prevention, behavioral health, developmental psychology, psychopathology, and family issues, based in a systemic, developmental and bio-psycho-social frame of reference of the patient (APA Interorganizational Work Group on Competencies for Primary Care Psychology Practice, 2013). The primary care context is therefore likely to present special challenges that may have an impact on the implementation of new treatment routines and methods. For example, moving from efficacy to effectiveness studies in health care is typically a challenge, which tends to become even more evident in primary care (Roy-Byrne et al., 2003).

The few studies of internet-delivered treatments that have been performed among primary care patients share common experiences of difficulties in the recruitment. Inclusion rates in studies of internet-delivered treatments normally tend to vary between 3% and 25% (Ebert et al., 2015). Clarke et al. (2005) invited a large number of patients identified as suffering from depression (receiving either medication or psychotherapy in the previous 30days) to ICBT, 2–4% responded. Mead et al. (2005) offered internet-treatment to primary care patients waiting for psychological therapy, one in five responded and the same response rate was found by Whiteside et al. (2014) when primary care patients identified as experiencing a new episode of depression were invited to ICBT. Studies reporting no problems with ICBT treatment in patients referred by general practitioners (GPs) exist (Williams and Andrews, 2013), but have primarily been carried out at a centralized health care unit. These experiences suggest that research-based implementation at primary care can be complicated.

There are several hurdles to overcome for successful dissemination of new programs for treatment. Adherence to evidence-based methods and practice can therefore be lower than might be expected (McFlynn et al., 2003; Seddon et al., 2001). Several frameworks to help understand and guide implementations have been suggested, for example the Seven Barriers to Optimal Care, identified by Cochrane et al. (2007). This framework is condensed from a systematic review of studies in which factors that limited or restricted health care providers to adhere to the implementation of evidence-based clinical practice were identified (see Table 1
                     ).

The present study focuses on experiences and attitudes among experienced primary care therapists who participated in the research-based PRIM-NET project aimed at the implementation of ICBT in primary care. The specific aims of the present study are to examine primary care therapists I) attitudes and experiences of ICBT in primary care, II) the conditions and opportunities for research on ICBT in primary care, and III) factors and barriers believed to be important in the implementation of ICBT in primary care.

@&#METHOD@&#

During 2010–2013, PRIM-NET (Swedish national research register, FoU — ID number 140531) implemented ICBT for depression at 16 primary care centers throughout the region of Västra Götaland, Sweden, with a total of 14 participating therapists.

At the participating primary care centers, there had to be a therapist trained and experienced in working with CBT and who also agreed to integrate ICBT into their work. PRIM-NET provided all materials needed, including access to the ICBT treatment, information about the project, and education on the specific treatment program, Depressionshjälpen®. The project also provided support via telephone during office hours.

The GPs and the registered nurses (RNs) had a key role at each primary care center. They were instructed to inform and recruit patients who met the basic inclusion criteria of age 18 and older and tentatively identified for depression. Recruited patients were assessed in a semi-structured interview by the primary care center therapist. Eligible patients were randomized to either treatment as usual (TAU) or ICBT. The PRIM-NET project was aimed at mild to moderate depression, defined as less than 35 points at Montgomery Åsberg Depression Rating scale — Self rating version (MADRS-S; Montgomery and Asberg, 1979).

The setup of the ICBT followed a study protocol in which the therapists made a telephone call to the ICBT-patients during the first week to provide support and help patients start the internet-based treatment program. The patients then worked on the internet-package for 8–12weeks by themselves. Throughout the treatment, they were supported by the same therapist they had met in the initial assessment. The weekly patient–therapist contact was kept mainly via the secure e-mail service, Mina Vårdkontakter (MVK) which is a nationwide and secure communication system between patient and health care provider in Sweden, and by telephone. The therapists were able to monitor the time and duration of each login, weekly reports on well-being, and also the internet modules that were logged on to, by each patient. Therapists were instructed to spend about 10–15min by secure e-mail and/or telephone with each patient per week. This setup closely resembles the setup of Carlbring et al. (2013), with the addition of three short telephone calls, and extended treatment time.

Although the quality of the therapist-client communication has been found to be important in internet-delivered treatments (Svartvatten et al., 2015; Van der Zanden et al., 2014), as the PRIM-NET project was performed within routine primary care, we were unable to in detail log all communication that might have occurred between staff, patient and therapist. The ordinary primary care routines for initial recruitment of patients means that we lack reliable information about the actual recruitment rate. However, as a comparison, the number of included patients in PRIM-NET (n=90) equals 2.5% of the patients diagnosed with depression at the partaking primary care centers during their participation in PRIM-NET. This suggests that all eligible patients were not approached and offered participation. Possible reasons include a heavy workload in primary care, and a potentially biased view on which patients the ICBT was suited for (Kivi et al., 2014).

The specific ICBT treatment used in PRIM-NET was Depressionshjälpen, a commercially available ICBT package in Swedish developed by Psykologpartners W&W AB, based on behavioral activation (Dimidjian et al., 2006), with incorporated functional strategies from Acceptance and Commitment Therapy, and Mindfulness. The program encompasses internet access to seven modules, with short texts, narrated explanatory models, and/or videos. A workbook (on paper) with fill-in diaries and exercises was provided to be used in conjunction with the modules (for further details see Carlbring et al., 2013, Table 2
                        ). Patients could access the internet modules freely, but were advised to finish them in the predetermined order, thus completing the treatment in minimum 8, and maximum 12weeks, when the login code expired. For all modules the patient was required to fill in a short survey on the current level of wellbeing in four different dimensions: sadness, fatigue, hope for the future, and quality of life. At week three and seven patients also filled in MADRS-S, a scale developed to be sensitive to change in depression (Montgomery and Asberg, 1979). Patients were encouraged to have weekly contact with their therapist via secure e-mail. In addition they all received three short telephone calls from the therapist: in week one, in the middle, and at the end of the treatment.

Within PRIM-NET 52 patients were to receive ICBT treatment. After renegs and drop-outs, 44 patients remained in the study. According to BDI-II cutoff, of these 44 patients, one had minimal, twelve mild, 15 moderate, and 16 severe depression.

There were 14 participating therapists in PRIM-NET. One of them was a registered psychologist and psychotherapist and, among the other 13 therapists, ten were registered psychologists and three were psychotherapists. Of the ten psychologists, two had pending licenses. One therapist did not perform any assessment, while some as many as 30. We are aware that some undocumented assessments were made without later inclusion, which makes it ambiguous to report a fixed maximum number of assessments. Four therapists did not support any ICBT treatment; among the remaining 10 therapists the number of supported patients varied between 1 and 16, with the mean number of supported ICBT-patients being 5.1, SD=4.1 (median=4.5). Among the four interviewed therapists the mean number of supported ICBT-patients were 4.0, SD=1.8 (median=4.5). At least two therapists had previous experiences using internet-based treatment before they participated in PRIM-NET (one among the interviewed). There is also a possibility that some therapists had used this type of treatment after PRIM-NET but before answering the survey/interview providing data for the present study. All of them were interested in internet-based treatments and had some knowledge of other programs.

The original plan for PRIM-NET was to engage primary care therapists already working at the participating primary care centers. For various reasons this was not always possible, which required us to hire therapists with adequate knowledge and experience of CBT and of treating depression to specifically perform the assessments and to support the ICBT treatment at some primary care centers. Consequently, the level of experience of primary care among the therapists differs considerably. Focusing on primary care and the reactions of primary care therapists to ICBT, therapists with little or no experience from primary care were excluded from the interviews. The four (two female and two male) therapists who were selected for an interview all had extensive experience working as therapists (CBT; average 12.5years, range 7–27), and within primary care (average 5.5years, range 2–11). They had also been participating in PRIM-NET for at least one year. Rating themselves, they represented a rather balanced approach to CBT with no clear focus on either cognitive or behavior therapy.

Data for this study were collected in two separate steps.
                           
                              1)
                              A survey was sent to all twelve, at that time, participating therapists in the spring of 2012. Eleven of them responded. The survey consisted of a) a section of multiple choice questions, and b) a section of open questions. Here we report data exclusively from section b) of the survey, which consisted of the following questions:
                                    
                                       A.
                                       Describe your most important experience from PRIM-NET

Describe the possibilities to use internet or other medias in your work at the primary care center,

If you could choose without any restrictions, what programs, applications etc, (also for diagnoses other than depression), do you think could be beneficial for your role as a therapist and for your patients,

How can we [i.e. PRIM-NET and primary care in general] best perform research on psychologically based treatment programs within primary care?

Share your own thoughts and observations.

In-depth interviews over telephone and, in one instance a face-to-face interview, with four of the participating primary care therapists. The interviews were conducted after they had concluded PRIM-NET. Each interview was introduced as an opportunity to give feedback to PRIM-NET, and the importance to put forth everything that had not been optimal, that had not worked, and that could have been better, was stressed. The interviews then started with the prompt “Please tell me about your experience of participating in PRIM-NET.” The goal of the interview was to cover two main areas:

Thoughts and attitudes on performing research within primary care.
                                    
                                       F.
                                       Should we perform research within primary care?

How can we perform research within primary care?

What can we learn from PRIM-NET/what can we do better next time we perform research within primary care?

The word “we” refers primarily not only to PRIM-NET, but also to research projects in general within primary care.
                           
                              ii
                              Thoughts and attitudes on ICBT.

What do you think of ICBT?

Should we offer ICBT in primary care?

Does ICBT fit primary care patients?

Is ICBT a viable treatment for depression?

Do you want to work with ICBT in the future?

The term “ICBT” was not specified during the interviews and can therefore refer to experiences both within and outside of PRIM-NET, not only to the actually used program (Depressionshjälpen), but also to other internet-based treatment programs.

If the interviewed therapist did not spontaneously cover these two topics, and eight questions, the interviewer would prompt the therapist. All interviews were conducted
                           3
                        
                        
                           3
                           Author MK, licensed psychologist. Acting project coordinator and in this capacity introducing and supervising the therapists.
                         between November 2012 and February 2013. The interviews lasted 46–75min. All interviews were taped and transcribed verbatim.

The analysis3 of written/transcribed data was commenced in two separate parts (see below): A+B and A+C, in which part B and part C relied on the analysis performed in part A.
                           
                              A.
                              
                                 Inductive analysis using methods from grounded theory (Birks and Mills, 2010).
                              

All transcribed data from the interviews as well as the comments from section b) in the survey were read several times, focusing on both manifest and latent content. Open codes were then created for each paragraph.


                                 Inductive analysis grouping data into themes.
                              

The open codes from part A were grouped, re-read, and re-grouped into broader categories emerging from the data. These categories were then grouped into six general themes. The findings from this final step are presented in Section 3.1.


                                 Analysis focusing exclusively on factors that might have hindered implementation.
                              

The open codes from part A were analyzed and grouped using the seven possible behavioral and system barriers against successful implementation defined by Cochrane et al. (2007), see Table 1, as a guiding but not forcing grid. The findings from this step are presented in Section 3.2.

The credibility of the findings was ascertained
                           4
                        
                        
                           4
                           Author ME, licensed psychologist. Acting project coordinator and in this capacity introducing and supervising the therapists.
                         by reading the transcripts of the interviews, the results of the analysis, and the supporting quotations, and comparing them to, and finding them to be in line with, what the therapists had expressed during meetings, supervision and tutoring, earlier in the project.

ICBT was seen by all participating therapists as a viable treatment option and an asset for the primary care therapists that expands the repertoire, saves resources, and makes quality psychological treatment available to more patients.
                              
                                 “…I think ICBT has a place in primary care alongside other treatment options, absolutely.”
                              
                           
                        

The consensus was that ICBT should be introduced in primary care, while the opinion on how this should be done (locally at almost every primary care center, and/or centrally at one single, or a few, centralized and specialized units) was more diverse. There were arguments supporting both modes of implementation. A central unit was seen as a way to offload part of the therapists' heavy workload, by offering a possibility to remit patients elsewhere. However, to introduce ICBT at the local primary care centers was seen by most as preferable.
                              
                                 “I think there should be knowledge of this [ICBT] at many primary care centers”
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 “I think it would be really senseless to have only a central [ICBT-unit], I must say.”
                              
                           
                        

The views of the therapists were, however, that ICBT should not be seen as completely separated from face-to-face therapy. Rather, it should be used in conjunction with, and as one of many tools, in face-to-face therapy.
                              
                                 “…you want to tailor [the treatment], even if there is a structure for the treatment, you still want to individualize it.”
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 “…perhaps not using the whole program, but as supporting tools, increasing patient involvement between sessions, having structured assignments to choose from.”
                              
                           
                        

Although the attitudes were very positive, among all therapists, towards internet-based treatments and ICBT, there were some concerns about ICBT and its use for depressed patients. Treating depression was considered to require something else than, for example, treating anxiety. Patients suffering from depression were seen as more fragile and in need of more support. The rigidity of the research protocol was thus thought of as too inflexible and the therapists would have preferred to use the ICBT package more freely, for example in conjunction with face-to-face treatment, individually or in group format, and perhaps starting the ICBT treatment with a couple of face-to-face sessions, getting to know the patient.
                              
                                 “…no, you want to meet the [depressed] patients [face-to-face], and perhaps meet them a couple of times…”
                              
                           
                        

The therapists did not, in many cases, feel entirely comfortable with sending depressed patients home with “just” the ICBT package.

One common belief about ICBT was that this type of treatment fit the younger patients the best.
                              
                                 “I'm thinking of younger, … that are more internet savvy…”
                              
                           
                        

One of the therapists also admitted that this might not be in accordance with reality, but still believed it had clearly influenced the view on which patients were invited to PRIM-NET.

Concerning possible negative attitudes towards ICBT among other primary care professions and patients, the therapists had encountered some, but they reported that this was not a problem, nor a dominant view. The therapists did not feel that the introduction of ICBT had been opposed by others.

The PRIM-NET project was rated as an ambitious and well-tailored project. The view was that it had introduced a valuable ICBT treatment to the primary care center, offered a lot of support, had been easy to reach via telephone or e-mail, and had done what could be expected.
                              
                                 “… I think it [the PRIM-NET project] has been good.”
                              
                           
                        

It was felt that participation in PRIM-NET was a rewarding experience, in spite of the difficulties, for example, in recruiting patients.
                              
                                 “It has been fun working with internet-therapy.”
                              
                           
                        

Since the recruitment rate to PRIM-NET was, at each primary care center, low, assessing and treating patients never became automated. The therapists believed that in order for ICBT to become a real alternative, there has to be a steady flow of patients. It was suggested that perhaps one should not focus on a single diagnosis, but offer internet-treatment for a number of different diagnoses.
                              
                                 “When [the patients] came so far apart and now and then, it meant we had to learn all over again, every time.”
                              
                           
                        

The therapists were, however, convinced that there are primary care patients for whom ICBT is a good fit.
                              
                                 “We are somewhat astonished [over the low recruitment rate], …they [depressed patients fit for ICBT] must be out there…”
                              
                           
                        

The specific ICBT treatment program used was seen as user-friendly, and as a good treatment, resting on sound principles and evidence. However, the therapists believed that many patients want cognitive elements to be included and the comparative lack of this in the ICBT treatment program used was seen as a shortcoming.
                              
                                 “…[patients with] milder depressions … are focusing on thoughts…”
                              
                           
                        

The secure e-mail program, MVK, could have been more user-friendly, and this was a problem for some of the patients.
                              
                                 “… I don't think we had any patient where it [MVK] just worked well.”
                              
                           
                        

In many cases, the therapists themselves also perceived MVK as too complicated.

When reflecting on the recruitment problems in PRIM-NET, there were some concerns that patients with mild to moderate depression are actually rarely admitted to and treated by therapists within primary care. The therapists' belief was that depression is typically detected and treated in primary care in more severe stages. This meant that PRIM-NET in fact tended not to relieve the work burden among the therapists as was intended. Instead it rather increased the workload by identifying and bringing new patients to the primary care therapists' attention.
                              
                                 “…this group of patients, we haven't admitted before…”
                              
                           
                        

Research within primary care was seen as something natural, necessary, and positive. The unanimous thought was that there has to be research performed within primary care.
                              
                                 “Performing research within real [primary] health care is excellent!”
                              
                           
                        

However, there seems to be very little room to perform research. The feeling was that the everyday chores take over and leave no energy for research.
                              
                                 “There was so much extra work due to the fact that it was a research project [and not due to the ICBT itself].”
                              
                           
                        

There was also the matter of the overarching focus on budget concerns, making lack of staff and time a key issue.
                              
                                 “…the problem is the lack of resources, staff, … it is so tight…”
                              
                           
                        

Although the therapists thought that research was regarded as mostly a good thing, they also reported having heard murmurs about the extra workload that the project produced, especially among staff not directly involved in the implementation of PRIM-NET.
                              
                                 “I heard some complaints, …and ‘what do we get out of this’. … It's good for all staff to know why we are doing this, to make them feel involved…”
                              
                           
                        

The therapists also thought that there was an unwillingness to change and accept new thoughts that are “force fed” to the staff from “outside parties”, and from management. Information on new methods and research projects often gets caught in group processes, and because of this does not pass through down to the individual staff member. One contributing factor to the reluctance to embrace new methods was believed to be an unwillingness to exhibit one's ignorance to one's peers.
                              
                                 “…it's not a learning environment, it's not an environment where you want to expose your ignorance.”
                              
                           
                        

For research to be successfully performed within primary care, it must take into account and adapt to the unique conditions of primary care (i.e., protocols must be simple and intuitive with extra efforts reduced to a minimum). The therapists also stressed the need for support from management, as well as a clear connection to the grass-roots within primary care that must be allowed to influence the research design and topic.
                              
                                 “…there has to be support and supervision, … and [the research set up and protocol] should be as undemanding as possible…”
                              
                           
                        

The therapists claimed that it was important to involve and inform all members of staff at the primary care center of the research project and its goals. If the staff understands, feels that this is viewed as important, and feels that the management gives them resources to perform the extra work, they might feel more loyal to the research.

The therapists' view was that the main focus among GPs was on somatic health, which limited the scope for psychological interventions and the role of therapists within primary care. A lack of general knowledge about psychologically based interventions among the non-therapist staff within primary care was perceived. It was believed that their education and training, in most cases, had not included any psychology at all.
                              
                                 “…it's not just that there is no room for psychologists, there isn't really any competence among GPs or nurses to see and treat psychological illness beyond writing prescriptions.”
                              
                           
                        

The therapists emphasized that psychology is a relatively new discipline in primary care and not yet integrated into the primary care culture. This makes it hard to reach common ground in understanding the patients and their needs.
                              
                                 “…there is no thinking, no planning ahead, concerning psychological illness”
                              
                           
                        

Psychological treatments were still something different and unusual at the primary care centers. The therapists somewhat felt that the “medical” or somatic view of the patients was at odds with the “psychological” view, and that today the “medical” view is still the winner.

One proposal was standardized primary care treatment programs, clearly stating mandatory routines when encountering and treating psychological problems, as well as naming and recommending psychological treatment options, might be a way to increase the status and expand the role of psychology within primary care.
                              
                                 “We have talked about introducing some kind of mandatory decision tree, … so that we do not end up giving two treatments at the same time, avoiding antidepressants if the patients should see us [i.e., see the therapists and receive psychological treatment].”
                              
                           
                        

The view of the therapists was that primary care of today is largely focused on production and budget, with much short-term thinking and action, which limits the opportunities for primary care staff to actually put the patients' needs in focus and on preventative work. There are seldom any discussions on evidence, best practice, or research at the primary care center, but rather more discussion about money and budget concerns.
                              
                                 “…we never discuss research or science of any kind.”
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 “…we are thinking budget all the time…”
                              
                           
                        

Primary care was perceived to still be organized around the GPs, with a focus on somatic health. It also seemed that inherent in the GP role was a great amount of autonomy, and it was believed that most GPs expected that they should keep responsibility over the patient and fix the problem themselves whenever possible, often by prescribing antidepressants. It was suggested that referring the patient to psychological treatments like ICBT, and not prescribing medication might be perceived as not adhering to the GP role.
                              
                                 “… I think it is hard for doctors, honestly, to not prescribe medication and instead refer to someone else.”
                              
                           
                        

There was also a shortage of GPs, at some primary care centers, leading to a stream of short-term locum doctors passing by.
                              
                                 “…it's the situation with non-continuing, short-term, locum doctors that makes it so hard…”
                              
                           
                        

Focusing on implementation and possible barriers, we grouped codes emerging from the data according to categories defined by Cochrane et al. (2007). Factors pertaining to five of the seven barriers were identified: I. Cognitive/behavioral barriers — Lack of knowledge and skill, III. Health care professional/physician barriers — Boundaries and peer influence, IV. Clinical practice guideline/evidence barriers — The nature of the treatment, VI. Support/resource barriers — Lack of resources or time, and VII. System/process barriers — Lack of organizational/system structures or processes. These findings are presented with supporting quotes in Table 2.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The present study explored primary care therapists' attitudes and experiences of ICBT, explored the conditions and opportunities to perform research on ICBT within primary care, and tried to identify factors that might hinder implementation of ICBT. Using Cochrane et al.'s (2007) seven barriers as a guide, factors that the therapists considered important for the successful implementation of ICBT in primary care were specifically identified.

The interviews were introduced as an opportunity to vent what the therapists felt had been suboptimal, not working, and what could be improved. Some aspects of the ICBT treatment were put forward, but problems of a more general level were also mentioned. The therapists expressed that primary care psychology was integrated poorly into primary care and the focus was still on somatic health. This lack of integration is less surprising since primary care psychology is a fairly new field (APA Interorganizational Work Group on Competencies for Primary Care Psychology Practice, 2013). Financial concerns were also identified as a major topic in primary care. A context like this can of course have a large impact on the implementation of new psychological methods such as ICBT.

The concept of ICBT remains one of diversity. Different designs and setups of ICBT can influence the outcomes as well as the level of acceptance by users. Among PRIM-NET therapists' attitudes towards ICBT were positive, a prerequisite for the primary care center to enter the study. Applying ICBT within PRIM-NET did not deter the therapists from using the method. Nevertheless, the low recruitment rates of patients made the therapists often feel that they never fully mastered the protocol and method (i.e., automated it). They suggested that, in order to raise inclusion rates, the ICBT depression treatment ought to be coupled to ICBT programs for other diagnoses. Additionally the communication program should be rendered more user-friendly since the version used in PRIM-NET was less intuitive and somewhat difficult to master. This observation may be attributed partially to the low inclusion rate. Lack of practice enhances flaws in user-friendliness. Notably, the problems concerning the communications program MVK did not seem to lessen the therapists' enthusiasm for ICBT in general. In spite of problems of recruitment and the lack of automation, the therapists still thought that the ICBT treatment was a good option and that they would like to use it in the future. As primary care therapists, any new method is, first and foremost, viewed from the primary care perspective. The primary care therapists' first priority was to determine if ICBT is as effective as other treatments offered in primary care, if it is a viable tool also within primary care, and if so, how it could best be adapted for use within this special setting. From this perspective it is understandable that the therapists, when they found ICBT usable, also expressed a desire, in addition to using ICBT as a stand-alone treatment, to use it more freely in combination with, and integrated into, face-to-face therapy. ICBT as a mixed intervention, blended into face-to-face treatments, have been evaluated elsewhere (Kooistra et al., 2014; Månsson et al., 2013) and as ICBT develop into regular care frequency of use ought to increase.

Depression presented a greater challenge than other conditions, for ICBT use due to perceived patient frailty. This made the therapists experience uneasiness in using “only” an ICBT package. Perhaps a differently-tailored ICBT-program could render the therapists feel more comfortable in this respect. This is reflected in Axelsson (2014) who implied dissatisfaction with only one face-to-face meeting before sending the patients home with ICBT and the therapists in that study also stated that they wanted to meet patients a couple of times before commencing ICBT. The hesitancy among the PRIM-NET therapists must be seen from the perspective that PRIM-NET by the study management was intended to exclusively treat patients with mild to moderate depression (patients with MADRS-S points>34 was excluded), which might have induced a belief among the therapists that ICBT primarily suits mild to moderate depression. Furthermore, patients recruited to PRIM-NET were not only in the mild to moderately depressed stages as was planned. According to Beck Depression Inventory — II (BDI-II; Beck et al., 2006) 41% met criteria for severe depression (Kivi et al., 2014). A typical depressed patient for primary care therapists is more often severely depressed, as patients with mild to moderate depression are seldom treated by primary care therapists. Reasons for this may partly be that more depressed patients are more likely to be identified by the GPs due to greater needs and therefore offered treatment (Cameron et al., 2011; Craven and Bland, 2013; Mitchell et al., 2009; SBU, 2004), and also by the shortage of primary care therapists. When access is limited, often the resource is rationed to the more needing cases. Thus it is likely that PRIM-NET produced less of a relief in workload for the therapists than was intended. Instead, PRIM-NET focused on, and also added a new group of patients, thereby increasing the workload. The therapists' desire to use ICBT less restrictedly and to integrate it into face-to-face therapy can also be seen as a reasonable adaptation to these circumstances.

Post-hoc analyses of PRIM-NET data did not reveal any significant differences in effect between ICBT-patients with severe depression at inclusion (according to BDI-II cut-off), and those with mild or moderate F(1, 41)=.94, p
                     =.34 (ANCOVA with inclusion BDI-II score as covariate and effect at 12months from ICBT start); and adherence t(38.4)=−1.19, p
                     =.24. Hence, PRIM-NET provides no support for the notion that ICBT only is suited for milder types of depression.

Future implementations of ICBT for depression in primary care require further analysis of the targeted patient group and tailored information to avoid a bias among therapists and staff in general about their assumptions about the fit between patients and type of intervention.

Research within primary care was seen as natural and necessary to perform, but currently prerequisites to perform research were largely believed to be missing. Research in primary care is beset by problems of patient recruitment (Clarke et al., 2005; de Graaf et al., 2009; Kivi et al., 2014; Mead et al., 2005). According to the categories of Cochrane et al. (2007), we were able to identify challenges on five of the seven barriers reported. Barriers concerning Attitudes among the therapists (II) and Patient characteristics or adherence (V) did not emerge from the data, which does not imply that they were non-existent; firstly, therapists participating in PRIM-NET volunteered, which may reflect a selection of only positive and asserted therapists. Among those chosen for interview only the most experienced, secure in their role as primary care therapists, who perceived their own knowledge and ability as sufficient in this role were selected. Secondly, there was also a strong possibility of selection of patients participating in PRIM-NET. The low recruitment rate and the attitudes among therapists and other primary care center staff may indicate this. It seems clear that the patients who received the ICBT treatment acted according to the therapists' expectations, which is confirmed by the high adherence rates (Kivi et al., 2014). The therapists believed that there were a lot of suitable patients, but that they were not identified. This probably led the therapists to focus on the low recruitment rate and processes at the primary care center, instead of pondering the possibility of any problems with patients' inherent characteristics.

One way to avoid the problems of implementation would of course be to offer ICBT at a centralized unit only. This scenario was discussed by the therapists, mostly since remitting elsewhere naturally would relieve some of the heavy demand on the therapists. One major drawback of this solution, according to the therapists, was that the possibilities of for example combining ICBT and face-to-face treatments and thus make primary care psychology more efficient would remain unavailable and unexplored.

The therapists expressed no major concern for negative effects of an ICBT-based treatment. There were certain comments that this type of treatment perhaps was not optimal for depressed patients, especially among those presenting more severe depression. The lack of more critical comments seems to reflect the therapists' positive attitude towards ICBT, a confidence in the CBT method, and a confidence in their own experience and knowledge.

@&#LIMITATIONS@&#

The small sample is a drawback. Ideally, a larger number of therapists should have been interviewed. The views expressed in the four interviews did correspond to the reports expressed in the survey. Our intention was also to capture the views of the more experienced primary care therapist, and not the views of therapists at large, which lead us to only include the therapists with extensive experience of primary care.

The interviewed therapists had, as most therapists partaking in PRIM-NET, supervised a limited number of patients. ICBT was still a rather new tool to them. Primary care therapists with a more expanded experience of using ICBT might not express the same attitudes and views. On the other hand, when introducing ICBT in primary care, the early reactions and attitudes will be important and probably heavily influence the outcome.

As expressed by the therapists, a very pressured schedule does not allow for much extra work, that is, the possibilities for the researcher to control and log activities were severely restricted. The not so user-friendly e-mail program might have influenced the way the therapists viewed the ICBT-treatment, and also the way they communicated with the patients. Potentially the therapists might have used the phone to a greater extent than intended in order to compensate, although we have no indications of this. Axelsson (2014) also found that having a choice of e-mail and phone, primary care therapists did prefer e-mailing patients since phoning them took too much of the therapists' time. There are also indications that the choice of telephone- or e-mail-contact might not have any impact on the effectiveness of the treatment (Lindner et al., 2014).

Within the PRIM-NET project the therapists had only used the ICBT program Depressionshjälpen. However, at least one of the interviewed therapists had experienced using other types of ICBT-programs as well. In the future, as a comparison, it would be interesting to examine the views of primary care therapists using other programs, as well as therapists that are not so positive towards ICBT and that would rather not use it in their work.

The interviewer
                           3
                         was well known to the therapists from her role as project coordinator and from the supervision and tutoring in PRIM-NET; this relationship was, however, terminated at the time of the interviews. Since all therapists had completed their participation in PRIM-NET at the time for the interview, there were no remaining dependencies. The semi-structured interviews were held in a conversational format. Prior to the interviews, it was stressed that the purpose of the interviews was to learn more from their experiences and from any mistakes that were made and that it was important and desirable that all criticisms were addressed. Nevertheless, the relationship between the interviewer and the therapists could have possibly influenced the results. However, this influence might not have acted entirely in a negative way. The relative familiarity between therapist and interviewer made it easier to disclose thoughts, perhaps not as easily vented with an unfamiliar interviewer.

@&#CONCLUSION@&#

The overall experiences and attitudes of the therapists towards PRIM-NET and ICBT were positive, despite practical problems and barriers that limited successful implementation. ICBT was seen as a valuable alternative to existing treatments in an extended toolbox for the primary care therapist. Future implementations require a modified and more user-friendly e-mail communication. The therapists would prefer to use the ICBT more freely than the research protocol allowed, and also to integrate it with face-to-face treatments. Participating therapists sought a better integration of a psychologically-based treatment in primary care, and found it challenging to introduce a research project into their daily routine.

Further research on attitudes and experiences among primary care therapists from different implementations of ICBT within primary care, comparing them to each other, is needed. As reported in Kivi et al. (2014), the effects of the ICBT treatment are on a par with treatment as usual, and combined with the positive therapists' experience, the present results provide support for the introduction of ICBT for depression in routine primary care.

No conflicts of interest are reported.

@&#ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS@&#

This research has been funded by grants from the Västra Götaland region (grant number: Dnr RSK111-2006) and REHSAM (grant number: RS2010/006).

@&#REFERENCES@&#

