@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#The effects of therapist support and treatment presentation on the clinical outcomes of an Internet based applied relaxation program

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           This study shows that enhancing treatment presentation or support does not improve the outcome of internet based relaxation.


                        
                        
                           
                           Adherence to homework assignments rather than the online program was associated with treatment outcome.


                        
                        
                           
                           Improving adherence to behavioral prescriptions is important to further improve the outcome of online therapy.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

Relaxation

Stress

Anxiety

Internet

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Symptoms of stress are common in the general population and associated with health risks and economic costs. Applied relaxation training has shown to be effective for reducing stress and worry both as a self-help treatment and as an internet-based intervention with therapist support. However, what factors may affect the outcome of internet based relaxation training is unclear. The aims of the present study were to investigate the effect of a brief internet based relaxation program for people with symptoms of stress or worry and to assess whether enhancing the quality of intervention presentation or therapist support had an impact on outcomes.
                  Participants were randomized in a full factorial design to either Normal or Enhanced treatment Presentation and either Normal or Enhanced therapist Support in a four-week online program with applied relaxation. The main outcome measures were self-report instruments of stress and worry.
                  A total of 162 participants were included in the study and 94 and 84 participants completed the post and follow-up measurements respectively. Participants in all conditions improved significantly on the main outcome measures, and the different levels of Presentation or therapist Support did not significantly affect treatment outcome. Registered number of completed exercises was a predictor of better treatment outcome, but this effect was independent of treatment condition. Enhancing internet based interventions by improving presentations and the quality of support may thus not be the best way to further improve the effect of internet based interventions. More specific knowledge of the mechanisms that affect outcomes in online psychotherapy is needed.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Mild to moderate symptoms of stress and anxiety symptoms are common in the general population (Connor et al., 2007; Johansson et al., 2013; Löwe et al., 2008) and are associated with low quality of life and economic costs for the society (Achat et al., 1998; Andlin-Sobocki & Wittchen, 2005). While there are effective interventions for anxiety symptoms and stress there are never the less reasons to develop and investigate treatment modalities that can potentially deliver treatments on a large scale (Hedman et al., 2012). Stress is a non-specific physiological response to perceived threats or environmental demands such as high work load or social conflicts in a context of low subjective control (Häusser et al., 2010; Ursin & Eriksen, 2004). This means that chronic stress may be elicited by diverse factors such as chronic disease, working environment or economic pressures (Kivimäki et al., 2006; Melchior et al., 2007). The stress response is characterized by a sympathetic activation including increased muscle tension, blood pressure and proliferation of stress hormones that may over time lead to negative health consequences (Brotman et al., 2007; Lazarus & Folkman, 1984) and increased risk for several severe diseases such as coronary heart disease and depression (Cohen et al., 2007; Hammen, 2005). Further, stress often leads to harmful coping behaviors, such as smoking, or problems, such as insomnia, that may further increase the risk of disease (S. Cohen et al., 2007). Taken together, prolonged stress can be a harmful condition even at moderate levels, and it is important to find treatment approaches suitable for the general population.

Broadly, interventions for stress management may either target the primary stressor, e.g., at the environment or organization level, or the individual's perception or coping of the stressful environment. Interventions focusing on the organization level may be effective but are often difficult to implement. It may be more feasible with interventions that focus on the individual level and include teaching coping skills, problem-solving or other cognitive or physical exercises (Dewe et al., 2010). Several treatment models have shown to be effective for reducing stress symptoms, including Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT), mindfulness-based interventions and relaxation training (Grossman et al., 2004; LaMontagne et al., 2007; Richardson & Rothstein, 2008; Zetterqvist et al., 2003).

Progressive relaxation training is one of the most frequently used interventions for stress, arguably due to its relative simplicity and general scope. It has previously shown to be effective in reducing stress and anxiety symptoms in non-clinical populations (Agee et al., 2009; Francesco et al., 2010). The relaxation treatment model is based on the fact that stressors elicit startle responses including muscle tension and in prolonged exposure to stressors, muscle tension develops into chronic tension and physiological hyperactivity (Barlow et al., 2007; E. Jacobson, 1938). By training muscle relaxation, this sympathetic activation is counteracted, the process can be reversed and the stress response ameliorated (Conrad & Roth, 2007). With sympathetic down-regulation, symptoms of anxiety and worry are also decreased (Manzoni et al., 2008).

Applied relaxation is a development from progressive relaxation that specifically aims at being easy to implement in everyday life in order to reduce anxiety symptoms (Öst, 1987). Applied relaxation has shown to be effective in reducing stress symptoms and ameliorate anxiety symptoms in patients with General anxiety disorder to a degree on par with that of CBT (Öst & Breitholtz, 2000). It is also effective in reducing symptoms in other anxiety disorders such as Panic disorder and Social phobia (Hayes-Skelton et al., 2013). One of the major benefits of applied relaxation is that it can be provided in a relatively condensed self-help format and has shown to be effective when delivered via the internet (Carlbring et al., 2007). Internet-based treatments are effective for a range of problems within behavioral medicine such as sleeping problems and chronic pain (Cuijpers et al., 2008). Sometimes relaxation training is an integral part of interventions, such as in tinnitus care, but it is seldom provided as a standalone treatment other than as a control condition.

Investigating and evaluating interventions that may alleviate stress and anxiety symptoms is important since, even though the impact on overall health may be small, it may be very important for the individual. Providing such interventions via the internet for the general population has the benefit of being cost effective (Hedman et al., 2012) and potentially having a wide reach (Bennett-Levy et al., 2010). How to deliver these internet based interventions in the most effective way is still largely unknown. Several studies have shown that therapist support has a positive effect on self-help treatment outcome, but this effect seems to be independent of therapist training or mode of delivery (Gellatly et al., 2007; Titov et al., 2009). Similarly, using presentation techniques that follow pedagogical and learning principles and incorporate multimedia content may also improve treatment effects though this is somewhat less clear (Danaher et al., 2006).

In a previous study focusing on improving adherence in internet based CBT, we saw that improving support increased treatment progress but not adherence to behavioral prescriptions (Alfonsson et al., 2015). There was no analog effect of improving treatment presentation on treatment progress or adherence. The aim of the present study was to build on these results and evaluate the possible treatment effects of enhanced presentation and support on the outcome of the same stress management intervention. The secondary aim was to investigate whether treatment effects were moderated by treatment adherence. The main outcome variables were self-report instruments of stress, anxiety symptoms and other psychiatric symptoms.

@&#METHOD@&#

The study design and background has been described in more detail previously (Alfonsson et al., 2015) and is summarized below. The study comprised two independent variables (Presentation and Support) at two levels (Normal or Enhanced) in a full factorial design. The dependent variables comprised clinical self-report instruments and measurements of treatment adherence. Assuming moderate effect sizes and using a .05 significance level, an estimated total of 128 participants were needed to provide 80% power. To allow for drop out and missing data, a total of 160 participants were planned to be recruited for the study.

Participants were recruited by public and online advertisement targeting people with perceived symptoms of stress and anxiety. Advertisement on public bill boards as well as online advertisements through Facebook and the webpage www.studie.nu was conducted over a time period of seven months. The advertisements informed briefly about an ongoing study with online behavioral treatment for people with stress or anxiety symptoms and referred to a study webpage with further information and an online application form. People who showed interest in the study received information by mail and those who returned informed consent were included in the study. Being 18years or older and having elevated symptom levels of stress and anxiety symptoms were the only inclusion criteria. All participants were asked to report current and recent medical and psychiatric conditions and treatments as part of the online screening process. Eligibility was assessed by a psychologist who monitored all screening data and contacted potential participants if needed. Having severe levels of depression (as indicated by the PHQ-9, see below) or reporting other medical or psychiatric conditions that warranted immediate care constituted exclusion criteria. Participants were also excluded if they were currently in psychological treatment but pharmacological treatment was not considered an exclusion criterion as long as medication had been stable for at least three months and did not change during the study period. Any participant who was suspected to fulfill any exclusion criteria during the study was contacted by telephone to assess eligibility. Participants were randomized to one of the four conditions directly after completing the baseline measurement. They were asked to fill out self-report questionnaires before treatment, after treatment end and at one month follow-up. All data was collected through the internet on a secure webpage. After randomization, participants immediately received access to the treatment webpage. The study protocol was approved by the Regional ethics committee in Uppsala, Sweden.

The intervention consisted of a four-week program with applied relaxation adapted from a treatment protocol that has previously been empirically evaluated (Carlbring et al., 2007). The program consisted of four steps with separate themes. The first step included an introduction to applied relaxation, the second step introduced release-only relaxation, the third step continued with rapid relaxation and positive imagery while the fourth step focused on implementing everyday relaxation training and maintenance strategies. Each step included prescribed relaxation exercises at least twice a day, but the exact training schedule was individualized for each participant. The first two steps comprised psychoeducation about stress, worry and muscle tension. The third step included a simple exercise with positive imagery as a complement to muscle relaxation. No other treatment components were used in the program.

To mimic previous internet based self-help treatments that are in use today, the Normal presentation meant that the intervention was presented as plain black-and-white texts with no use of enriched media. The Enhanced presentation was influenced by persuasive system design and e-learning (Clark & Mayer, 2011; Torning & Oinas-Kukkonen, 2009) and utilized full-color texts with images and figures to highlight important topics. Summaries, quizzes and case vignettes were further used to facilitate learning and increase engagement in the treatment. Each step in the Enhanced conditions was presented in a video presentation, and audio instructions were supplied for the relaxation exercises.

In the Normal support condition participants had weekly contact with a therapist via the web page and could expect feedback within 24h on week days. Participants were prompted by their therapist if they did not log in to the web page or failed to respond to messages. Therapists were instructed to be friendly and supportive but not to use any specific therapeutic techniques. In the Enhanced support conditions, therapists were instructed to provide feedback within 12h on all days and to use specific techniques derived from motivational interviewing (Miller & Rollnick, 2012): normalizing and validating problems, rolling with resistance to change and to invite participants for discussion. Therapists could also initiate contact with participants as often as they deemed necessary. The support was provided by psychologists and master-level psychology students. All therapists' contacts with participants were logged and monitored by senior psychologists and researchers.

The main outcome variables were measured with self-report instruments. The primary outcomes of stress and anxiety symptoms were measured with the Perceived Stress Scale (PSS; Cohen et al., 1983) and the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory State (STAI-S; Spielberger et al., 1970). The PSS comprises 14 items that are scored on a scale from 0 to 4 providing a total score between 0 and 56. The PSS has shown adequate psychometric properties and α was .85 in the present study baseline assessment (Lee, 2012). The STAI-S has 20 items scored between 1 and 4 thus providing a total score between 20 and 80. The STAI-S has adequate psychometric properties and α=.89 in the present study baseline assessment (Novy et al., 1993). The primary outcome measurements were complemented with four additional self-report scales: The GAD-7 was used to measure levels of worry (GAD-7; Spitzer et al., 2006). The GAD-7 provides a total score of 0–21 and has adequate psychometric properties with α=.87 in the present study baseline assessment (Kroenke et al., 2010). Symptoms of depression were measured with the Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9; Kroenke et al., 2001) which includes 9 items and provides a total score between 0 and 27. The cut-off score for moderate depression is 10 and for severe depression 20 (Kroenke et al., 2001; Manea et al., 2012). The PHQ-9 has shown adequate psychometric properties and the was .86 in the present study baseline assessment (Kroenke et al., 2010). Somatic symptoms were assessed with the Patient Health Questionnaire-15 (PHQ-15; Kroenke et al., 2002) which lists 15 different symptoms and provides a general picture of physical complaints on a scale between 0 and 28 (with the item about menstrual problems excluded) (Han et al., 2009). Treatment satisfaction was evaluated with the Satisfaction with Therapy and Therapist Scale (STTS; Oei & Shuttlewood, 1999) which comprises 12 items scored on a scale between 0 and 5 providing two subscales, Satisfaction with therapy and Satisfaction with therapist, each with a score between 0 and 30 and with post intervention α values of .93 and .94 respectively. The wording of the STTS was somewhat adapted to better suit the internet based treatment format (Oei & Green, 2008). While psychiatric self-report instruments often retain their psychometric properties when delivered online, of the questionnaires used in this study only the STAI-S and the PHQ-9 has been formally evaluated in digital format (Alfonsson et al., 2014). Adherence to the intervention was assessed by measuring the progress, i.e. the number of completed treatment components (0–25) for each participant, as well as the number of completed and registered relaxation exercises each week (0–14).

Participants were primarily analyzed in pair-wise groups, i.e. Normal presentation versus Enhanced presentation, and Normal support versus Enhanced support and then secondly for each condition. Cross section differences between groups of participants were analyzed with t-tests and Analyses of Variance (ANOVA) for parametric variables and with Mann–Whitney and Kruskal–Wallis tests for non-parametric variables. Jonkheere–Terpstra tests were used to assess trends over ordinal groups in non-parametric variables. Treatment effects were analyzed with Mixed Models Repeated Measures (MMRM) using maximum likelihood estimation with both fixed and random effects (Hesser, 2015). Covariance structure for each model was chosen for best model fit, using the χ2 likelihood ratio test which was also used to compare different models. This procedure resulted in that the First Order Autoregressive covariance structure was chosen for each outcome variable. In the MMRM analyses, the main effects of Time (three levels), Presentation (two levels) and Support (two levels) and the interaction effects between all three independent variables were analyzed. Background variables that were significantly different between the groups or between participants that dropped out or completed the intervention were included as covariates in the MMRM. Outcome prediction and moderation was analyzed as described by Kraemer et al. (2002). In the moderation analyses, treatment condition was a predictor variable, the main treatment outcome scale PSS was the dependent variable and treatment adherence (Progress and Exercises) were the moderation variables. Since variables Progress and Exercises were considered constants and only measured once, they were analyzed as moderator variables rather than mediator variables. MMRM was used to analyze any interaction effects between predictor and moderation variables on outcome variables.

No patterns could be found regarding missing data so data missing at random was assumed. All statistical analyses with MMRM were conducted using the complete intention-to-treat sample while descriptive statistics were reported for participants with complete data only. A p-value of .05 was considered the threshold for statistical significance in all analyses. Effect sizes was assessed with Cohen's d for parametric tests with d
                        =0.2 equals a small, d
                        =0.5 equals medium and d
                        =0.8 equals a large effect size and with r for non-parametric tests where r
                        =0.1 equals small, r
                        =0.3 equals medium r
                        =0.5 equals large effect size (J. Cohen, 1992). Analyses of reliable change, improvement and deterioration between pretreatment and post-treatment were made using the procedures described by (Jacobson and Truax (1991); Wise, 2004). Reliable change was computed by dividing the difference between the pretreatment and posttreatment scores by the standard error of the difference between the two scores. If the Reliable Change Index was greater than 1.96 a change of that magnitude would not be expected due to the unreliability of the measure (Bauer et al., 2004). Using this procedure, the reliable change criterion for each outcome instruments were: PSS>9, STAI-S>10, GAD-7>6, PHQ-9>7, PHQ-15>5. These cut off values were rounded up in order not to overestimate the clinical effect of the intervention. A positive change between pre- and post-measurements exceeding these criteria was interpreted as reliable improvement while a negative change was interpreted as reliable deterioration.

@&#RESULTS@&#

A total of 239 persons showed interest in the study, 181 returned informed consent and 169 completed the baseline measurement and were included in the study. Sixteen reported symptoms of clinical depression and of these, seven were referred to clinical care and excluded from all analyses. Ninety-four participants completed the post measurement and eighty-four completed the follow-up measurement after one month, see CONSORT flow chart in Fig. 1
                        . A total of 162 participants were included in the MMRM analyses. All background data can be seen in Table 1
                        .

There were no significant differences in any background or outcome variables between the four groups at pre-measurement. Participants who dropped out of the study and did not provide data at the post or follow up measurements reported previous treatment with psychotherapy significantly more often (Z
                        =2.82, p
                        =.005) than other participants so this variable was used as a covariate in all subsequent analyses. There was no significant difference in the number of drop outs between the groups. Since 18 (11%) participants reported currently being in psychological treatment at baseline, all analyses were repeated with these participants excluded but as this did not change the overall conclusions, those results are not reported. No other variables were significantly different between completers and dropouts.

The mean values of all outcome variables at pre, post and follow-up measurements can be seen in Tables 2 and 3
                        
                        . There was a significant main effect of time (F
                        =10.23–25.56, p
                        <.003, d
                        =0.51–0.80) on all outcome variables with medium effect sizes. There were no main effects of Presentation (F
                        =0.23–2.40, p
                        =.12–.63) or Support (F
                        =0.62–2.50, p
                        =.12–.43) nor any Group×Time interaction effects (F
                        =0.01–1.16, p
                        =.28–.99) on any outcome variable. There was a quadratic effect of Time (Time2) on all outcome variables except the PHQ15. Post-hoc analyses showed that participants in the Enhanced presentation conditions reported significantly lower scores on the PSS, STAI, GAD-7 and PHQ-9 (F(1,94)=3.95–9.93, p
                        =.002–.049, d
                        =0.45–0.71) at post measurement but not at the follow-up measurement compared to the Normal presentation (see Table 2). There were no analog significant differences between the groups in the Support conditions.

There were no significant main effects of Progress (F(1132.163)=0.21, p
                        =.65) or Exercises (F(1185.157)=0.35, p
                        =.56) on the PSS and no significant Time×Progress (F(1,81.153)=3.33, p
                        =.07) interaction effect. There was a significant Time×Exercises (F(1126.042)=4.66, p
                        =.03) but not a significant Group×Time×Exercises (F(1160.496)=0.36, p
                        =.78) interaction effect. This indicates that treatment outcome regarding stress was moderated by the level of completed Exercises but this effect was independent of treatment condition. There was no moderation effect of treatment Progress.

Across conditions, 22% of participants reported reliable improvement on the primary outcome variable PSS and a similar proportion, 30%, reported reliable improvement on the STAI (see Table 4
                        ). Proportions who reported reliable improvement were smaller on the other outcome measurements and lowest for the PHQ-15. There were no significant differences in the proportions of participants reporting reliable change, deterioration or improvement, between the treatment conditions. There were no significant differences in background variables between participants who achieved reliable improvement on the PSS or the STAI and the other participants. A small number of participants (0–3%) reported reliable deterioration on the outcome measurements. Three participants deteriorated on the PSS, three deteriorated on the STAI, two deteriorated on the GAD-7 and two deteriorated on the PHQ-9. Two participants reported elevated perceived stress due to the demands of the intervention in the open section of the post intervention evaluation.

The mean score on the STTS Therapist subscale was significantly higher (F(1,93)=4.70, p
                        =.03, d
                        =0.49) in the Enhanced (m
                        =22.0, sd
                        =7.23) compared to the Normal (m
                        =18.2, sd
                        =8.76) support condition. There were no differences between the Presentation conditions on the STTS. In the whole sample, the mean scores on the STTS Therapist subscale (m
                        =20.1, sd
                        =8.22) was significantly higher (t(1,93)=7.71, p
                        =.001, d
                        =1.21) than for the Therapy subscale (m
                        =14.4, sd
                        =7.98).

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

The aim of this study was to investigate the treatment effect of enhancing treatment presentation and support in a brief internet based intervention with applied relaxation for people with mild to moderate stress and anxiety symptoms in the general population. The results showed that participants in all conditions improved significantly and that 22 and 30% reported reliable improvement on stress and anxiety symptoms respectively. Participants in the enhanced presentation conditions showed faster symptom improvement than participants in the normal presentation, but only in the short run. The reasons for this effect are unknown and this find should be interpreted with caution. The main conclusion from this study is that enhancing the treatment presentation and support does not increase the treatment effect beyond that which can be achieved in normal internet based care. In all conditions, the treatment effect was moderated by completing exercises rather than completing the online intervention. This is an important find and may lead to a focus on improving adherence to the behavioral prescriptions rather than the treatment material. Why some participants adhere to the behavioral prescription to a higher degree than others is still unclear and needs to be further investigated.

While reference data is lacking, the difference between the two subscales of the STTS may indicate that overall, participants were more satisfied with the therapist than with the therapy. Participants in the enhanced support condition scored higher on the STTS Therapist subscale compared to participants in the normal support condition which indicates that they appreciated the extra contact and effort made by the therapists in this condition. Similar to previous studies, this appreciation did not carry over into a treatment effect suggesting that a positive therapist effect is achieved already with a moderate level of therapist support in internet based interventions (Mohr et al., 2013; Titov et al., 2009). Instead, positive treatment effect was associated with reporting more completed exercises regardless of treatment condition. This association has been seen in other studies as well but interestingly there was no association between treatment progress and treatment outcome (Titov et al., 2010). Working through the interventions thus does not in itself suffice for positive treatment effects if one does not adhere to the behavioral prescriptions. In a previous evaluation we found that enhanced support improved treatment progress but not number of registered exercises and we can now conclude that this effect on treatment adherence may be of less importance (Alfonsson et al., 2015).

As expected, a larger number of participants reported reliable improvement on stress and anxiety symptom scales than on depressive or somatic symptoms scales. These results are in line with the described effect of relaxation on arousal and anxiety symptoms rather than negative mood. While only 22–30% of participants achieved reliable improvement using rather conservative cut off scores on the main outcome measures this should be viewed in the context that the intervention was brief and did not demand a lot of therapist resources, at least not in the normal support conditions. The within group effect sizes were about medium on all outcome measures which underlines the general effect that applied relaxation may have on diverse symptoms seen in other studies as well (Bastani, Hidarnia, Kazemnejad, Vafaei, & Kashanian, 2005; Öst, 1987). Relaxation training to reduce tension and stress seems to be a rather universal intervention that may be beneficiary across a range of problems or disorders. It is in this sense similar to other general interventions, such as cognitive restructuring and mindfulness training, that seem to ameliorate symptoms in diverse clinical populations (Boettcher et al., 2014). However, the instructions for applied relaxation are among the most standardized within clinical psychology interventions and there is relatively little room for individual differences or customization. It is still unclear whether more complex interventions, such as cognitive restructuring or exposure exercises, are be more sensitive to enhanced presentation and support than found for applied relaxation in the present study. Applied relaxation was partly chosen in order to have a concrete behavioral measure for assignment adherence, something that is probably harder to attain in more complex interventions.

Negative effects of the intervention were assessed by analyzing signs of deterioration in the self-report instruments and with open questions asking for negative effects at the post treatment observation point. About 5% of the participants who completed the post measurement reported a reliable increase in symptoms after the intervention. While negative symptom development is always regrettable during treatment, the proportion is in the lower end of the range reported in other studies (Rozental et al., 2014). The group was also too small to analyze further regarding background variables and other potential risk factors. In the section of open questions, only a few participants chose to mention any negative effects and these were too diverse to interpret meaningfully. The only comment which appeared more than once was perceived negative stress due to the demands of the intervention and the prescribed assignments. Only a small number of participants seem to have experienced negative effects of the intervention but one should be aware that there may be a larger proportion in the group of participants who dropped out from the study and who did not complete the post measurements. This highlights the importance of preventing drop out and to make serious efforts to attain data from those who do. In the present study participants who did not complete a post measurement were contacted by e-mail and then by telephone up to three times but still a rather large proportion chose not to answer the follow up instruments. It is also advisable to identify people who show deterioration after study end for further evaluation and direction to other care.

The present study had several limitations. The appeal of the different presentations was only assessed in a small pilot study prior to the main study. A larger and more systematic evaluation of the intervention presentation would have provided valuable information about the accessibility of the interventions. Clinical interviews could have been used to assess potential psychiatric diagnoses among the participants to collect better data on participants and to further improve the quality of the study. In the screening procedure before inclusion in the study, participants were asked whether they were currently in any treatment for psychological problems in order to exclude anyone who was from the study. Never the less when asked a similar question as part of the baseline measurement, 18 (11%) participants reported being in psychological treatment. This may have affected the results of the current study to some degree but also highlights that participants may withhold such information for fear of being excluded from studies, especially when recruited via the internet. More specific questions on what type of psychological treatment would have been helpful in determining the potential effect on the results of the current study. Lastly, there was a large drop out from the post and follow up measurements. While analyses with MMRM often are robust enough to handle missing data, the results should be interpreted with caution. There were also no significant differences between participants who dropped out and completers expect having previously had psychotherapy. The reasons for this difference are difficult to speculate about but they may have been disappointed that that the intervention was not something radically new for them. Alternatively, they may experience more difficult stress symptoms that were difficult to address with the kind of intervention used in this study.

Since a majority of participants in this study had previously had psychiatric treatment, the sample may be seen more as clinical rather than nonclinical. The levels of psychiatric symptoms on the self-report instruments were higher than expected and many reported clinical levels of depressive symptoms and anxiety. This confirms what is often seen in internet intervention studies that participants are not people with mild symptom levels or people who are not in need of treatment but psychiatric patients who seek alternative treatment approaches for different reasons. Interestingly, there were few and weak associations between background variables (including computer experience) and treatment outcomes but this should be interpreted with caution since participants were self-referred and thus interested specifically in internet based treatment.

In conclusion, the impact of enhanced treatment presentation or support in Internet based interventions with applied relaxation for ameliorating stress and anxiety in the general population seems to be limited. These results are in line with the observation that even relatively simple treatment presentations can be effective, as long as there is a sufficient level of therapist support (Cuijpers et al., 2010). However, some participants do not benefit from internet interventions and a large group drop out of treatment at an early stage. The reasons these participants are terminating the intervention is unclear but may be due to a mismatch between expectations and treatment realities or practical issues in everyday life (Johansson et al., 2015). Based on the results from this study, it is not evident that finding ways of keeping these participants in treatment is the most beneficiary action but rather to better inform participants of how internet interventions work and the demands not only through written information but through practical exercises or examples. Further studies are needed in order to find how to best predict who will benefit from internet based interventions and how to improve adherence to behavioral prescriptions.

This study was funded by the Swedish government's strategic grant to Uppsala University Psychosocial Care Program (U-CARE). The authors have no conflict of interest.

@&#REFERENCES@&#

