@&#MAIN-TITLE@&#Australian mental health worker attitudes towards cCBT: What is the role of knowledge? Are there differences? Can we change them?

@&#HIGHLIGHTS@&#


               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           Australian mental health worker attitudes towards cCBT were assessed.


                        
                        
                           
                           Greater knowledge was related to less perceived disadvantages and more advantageous circumstances.


                        
                        
                           
                           No differences between psychologists and non-psychologists on attitudes


                        
                        
                           
                           Differences in attitudes were found between those who intended to use cCBT and those who did not.


                        
                        
                           
                           A short presentation was effective in improving attitudes towards cCBT.


                        
                     
                  
               
            

@&#KEYPHRASES@&#

CCBT

Computer-based therapy

Mental health workers

Attitudes

Knowledge

@&#ABSTRACT@&#


               
               
                  Background
                  Despite the proven efficacy of computerised cognitive behavioural treatment (cCBT) programmes and their potential to provide more people with high quality treatment, their uptake is relatively low. This study had three main objectives: 1. To investigate the impact of Australian mental health worker knowledge of cCBT on a range of attitudes towards these programmes. 2. To determine differences in attitudes towards cCBT between a) those whose primary therapeutic approach was CBT and those whose primary therapeutic approach was not CBT, b) psychologists and non-psychologists and c) those who reported intention to use cCBT programmes compared to those who did not. 3. To determine whether a short presentation on cCBT was effective in changing mental health worker attitudes towards cCBT.
               
               
                  Methods
                  One hundred and twenty-four Australian mental health workers completed an online survey that measured: knowledge of cCBT; perceived advantages of cCBT; perceived disadvantages of cCBT; circumstances under which cCBT was perceived to be advantageous; belief in the efficacy of computers in therapy; comfort with using computers in therapy; and intention to use cCBT. Participants were randomly allocated into either the cCBT presentation condition or Control presentation condition. After viewing the presentation, participants again completed the measures.
               
               
                  Results
                  Higher knowledge of cCBT was found to be associated with fewer perceived disadvantages of cCBT (t=−4.51, p<.001) and a greater number of circumstances under which cCBT was perceived to be advantageous (t=2.30, p=.021). No differences between psychologists and non-psychologists or between those whose primary therapeutic approach was CBT and those whose primary therapeutic approach was not CBT, were found. Compared to those low in intention to use cCBT, those who reported high intention to use cCBT programmes were found to perceive more advantages of cCBT, F(1119)=9.32, p=.003, fewer disadvantages of cCBT, F(1119)=17.10, p<.001, more circumstances under which cCBT was considered advantageous, F(1119)=17.89, p<.001, reported higher belief in the efficacy of computers in therapy, F(1119)=26.39, p<.001, η2
                     =.181, endorsed greater comfort with using computers in therapy, F(1119)=7.80, p=.006, and had greater knowledge of cCBT, F(1119)=5.00, p=.027. Finally, compared to Control presentation participants, those who viewed the cCBT presentation demonstrated a significantly greater increase in knowledge of cCBT, F(1119)=13.77, p<.001, a greater increase in the perceived advantages of cCBT, F(1119)=4.82, p=.030, and a greater reduction in the perceived disadvantages of cCBT, F(1119)=4.77, p=.031.
               
               
                  Conclusions
                  Australian mental health workers attitudes can be changed through provision of information about, and demonstrations of, cCBT programmes.
               
            

@&#INTRODUCTION@&#

Computerised CBT (cCBT) programmes are a relatively recent technological advancement in the provision of mental health services. Although the term ‘cCBT’ is used in a variety of ways, for the purposes of this paper, we are referring to computerised programmes where the content of the intervention is embedded within the programme itself and contact with a therapist is either minimal (usually in the form of email or telephone contact) or non-existent. cCBT programmes have been found to be efficacious in the treatment of many psychological disorders including anxiety and depression (Donovan and March, 2014; Richards and Richardson, 2012), substance abuse (Kay-Lambkin et al., 2012), post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) (Ormrod et al., 2010), chronic insomnia (Vincent et al., 2010), obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) (Andersson et al., 2012), and disordered eating (Kass et al., 2014) to name just a few. Furthermore, there have been a number of studies demonstrating that cCBT is equivalent to face to face therapy in terms of efficacy (e.g., Spence et al., 2011). Yet, despite clear empirical evidence for its utility, its favourable comparison to face-to-face therapy, and its high client satisfaction ratings, the rate of cCBT uptake remains low (MacLeod et al., 2009). It is important to consider the attitudes of those providing mental health services when examining potential reasons for poor cCBT uptake, as without their commitment towards, and use of cCBT, dissemination of these programmes is unlikely.

Clinician attitudes towards cCBT and other computer-based therapies have been investigated in a number of countries including Australia (Sinclair et al., 2013; Gun et al., 2011), New Zealand (Fleming and Merry, 2013), the USA (Carper et al., 2013; Mora et al., 2008; Wells et al., 2007; Perle et al., 2013; Becker and Jensen-Doss, 2013; Cook et al., 2009), Sweden (Vigerland et al., 2014), Britain (MacLeod et al., 2009; Stallard et al., 2010), Norway (Wangberg et al., 2007), and Scotland (Du et al., 2013). Although results vary from study to study, there are some common themes that emerge. For instance, it would seem that the majority of mental health workers believe that face-to-face therapy is superior to cCBT, with only 17–33% of mental health professionals reporting that cCBT can produce equivalent outcomes to standard practise (Perle et al., 2013; Vigerland et al., 2014; Stallard et al., 2010). In addition, computerised therapy is viewed by the majority of mental health workers as being potentially useful for prevention purposes and for mild to moderate psychological problems, but as being less appropriate for severe and complex disorders (Sinclair et al., 2013; Gun et al., 2011; Vigerland et al., 2014; Stallard et al., 2010). Also, mental health workers are more likely to use or consider using, computerised programmes as adjuncts rather than as substitutes for therapy (Sinclair et al., 2013; Mora et al., 2008; Perle et al., 2013; Waller and Gilbody, 2009) and report that cCBT programmes should not be made freely available online without therapist support (Vigerland et al., 2014; Stallard et al., 2010). Furthermore, it would seem that CBT therapists are generally more accepting of computerised interventions than other theoretical orientations, perhaps because the majority of computerised interventions are CBT oriented (Mora et al., 2008; Perle et al., 2013; Vigerland et al., 2014). Indeed, CBT programmes are more amenable to computerisation given their structured nature, while other forms of therapy are more difficult to convert to an online medium. Finally, research has produced a long list of clinician perceived advantages and disadvantages of cCBT (Sinclair et al., 2013; Fleming and Merry, 2013; Mora et al., 2008; Wells et al., 2007; Perle et al., 2013; Becker and Jensen-Doss, 2013; Cook et al., 2009; Vigerland et al., 2014; Stallard et al., 2010; Waller and Gilbody, 2009). When examining the list of perceived disadvantages, it is clear that some may be due to a lack of knowledge regarding cCBT programmes and the research behind them. Unfortunately, poor mental health worker knowledge about cCBT programmes is common (Wells et al., 2007; Du et al., 2013).

Through emerging research, it is also becoming clear that mental health workers are able to identify targets of change to increase the use of cCBT in their practise. It has been suggested that knowledge regarding the effectiveness and availability of programmes requires improvement, information is required on the potential legal issues around cCBT use, adequate training needs to be given, and practical considerations such as the location of computers to allow cCBT use require solutions (Gun et al., 2011; Fleming and Merry, 2013; Perle et al., 2013). Encouragingly, a large proportion of mental health workers are relatively positive about the potential use of cCBT programmes, with significant numbers being accepting of cCBT and indicating a willingness to consider its use in future practise (Perle et al., 2013; Vigerland et al., 2014; Stallard et al., 2010). However, it should be noted, than in some countries, even if mental health specialists would be willing to use cCBT, they would not be allowed to do so due to professional rules and legislation requiring face-to-face contact in therapy. Thus, for practitioners in some countries, uptake will not occur until changes in rules and legislation take place.

It is evident from the above discussion, that there is increasing empirical interest in mental health worker attitudes towards cCBT due to the important contribution they make with respect to the uptake of this treatment modality. Continuation and extension of this research area is particularly important in Australia, where the government is investing significant funds into its national e-mental health strategy.

As noted above, mental health worker knowledge about cCBT programmes is low. However, poor knowledge has not been examined previously in relation to its impact on a broad range of cCBT attitudes. In addition, there has been great variation in the type of mental health workers examined in previous studies. Some have involved only psychologists (e.g., Perle et al., 2013) or only youth workers (e.g., Fleming and Merry, 2013), and others have involved a broad range of mental health workers who have been grouped together in analyses (e.g., Vigerland et al., 2014). It is our contention that when examining the attitudes and beliefs of mental health providers regarding cCBT, it is essential to include both psychologists (who have historically delivered face-to-face CBT programmes) and ‘other’ mental health service providers (who generally do not deliver face-to-face CBT programmes), given the pathways people take in order to receive mental health assistance. For example, research has demonstrated that a large percentage of children and adolescents (70–80%) utilise the education sector (e.g. guidance counsellors and school nurses) as their sole source of mental health care (Sawyer et al., 2001; Burns et al., 1995). The majority of these providers are not trained in CBT even if they know of its efficacy, and they are frequently required to refer students on to psychologists for CBT treatment. If guidance counsellors and school nurses for example, held positive attitudes towards cCBT, they may be particularly inclined to promote and become trained in these approaches, and to subsequently disseminate these programmes to youth. Indeed, it may well be ‘other’ mental health workers who hold the most positive attitudes towards cCBT. In addition to investigating differences between psychologists and non-psychologists, this study will also examine factors that might differentiate those mental health workers who report intention to use cCBT programmes from those who do not, as well as those mental health workers whose primary therapeutic approach is CBT from those whose primary therapeutic approach is something other than CBT. In this way, the content of promotional material may be better informed.

Finally, to our knowledge, only three studies to date have investigated an attempt to change attitudes towards cCBT with any population. Mitchell and Gordon (Mitchell and Gordon, 2007) provided a cCBT demonstration to 20 student participants and found that 30% changed their opinions in a positive direction post-demonstration. Prior to viewing the cCBT demonstration, participants were provided with a brief description of cCBT and then completed a questionnaire with respect to their expectations. Pre-demonstration findings suggested that participants were not convinced of the credibility of cCBT, indicated low expectancy for improvement, and reported little likelihood of using cCBT over traditional therapist guided CBT. After viewing the demonstration however, credibility scores, expectancy ratings, and reports on the likelihood of using a cCBT programme, all increased by a minimum of 50%. A study by Casey et al. (2013) investigated the relative utility of information provided via text versus film in changing adult attitudes towards e-mental health services in a general population sample of adults aged 19–60years. Text but not video was found to increase intention to use e-mental health services whilst neither modality was found to improve the perceived helpfulness of e-mental health services. Finally, Fleming and Merry (2013) found that youth workers who were given exposure to cCBT through a demonstration programme, reported more positive attitudes towards computer-based therapy compared to youth workers who had not had exposure to such programmes. Although not all of these studies were conducted with mental health workers, it provides preliminary evidence that attitudes towards cCBT can be modified through exposure to an actual programme.

Drawing on this literature base, the current study had three aims. The first was to investigate the role of mental health worker knowledge in their attitudes towards cCBT. The second was to examine differences in attitudes towards cCBT between a) mental health workers whose primary therapeutic approach was CBT versus mental health workers whose primary therapeutic approach was not CBT, b) psychologists versus ‘other’ mental health workers (e.g., psychiatrists, social workers, case workers, guidance officers, occupational therapists, counsellors, nurses and youth workers) and c) those who reported a strong intention to use cCBT and those who did not. The third aim of this study was to examine whether a short 5–7min PowerPoint presentation providing information and a demonstration of cCBT, was effective in changing mental health worker attitudes towards, and intention to use, cCBT.


                        Table 1
                         provides the demographic details of participants. As is evident from Table 1, the majority of participants were psychologists, worked in the public sector, had completed tertiary level education, and were CBT-oriented.

Participants were required to provide general demographic information concerning gender, age, employment, education, and preferred therapeutic approach, as well as responses to questions asking them a) whether they had ever seen a cCBT programme in use (yes/no), b) whether they had ever used a cCBT programme (yes/no), c) how much they knew about cCBT before the survey (not at all/very little/a little/quite a lot/a lot), d) how much exposure they had had to cCBT in practise (not at all/very little/a little/quite a lot/a lot), e) how effective they felt cCBT was in treating various disorders (not at all/very little/a little/quite a lot/a lot), and whether they would use cCBT with their clients if it was available to them (unsure/definitely not/possibly/most likely/definitely yes).

Comfort with using computers in therapy and belief in the efficacy of using computers in therapy were measured with the Comfort with Using and Belief in Efficacy subscales respectively of the 8-item Computer-Assisted Therapy Attitudes Scale (CATAS) (Becker and Jensen-Doss, 2013). The Comfort with Using subscale consists of three items assessing how comfortable a therapist is with using computer-assisted therapy programmes (e.g., “I feel apprehensive about using computers in my practise”). The Belief in Efficacy subscale consists of five items assessing therapist belief in computer-assisted therapy efficacy (e.g., “If given the opportunity and training, I would like to use computers in my practise”). Participants were required to rate the degree to which they agreed with each statement on a 5-point Likert scale from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). After reverse scoring the negatively worded items, the items on each subscale were summed to produce total subscale scores ranging from 3 to 15 for the Comfort with Using subscale and 5 to 25 for the Belief in Efficacy subscale. Higher scores indicated greater comfort with using and belief in efficacy of computers in therapy respectively. The authors reported a somewhat low (a
                           =.59) internal reliability estimate for the Comfort with Using Subscale and a high (a
                           =.84) internal reliability estimate for the Belief in Efficacy subscale (Becker and Jensen-Doss, 2013).

Circumstances under which cCBT was perceived to be advantageous were measured using a modified version of Stallard et al.'s (2010), Helpfulness of cCBT measure. The original 3-item measure was modified for this study by a) slight rewording to reflect a broader age range of patients (i.e., not only young people aged 7–18years), b) adding more circumstances in which cCBT could potentially be perceived as advantageous and c) changing the 6-point scale to a 5-point scale. The resulting scale used in the current study consisted of 12 statements regarding the potential advantages of cCBT under various circumstances (e.g., “as a prevention programme” and “with mild severity problems”). Participants were required to rate each of the 12 statements on a 5-point Likert scale from 1 (not at all advantageous) to 5 (extremely advantageous). Items were summed to produce a total score ranging from 12 to 60, with higher scores indicating a greater number of perceived circumstances under which cCBT was perceived to be advantageous.

Perceived advantages of cCBT were measured using a modified version of Stallard et al.'s (2010) 10-item Advantages of cCBT measure. The measure was modified for this study through a) minor wording changes, b) the addition of three items relating to the cost efficiency of cCBT and c) using a 5-point rather than 4-point Likert scale. The resulting Perceived Advantages scale used in the current study consisted of 13 statements regarding the potential advantages of cCBT (e.g., “Reduction of stigma”). Participants were required to rate each of the 13 statements on a 5-point Likert scale from 1 (not at all advantageous) to 5 (extremely advantageous). Items were summed to produce a total score ranging from 13 to 65, with higher scores indicating more perceived advantages of cCBT.

Perceived disadvantages of cCBT were measured using a modified version of Stallard et al.'s., Disadvantages of cCBT measure (Stallard et al., 2010). The original measure was modified for this study through a) minor wording changes, b) the addition of three items and c) using a 5-point rather than 4-point Likert scale. The resulting Perceived Disadvantages scale used in the current study consisted of 15 statements regarding the potential disadvantages of cCBT (e.g., “therapy dropout”). Participants were required to rate each of the 15 statements on a 5-point Likert scale from 1 (not a problem) to 5 (extreme problem). Items were summed to produce a total score ranging from 15 to 75, with higher scores indicating more perceived disadvantages of cCBT.

Knowledge of cCBT was measured using a ‘test” of cCBT facts (see Appendix A). The items were developed by the authors in consultation with colleagues who conduct research in the online area. Participants responded True, False or Unsure to six statements regarding computerised interventions (e.g., “computerised interventions are not interactive”). Correctly answered items were summed to produce a total score ranging from 0 to 6, with higher scores indicating greater knowledge of cCBT.

Agreement/belief in CBT as a theoretical approach to treatment, Confidence in Computer use, and Primary Therapeutic Approach were used as control variables in the analyses. Agreement/Belief in CBT was measured using two author-developed questions: “Do you agree with the principles of CBT?” and “Do you believe CBT is an effective therapeutic approach?” Participants were required to answer ‘Yes’, ‘No’ or ‘Somewhat’ in response to these items. Items were summed to produce a total score ranging from 0 to 4, with higher scores indicating greater agreement/belief in CBT.

Confidence in Computer use was measured with one author-developed item: “How confident do you feel using computers and the internet generally?” Participants were required to rate their perceived computer confidence on a 5-point Likert scale from 1 (really not confident) to 5 (very confident). Scores on the item ranged from 0 to 5, with higher scores indicating greater confidence with using computers.

Therapeutic approach was measured with one question, asking participants to endorse their primary therapeutic approach from a list of alternatives including CBT, Mindfulness/Acceptance and Commitment Therapy, Mindfulness Based Cognitive Therapy, Interpersonal Therapy, Psychodynamic Therapy, Neuropsychological Therapy, Humanistic Therapy, Dialectical Behaviour Therapy Solution Focused/Brief Therapy, Gestalt Therapy, Family Therapy, Supportive Counselling, Mentoring, “Other” (to which participants could then specify) or ‘I do not do therapy with clients’. Responses were then coded as either ‘CBT’ or ‘not CBT’.

@&#PROCEDURE@&#

Prior to commencement of data collection, ethics permission was sought and granted from the Griffith University Human Research Ethics Committee. Participants were recruited via several methods, including advertisement on the Australian Psychological Society website, invitation to participate through the Griffith University Call for Research Volunteers, telephone and email contact with various Australian health and mental health organisations, and through personal connections and snowballing through social networking means (e.g. Facebook). Potential participants were provided with a web link that directed them to the online survey site.

An information sheet and consent form were presented first and those participants who provided consent were subsequently directed to the online survey. The battery of questionnaires described above was completed first (pre-assessment). The survey site (Qualtrics) then immediately randomly allocated participants into either the cCBT condition or the control condition through an automated, computerised randomisation process that generates the condition once the participant reaches a certain point in the questionnaire. The participants then viewed the short presentation relevant to their condition (see below). After viewing the presentation, participants completed the battery of questionnaires a second time (post-assessment). All phases (pre-assessment, viewing of the presentation and post-assessment) were conducted in one sitting. Participants were not able to log off and return to complete the study at a later stage. After completing the post-assessment questionnaires, participants were given the option of providing their email addresses so that they could be placed into a draw to win one of ten, $20 gift vouchers.

As noted above, participants were randomly allocated into either the cCBT condition (cCBT) or the control condition (Control). The cCBT condition received an author-developed PowerPoint presentation providing participants with information about cCBT. A total of 13 power-point slides provided information on cCBT with respect to its advantages, efficacy, client benefits, and general information. In addition to the information slides, a three-minute video was embedded within the presentation demonstrating the BRAVE Programme (Spence et al., 2011, 2006), a cCBT programme developed for children with anxiety. The slide content comprised information obtained from a number of studies (Hedman et al., 2011; Khanna and Kendall, 2010; Andersson and Cuijpers, 2009) and took participants approximately 5–7min to view. See Fig. 1
                            for a screen shot of one of the presentation slides.

Those in the Control condition also received an author developed PowerPoint presentation. However, the content of the Control presentation provided mental health workers with recommendations for self-care rather than information about cCBT. The Control presentation also consisted of 13 slides that covered information on the importance of a range of self-care practises such as eating a balanced diet, rest, relaxation, social relationships, and taking time away from computers and phones. Embedded within the PowerPoint presentation was a 3-min health and fitness video, the content of which included health and fitness tips such as drinking adequate amounts of water, engaging in recommended amounts of daily exercise, and beneficial ways to structure one's exercise routine. Slide content was derived from the Australian Government funded, Mid North Coast Division of General Practise article (Bloemhard, 2009) and the embedded video on health and fitness was sourced from the internet (David Loyd Leisure, 2013). The Control presentation took participants approximately 5–7min to view. See Fig. 2
                            for a screenshot of one of the slides in the Control presentation.

The analyses were divided into three sections corresponding to the three aims of the study. The first section examined the role of knowledge on mental health worker attitudes towards cCBT. A series of five hierarchical multiple regression analyses (HMRs) were conducted, one for each of the five outcome variables (advantages of cCBT, disadvantages of cCBT, circumstances under which cCBT is perceived to be advantageous, belief in the efficacy of computers in therapy and comfort with using computers in therapy). On the first step of each HMR, the control variables of therapeutic approach, agreement/belief in CBT and confidence in computer use were entered. Knowledge of cCBT was entered on the second step.

The second section examined differences in mental health workers on their attitudes towards cCBT between a) those who primary therapeutic approach was CBT and those whose primary therapeutic approach was something other than CBT, b) psychologists and ‘other’ mental health professionals and c) those who reported high intention to use cCBT and those who reported low intention. A MANOVA was conducted to examine the difference between those whose preferred therapeutic approach was CBT and those whose preferred therapeutic approach was something other than CBT. Agreement/belief in CBT and confidence in computer use were entered as covariates. Similarly, a MANOVA was conducted examining the difference between groups (psychologist versus ‘other’) on the five outcome variables described above. The control variables of therapeutic approach, agreement/belief in CBT and confidence in computer use were entered as covariates.

In order to group participants into ‘High Intenders’ and ‘Low Intenders’, those who responded ‘definitely yes’ or ‘most likely’ to the intention to use cCBT question were coded as ‘High Intenders’ and those who responded ‘possibly’, ‘unsure’ or ‘definitely not’ were coded as ‘Low Intenders’. Although a more fine-grained grouping of high intention (‘definitely yes’ and ‘most likely’), some intention (‘possibly’ and ‘unsure’) and low intention (definitely not’) would have been preferable, the sample sizes would have been very uneven, with only 4.8% of participants in the ‘definitely not’ category. Given that ‘possibly’ and ‘unsure’ do not signify ‘high intention’, we decided to make two groupings of High Intenders and Low Intenders. A MANOVA was conducted examining the difference between groups (High Intenders versus Low Intenders) on the five outcome measures described above. The control variables of therapeutic approach, agreement/belief in CBT and confidence in computer use were entered as covariates.

The third section examined the efficacy of the brief PowerPoint presentation in changing mental health worker attitudes towards cCBT. First, a MANOVA was conducted with condition (cCBT versus Control) as the between groups variable on all pre-assessment outcome measures to ensure that the participants were equivalent prior to receiving either the cCBT or Control presentations. A chi-square analysis was also conducted to check for differences between cCBT versus Control conditions on the number of High Intenders versus Low Intenders. Second, a repeated measures MANOVA was conducted examining the difference between those who received the cCBT presentation and those who received the Control presentation (cCBT versus Control) over time (pre assessment versus post-assessment) on the five outcome variables. The control variables of therapeutic approach, agreement/belief in CBT and confidence in computer use were entered as covariates. A chi-square analysis was also conducted on the number of High Intenders versus Low Intenders between conditions (cCBT versus Control).

@&#RESULTS@&#

With respect to cCBT, 33.1% of mental health workers reported having seen a cCBT programme in use and 18.5% reported having used a cCBT programme. When asked how much they knew about cCBT programmes, 4.8% reported ‘a lot’, 16.9% reported ‘quite a lot’, 32.3% reported ‘a little’, 27.4% reported ‘very little’, and 18.5% reported ‘not at all’. With respect to how much exposure they had had to cCBT in practise, 2.4% of mental health workers responded ‘a lot’, 8.1% responded ‘quite a lot’, 25.8% responded ‘a little’, 14.5% responded ‘very little’ and 49.2% responded ‘not at all’. When asked to rate how effective they believed cCBT was in treating various disorders, 5.6% reported ‘a lot’, 41.9% reported ‘quite a lot’, 34.7% reported ‘a little’, 8.9% reported ‘very little’ and 8.9% reported ‘not at all’. In terms of whether the participants would use a cCBT programme with their clients if it were available, 13.7% responded ‘definitely yes’, 32.3% responded ‘most likely’, 42.7% responded ‘possibly’, 4.8% responded ‘definitely not’, and 6.5% reported that they were ‘unsure’.


                        Table 2
                         provides the means, standard deviations, bivariate correlations and alphas for all variables used in the analyses. As is evident from Table 2, knowledge of cCBT was significantly and negatively associated with perceived disadvantages of cCBT and was significantly and positively correlated with perceived advantages of cCBT, circumstances under which cCBT was perceived to be advantageous, and belief in the efficacy of computers in therapy. Knowledge of cCBT was not significantly correlated with comfort with using computers in therapy.


                        Table 3
                         provides the statistics for Step 2 of each of the five HMRs conducted (one for each of the outcome variables). As is evident from Table 3, knowledge of cCBT was found to predict perceived disadvantages of cCBT and circumstances under which cCBT was perceived to be advantageous, but was not found to predict perceived advantages of cCBT, comfort with using computers in therapy or belief in the efficacy of computers in therapy. It is also interesting to note that of the control variables, agreement/belief in CBT predicted perceived advantages of cCBT, circumstances under which cCBT was perceived to be advantageous, and belief in the efficacy of computers in therapy. Computer confidence was found to predict comfort with using computers in therapy. Therapeutic approach was not found to predict any of the dependent variables.

Participants were grouped into those whose primary therapeutic approach was CBT (N=41, 33%) and those whose primary therapeutic approach was something other than CBT (N=83, 67%). Table 4
                         provides the means and standard deviations for each of the five outcome variables for each of the two groups. The overall MANOVA was not found to be significant, Pillais F(6115)=1.04, p=.406, η2
                        =.051, suggesting no significant differences on any of the outcome variables between the two groups.

Grouping the participants into psychologists versus ‘other’ mental health workers resulted in N=67 (54%) psychologists and N=57 (46%) other mental health workers. Table 4 provides the means and standard deviations for each of the five outcome variables for each of the two groups. The overall MANOVA was not found to be significant, Pillais F(6115)=1.13, p=.352, η2
                        =.055, suggesting no significant differences between psychologists and other mental health workers on any of the five attitudinal outcome measures.

As noted above, participants were also grouped into High Intenders and Low intenders. Grouping the participants in this way resulted in 46% (N=57) being classified as High Intenders and 54% (N=67) being classified as Low Intenders. Table 4 provides the means and standard deviations for each of the outcome variables for each of the two groups. The overall MANOVA was found to be significant, Pillais F(6114)=7.15, p<.001, η2
                        =.274, with significant univariate effects found for perceived advantages of cCBT, F(1119)=9.32, p=.003, η2
                        =.073, perceived disadvantages of cCBT, F(1119)=17.10, p<.001, η2
                        =.126, circumstances under which cCBT was perceived to be advantageous, F(1119)=17.89, p<.001, η2
                        =.131, belief in the efficacy of computers in therapy, F(1119)=26.39, p<.001, η2
                        =.181, comfort with using computers in therapy, F(1119)=7.80, p=.006, η2
                        =.062 and knowledge of cCBT F(1119)=5.00, p=.027, η2
                        =.040. It would seem that, compared to Low Intenders, High Intenders reported greater knowledge of cCBT, perceived more advantages and fewer disadvantages of cCBT, reported a stronger belief in the efficacy of computers in therapy and a greater comfort with using computers in therapy, and endorsed more circumstances under which cCBT would be advantageous.

As noted above, participants were randomly allocated into cCBT (N=59) and Control (N=65) presentation conditions. The overall MANOVA checking for pre-existing group differences on perceived advantages of cCBT, perceived disadvantages of cCBT, belief in the efficacy of computers in therapy, comfort with using computers in therapy and circumstances under which cCBT was perceived to be advantageous was not significant Pillais F(6115)=1.07, p=.386, η2
                        =.053. Similarly, the chi-square analysis checking for pre-existing differences between cCBT and Control groups in terms of Intenders versus Non-intenders was also nonsignificant, χ2(1, N=124)=1.27, p=.260.


                        Table 5
                         provides the means and standard deviations for the cCBT and Control conditions at pre-assessment and post-assessment. The overall repeated measures, between groups MANOVA showed a significant group by time effect, Pillais F(6114)=4.03, p=.001, η2
                        =.175. Subsequent univariate analyses suggested significant group by time effects for knowledge of cCBT, F(1119)=13.77, p<.001, η2
                        =.104, perceived advantages of cCBT, F(1119)=4.82, p=.030, η2
                        =.039, and perceived disadvantages of cCBT, F(1119)=4.77, p=.031, η2
                        =.039, but not for comfort with using computer in therapy, F(1119)=0.08, p=.780, η2
                        =.001, belief in the efficacy of computers in therapy, F(1119)=1.78, p=.184, η2
                        =.015, or circumstances under which cCBT was perceived to be advantageous, F(1119)=2.65, p=.106, η2
                        =.022.

Interestingly, the number of High Intenders in the cCBT group rose from 40.7% at pre-assessment to 61% at post-assessment. In contrast, the number of High Intenders in the Control condition rose from 50.8% at pre-assessment to 58.5% at post-assessment, although these were not significantly different at post-assessment according to the chi-square analysis, χ2(1, N=124)=.084, p=.772. Closer examination of this data suggests that of those who originally reported that they would ‘definitely not’ use cCBT prior to viewing the presentation, 50% (N=2) remained in the ‘definitely not’ category and 50% (N=2) moved into the ‘possibly’ category. Of those who originally reported that they would ‘possibly’ use cCBT prior to viewing the presentation, 53.6% (N=15) remained in the ‘possibly’ category, 35.7% (N=10) moved to the ‘most likely’ category, and 10.7% (N=3) moved to the ‘definitely yes’ category. Finally, of those originally in the ‘unsure’ category prior to viewing the presentation, 100% (N=3) moved to the ‘possibly’ category.

@&#DISCUSSION@&#

This study had three primary aims. 1. To examine the role of mental health worker knowledge on their attitudes towards cCBT. 2. To examine differences between a) those whose primary therapeutic approach was CBT and those whose primary therapeutic approach was not CBT, b) psychologists and non-psychologists and c) those who reported strong intention to use cCBT and those who did not, in terms of their attitudes towards cCBT. 3. To investigate the usefulness of a very brief presentation in changing Australian mental health worker attitudes towards cCBT programmes. The results of each of these investigations will now be discussed in turn.

Knowledge was found to predict both perceived disadvantages of cCBT and the circumstances under which cCBT was perceived to be advantageous, but it was not related to perceived advantages of cCBT, comfort with using computers in therapy or belief in the efficacy of computers in therapy (after therapeutic approach, agreement/belief in CBT and confidence in computer use were controlled for). Thus, the results of this study would seem to suggest that the answer to the question “what is the role of knowledge?” is perhaps “not as much as you would think!”

Given that it makes intuitive sense that knowledge of cCBT would contribute greatly to attitudes, it was somewhat surprising to find that knowledge only impacted on two of the five attitudes examined. One might have expected it to have a much broader impact and indeed, the bivariate correlations suggested that knowledge was significantly associated with four of the five attitudes examined. Clearly controlling for therapeutic approach, agreement/belief in CBT and confidence in computer was an important inclusion in this study and provided a more accurate picture of the contribution of knowledge to mental health worker attitudes towards cCBT. That said, the results suggest that knowledge is still important as it impacts on the perceived disadvantages of cCBT and the circumstances under which cCBT is perceived to be advantageous, which may be crucial to mental health workers when making decisions about whether or not to use cCBT programmes. Thus, strategies aimed at increasing the uptake of cCBT programmes by mental health professionals should include information aimed at the disconfirmation of common myths around the disadvantages of such programmes as well as information on the areas where cCBT has been shown to be effective.

The second aim of this study was to determine whether there were any differences in cCBT attitudes between subsamples of mental health workers. The first two comparisons conducted were between a) those whose primary therapeutic approach was CBT and those whose primary therapeutic and b) psychologists and non-psychologists. No differences between the groups were found on any of the five attitudes examined. In many ways, this is a positive outcome as it means that promotional activities aimed at improving the uptake of cCBT programmes do not have to be targeted to specific mental health worker groups or theoretical orientations, and that a broader approach may be taken. However, it is somewhat disappointing that psychologists, who are trained as scientist-practitioners and therefore should base treatment-related decisions on evidence, may not be doing so and/or are not up to date with the empirical advancements in this area. Clearly, more professional development on computer-based treatments is required by psychologists.

The third comparison was conducted between those who reported a high intention to use cCBT and those who did not. The results indicated that high intenders differed from low intenders on all of the attitudes examined. High intenders perceived more advantages and fewer disadvantages of cCBT, they perceived cCBT to be advantageous under a greater number of circumstances, they held stronger beliefs about the efficacy of cCBT, they were more confident in the use of cCBT and they had greater knowledge of cCBT. The results of this comparison therefore, suggest that strategies directed towards changing each of these attitudinal domains should be implemented widely if our aim is to increase the intention of mental health workers to actually use cCBT programmes.

In short, the answer to the question “are there any differences?” is “yes” (for high intenders versus low intenders) and “no” (for psychologists versus non-psychologists and those whose therapeutic approach is CBT versus those whose therapeutic approach is not CBT).

The final aim of this paper was to investigate whether a very short 5–7min presentation comprising information about cCBT programmes and a demonstration of a particular cCBT programme, could change mental health worker attitudes towards cCBT. The results suggested that compared to mental health workers who received the Control presentation focusing on general health, those who received the presentation on cCBT reported significantly greater increases in knowledge about cCBT, reported significantly more advantages of cCBT, and reported significantly fewer disadvantages of cCBT. However, although the number of participants who viewed the cCBT presentation and who reported intending to use cCBT programmes in the future, rose from 40.79% before the presentation to 61% after viewing the presentation, the chi-square analyses were not significant. Thus, it would seem that the short answer to the question “can we change attitudes?” is “to some extent…”.

Given the brevity and simplicity of the presentation used in this study, the change it produced is encouraging. There was nothing particularly impressive about the presentation — it was delivered via PowerPoint, the information provided was text-based, and the ‘demonstration’ of the BRAVE-ONLINE programme was very short and comprised a video of a person clicking on various pages of the BRAVE-ONLINE programme with no speech overlay or explanation. That such a simple promotional activity could produce attitudinal change in 5–7min is encouraging and suggests that the potential for change using sophisticated promotion would likely be stronger. This is the first study to the authors' knowledge that has investigated the efficacy of an intervention designed to change mental health worker attitudes towards cCBT and therefore provides a very important first step in the design and implementation of promotional activities aimed at improving uptake.

This study had a number of strengths. It was the first of its type to assess the impact of cCBT knowledge on a broad range of attitudinal factors held by mental health workers regarding cCBT. It was the first to compare those whose primary therapeutic approach was CBT versus those who primary therapeutic approach was not CBT, psychologists versus non-psychologists and high intenders versus low intenders, on attitudes towards cCBT. Most importantly perhaps, it was the first to demonstrate that attitudes of mental health workers towards cCBT can be changed with a very brief, simple presentation. Finally, it included mental health workers from a variety of disciplines and examined a broad range of attitudinal factors associated with cCBT.

Despite its strengths however, this study was not without limitations. Although the sample size was adequate, the study may have benefited from recruiting a greater number of mental health workers in the various ‘non-psychology’ disciplines to allow more direct comparisons between subgroups. In this study, all non-psychologists were ‘lumped together’ as though they were a homogenous group when they undoubtedly were not. It may well be that certain subgroups within the non-psychologist group have differential attitudes towards cCBT. Indeed, even psychologists are a heterogeneous group, as there can be large variation in skill and knowledge level. Future research should aim to recruit greater numbers of psychologists and non-psychologists, with different levels of training and skill and from different disciplines, so that comparisons can be made.

Second, the cross-sectional nature of the research prevents any conclusions being made about the temporal association of the variables examined. Future research should aim to test the impact of knowledge about cCBT on attitudes towards cCBT longitudinally. Similarly, research should be conducted to examine whether the short-term effects demonstrated by the cCBT intervention are maintained over a longer time period, and if not, what can be done to improve maintenance.

Third, all measures were self-report, and only ‘intention’ to use cCBT rather than actual cCBT uptake, was measured. It would be interesting to provide clinicians with the opportunity to use a computer-based therapy after being exposed to the presentation, and to subsequently investigate whether they actually choose to use it with clients. This would provide a behavioural measure of cCBT programme uptake.

Fourth, the measure of knowledge employed in this study may have been somewhat problematic. It was our contention that simply asking participants to rate how much they knew about cCBT from ‘a lot’ to ‘nothing’ may not be an accurate reflection of knowledge. We therefore provided the ‘test’ as a more objective measure. However, the test comprised only six true/false questions and was therefore very narrow in its scope. The reliability of the knowledge measure was also low, bringing its usefulness into question. Although we remain advocates of the test, future research should aim to provide participants with a broader range and a greater number of items, to ensure that any knowledge participants may have about cCBT is reflected in their scores.

Fifth, as noted above, the scale used to group participants into High Intenders versus Low Intenders was problematic. It would have been better to have a more clearly defined scale, perhaps with anchors such as ‘definitely not’, ‘unlikely’, ‘unsure/possibly’, ‘most likely’, and ‘definitely yes’ to allow for a more robust categorisation split between High Intenders and Low Intenders. Future research should ensure that a more clearly defined scale is employed.

Sixth, the measures used in the present study have not been psychometrically validated, with only reliability estimates being reported. Furthermore, consistent with Becker and Jensen-Doss (2013), the reliability of the Comfort with Using scale was found to be somewhat low in this study. Future research should work on developing psychometrically valid measures for these attitudinal constructs.

Finally, as noted above, the intervention used was very brief and simple. Although it provided encouraging results regarding what can be accomplished even with a low-grade promotional exercise, future research should aim to test the efficacy of higher quality promotional activities that would actually be used to promote cCBT programmes in the real world.

In addition to the suggestions for future research alluded to above, it would also be interesting to replicate this study several times over the next 10years. Although the Australian government has invested considerable funds into the development of online services, it has invested considerably less in their promotion. However, for a number of reasons, it is likely that this situation will change over the next decade. Thus, replication of this study every few years in an attempt to gauge change over time, would be a very worthwhile exercise.

@&#CONCLUSIONS@&#

The results of this study suggest that Australia still has a long way to go in terms of educating mental health professionals about cCBT programmes. Despite widespread dissemination of Australian programmes such as MoodGYM (O'Kearney et al., 2009) and BRAVE-ONLINE (Spence et al., 2011, 2006), it would appear that the uptake of such programmes by mental health professionals is not widespread, that mental health professionals lack knowledge about them, and that mental health workers hold a number of misconceptions about the effectiveness and scope of cCBT programmes. On the positive side, it would seem that it is possible to change the attitudes of Australian mental health workers towards cCBT at least to some extent, by providing them with information and demonstrations.

None declared.


                     
                        
                           
                              
                              
                              
                              
                              
                                 
                                    
                                    True
                                    False
                                    Unsure
                                 
                              
                              
                                 
                                    1. Computerised interventions are only available online
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    2. All computerised interventions involve therapist contact
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    3. Computerised interventions are less effective than face-to-face therapy
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    4. Computerised interventions automatically tailor to individual needs
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    5. People who do computerised interventions are generally satisfied
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    6. Computerised interventions are not interactive
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  

@&#REFERENCES@&#

